<doc id="162249" wikidata="Q509441" url="?curid=162249" title="Mark Hanna">
<text>Marcus Alonzo Hanna (September 24, 1837 – February 15, 1904) was an American businessman and Republican politician who served as a United States Senator from Ohio as well as chairman of the Republican National Committee. A friend and political ally of President William McKinley, Hanna used his wealth and business skills to successfully manage McKinley&#x27;s presidential campaigns in 1896 and in 1900.

Hanna was born in New Lisbon (today Lisbon), Ohio, in 1837. His family moved to the growing city of Cleveland in his teenage years, where he attended high school with John D. Rockefeller, who became a lifelong friend. He was expelled from college, and entered the family mercantile business. He served briefly during the American Civil War and married Charlotte Rhodes. Her father, Daniel Rhodes, took Hanna into his business after the war. Hanna was soon a partner in the firm, which grew to have interests in many areas, especially coal and iron. He was a millionaire by his 40th birthday, and turned his attention to politics.

Despite Hanna&#x27;s efforts on his behalf, Ohio Senator John Sherman failed to gain the Republican nomination for president in 1884 and 1888. With Sherman becoming too old to be considered a contender, Hanna worked to elect William McKinley. In 1895, Hanna left his business career to devote himself full-time to McKinley&#x27;s campaign for president. Hanna paid all expenses to get McKinley the nomination the following year, although he was in any event the frontrunner. The Democrats nominated former Nebraska Congressman William Jennings Bryan, who ran on a bimetallism, or &quot;Free Silver&quot;, platform. Hanna&#x27;s fundraising broke records, and once initial public enthusiasm for Bryan and his program subsided, McKinley was comfortably elected.

Declining a Cabinet position, Hanna secured appointment as senator from Ohio after Sherman was made Secretary of State; he was re-elected by the Ohio General Assembly in 1898 and 1904. After McKinley&#x27;s assassination in 1901, Hanna worked for the building of a canal in Panama, rather than elsewhere in Central America, as had previously been proposed. He died in 1904, and is remembered for his role in McKinley&#x27;s election, thanks to savage cartoons by such illustrators as Homer Davenport, who lampooned him as McKinley&#x27;s political master.

== Early life and business career ==
Marcus Alonzo Hanna was born on September 24, 1837, in New Lisbon (in 1895 renamed Lisbon), Ohio, to Dr. Leonard and Samantha Hanna. Leonard&#x27;s father, Benjamin Hanna, a Quaker of Scotch-Irish descent, was a wealthy store owner in New Lisbon. Dr. Hanna practiced in Columbiana County, where New Lisbon was located, until he suffered a spinal injury while riding. After the accident, he joined the family business, B., L., and T. Hanna, by then a major grocery and goods brokering firm. Samantha, née Converse, and her parents had journeyed west from Vermont when she was 11; she was of English, possibly Irish, and French Huguenot descent.

Mark&#x27;s uncle Kersey Hanna described Mark as a boy as &quot;short, strong and rugged, with a full round figure&quot;. Young Mark attended the local public school, which conducted class in the basement of the Presbyterian church. He competed in the local boys&#x27; debating society, and on the question of whether the black man had more cause for complaint than the Indian, carried the day arguing for the blacks.

Members of the Hanna family invested in a canal project to connect New Lisbon, distant from waterways, to the Ohio River. The canal was a failure, and the family lost large sums of money. Most Hanna family members left New Lisbon in the early 1850s. Dr. Hanna went into partnership with his brother Robert, starting a grocery business in Cleveland, and relocated his family there in 1852. In Cleveland, Mark attended several public schools, including Cleveland Central High School, which he went to at the same time as John D. Rockefeller and was one of his classmates. After graduation in 1857, Hanna attended Western Reserve College, but was dismissed for distributing mock programs at a solemn ceremonial. Hanna served in various capacities in the family business, learning it from the bottom up.

==Civil War service==
By the start of the Civil War, he was a major participant in the business. Dr. Hanna had fallen ill with complications from his spinal injury (he died on December 15, 1862), and Mark Hanna, even before his father&#x27;s death, was made a partner.

With an ill father and many business responsibilities, Mark Hanna could not be spared by his family to join the Union Army, hiring a substitute to enlist in his place. Instead, he became a member of the Perry Light Infantry, a regiment of National Guard troops consisting mostly of young Cleveland businessmen. In 1864, his regiment was briefly mustered into active service as the 150th Ohio Infantry and sent to be garrison troops at Fort Stevens, part of Washington, D.C.&#x27;s defenses. During the time the Perry Light Infantry was in service, it saw brief combat action as Confederate General Jubal Early feigned an attack on Washington. However, Hanna, who had been commissioned a second lieutenant, was absent during that time, having been sent to escort the body of a deceased soldier back to Ohio. The regiment was mustered out in August 1864. After the war, Hanna was elected a companion of the Ohio Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States—a military society of officers of the Union armed forces and their descendants.

==Post war==
Even before his service during the Civil War, Hanna had fallen in love with Charlotte Augusta Rhodes, whom he met in 1862, shortly after her return from a finishing school. Her father Daniel Rhodes was an ardent Democrat and was distantly related to Illinois Senator Stephen A. Douglas, the unsuccessful Democratic candidate for president in 1860. Rhodes disliked the fact that Hanna had supported the successful Republican candidate, former Illinois Congressman Abraham Lincoln. Daniel Rhodes eventually yielded, and Mark and Charlotte Augusta Hanna were married on September 27, 1864.

The 1850s and 1860s were a time of great expansion for Cleveland, which grew from a small lakeside town to a major player in Great Lakes commerce and a rival to the southern Ohio city of Cincinnati. With peace restored in 1865, Hanna struck out on his own ventures. Foreseeing a demand for petroleum products, he built a refinery, and also invested his own money in the &quot;Lac La Belle&quot;, a swift Great Lakes steamer. The ship sank and the refinery burned, uninsured. The losses reduced Hanna to near-insolvency. According to Hanna biographer Herbert Croly, &quot;he had gained little from the first nine years of his business life except experience.&quot; His father-in-law, appreciating Hanna&#x27;s potential, took him into his own business in 1867 as a partner and soon retired. The firm, Rhodes and Company (later M.A. Hanna and Company), dealt principally in coal and steel, but under Hanna expanded into many fields. The firm had close dealings with the railroads—especially the Pennsylvania Railroad, which carried much of its freight. Hanna later became director of two railroads, including one of the Pennsylvania&#x27;s leased lines.

In the 1868 presidential election, Hanna supported the Republican, former Union General Ulysses S. Grant. The flood of inflationary greenback currency issued during the war made Rhodes and Company&#x27;s dealings in the new confederation of Canada difficult; merchants would accept a dollar in paper money as the equivalent of 35 cents in gold. Hanna hoped that Grant, who was elected, would institute policies which would return full value to the currency. The firm built many vessels and also gained interests in a wide variety of firms, which in turn used the Rhodes steamers. Hanna also purchased Cleveland&#x27;s opera house, allowing it to remain open at times when it could not pay its full rent.

During Grant&#x27;s first four-year term, Hanna began to involve himself in politics. At first, his interest was purely local, supporting Republican candidates for municipal and Cuyahoga County offices. In 1869, he was elected to the Cleveland Board of Education, but as he was traveling a good deal for business at the time, was able to attend less than half the meetings. In 1873, disgusted by local scandals and the influence of party bosses, he and other Republicans briefly abandoned the party to elect a Democrat running for mayor of Cleveland on a reform agenda.

== Aspiring kingmaker (1880–1888) ==
In 1880, Hanna added &quot;The Cleveland Herald&quot; newspaper to his business empire. This was resented by Edwin Cowles, who owned the Republican newspaper in Cleveland, &quot;The Cleveland Leader&quot;. For the next five years, until Hanna sold the newspaper, he was bitterly attacked by Cowles in his paper. According to Hanna biographer William T. Horner, the episode was the start of the negative image of Hanna in the press which would be further developed by the Hearst newspapers over a decade later. Cowles&#x27; paper attacked Hanna personally, dubbing him &quot;Marcus Aurelius&quot;. Cowles&#x27; choice of nickname was dictated by the coincidence of name, without regard to that emperor&#x27;s good reputation. The nickname remained with Hanna throughout the remainder of his career.

The incumbent in 1880, President Rutherford Hayes, had no interest in seeking a second term; after 36 ballots, the Republicans nominated Ohio Representative James Garfield. The nominee had gone to the convention as manager of the campaign of his fellow Ohioan, Secretary of the Treasury John Sherman. Garfield had emerged as a candidate after delegates were impressed by his nomination speech of Sherman. Although Hanna did not attend the convention, he was very active in the fall campaign. The industrialist helped found a businessman&#x27;s fundraising club to raise money for Garfield&#x27;s personal expenses in the campaign. Garfield, who ran a front porch campaign, often had to entertain politicians and others who came to meet him at his home in Mentor. According to Charles Dick, who succeeded Hanna in the Senate after the latter&#x27;s death in 1904, &quot;Mr. Hanna had as much to do with the election of Mr. Garfield as any single individual in the country.&quot;

Hanna, according to his biographer Croly, was in charge of the arrangements for the campaign visit of former President Grant and New York Senator Roscoe Conkling to the state. Croly credits him with persuading the two men, who were Stalwarts hostile to Garfield&#x27;s Half-Breed wing of the party, to visit Garfield in Mentor. Having Grant go to Mentor would be an important show of party unity—Grant had sought the presidency again in 1880, but his faction had failed to gain the nomination for him. However, later biographer Horner believes the tale dubious, suggesting that Grant made the decision unaided by Hanna. Garfield favored civil service reform, a position disliked by Hanna, who felt that public jobs should be used to reward campaign workers. Nevertheless, he strongly supported Garfield as a fellow Ohioan, and the Republican candidate defeated his fellow Civil War general Winfield Hancock by a narrow margin in the November election. Hanna did much fundraising work, roaming the state to persuade business owners to contribute to the Garfield campaign.

Hanna sought no position in the Garfield administration, although Horner states that his services to the campaign entitled him to a reward, and speculates that Hanna did not make any request of Garfield because of their political differences. Garfield&#x27;s short-lived administration ended with his assassination after six months in office. Hanna was in charge of the committee which took charge of the late president&#x27;s body when it was brought to Cleveland and saw to the funeral arrangements and interment at Lake View Cemetery—where Hanna himself was to be laid to rest over 20 years later.

In 1884, Hanna sought election as a delegate to the Republican National Convention in support of the presidential bid of Senator Sherman (as he was by then)—President Chester A. Arthur, Garfield&#x27;s successor, was seeking re-nomination, but was opposed by a number of other Republicans Hanna supported Sherman as the candidate favored the gold standard and worked to solve the problems of business, and because he was from Ohio. The industrialist was successfully opposed by Cowles at the local convention but was elected a delegate-at-large from Ohio at the state convention. At the national convention, Hanna joined forces in support of Sherman with another delegate-at-large from Ohio, former Cincinnati judge Joseph B. Foraker, whose rise in state and national politics over the next 20 years would parallel Hanna&#x27;s. The Ohio delegation proved bitterly divided between supporters of Sherman and those supporting Maine Senator James G. Blaine. Foraker gained national acclaim with his speech nominating Sherman, and Hanna worked for the senator&#x27;s nomination, but Blaine won easily. With a non-Ohioan, the nominee, Hanna worked less energetically for the Republicans than he had in 1880. Blaine lost to the Democratic candidate, New York Governor Grover Cleveland.

During the first Cleveland administration, Hanna continued to run his businesses and prepared for another run by Sherman, whom he did not actually meet until 1885. Once he did, however, a warm relationship grew between the two men. President Cleveland selected Hanna as one of the Union Pacific Railroad&#x27;s directors—part of the corporate board was then appointed by the government. The appointment was most likely at the recommendation of Senator Sherman. The industrialist&#x27;s work for the railroad was highly praised by its president, Charles Francis Adams; Hanna&#x27;s knowledge of the coal business led to him being appointed head of one of the board&#x27;s committees with responsibility in that area. Hanna was a major campaign adviser and fundraiser for Foraker&#x27;s successful runs for governor in 1885 and 1887.

== McKinley partisan (1888–1896) ==

=== Early relationship ===
It is uncertain when William McKinley and Mark Hanna first met—neither man in later life could remember the first meeting. McKinley, in 1896, referred to a friendship with Hanna that had lasted over twenty years; Hanna, in 1903, stated after some thought that he had met McKinley before 1876. McKinley biographer H. Wayne Morgan suggests that the two men may have met as early as 1871, although initially without making much impression on each other.

The two men certainly met in 1876, when McKinley, a lawyer, represented a number of coal miners who had gone on strike following attempts by owners to cut wages. Hanna was one of the mine owners affected by subsequent unrest. The militia, called in by Governor Rutherford Hayes to restore order, had fired on the strikers, and 23 miners were arrested and put on trial in Canton, Ohio, the hometown of Major McKinley (as he was often known, for his Civil War service). McKinley was hired to represent them, and only one was convicted. McKinley&#x27;s victory won him the gratitude of labor elements in both major parties, and he won election to Congress later that year. Hanna remembered, &quot;I became intimate with him soon after he entered Congress, and our friendship ripened with each succeeding year.&quot;

With Cowles&#x27; enmity ended by Hanna&#x27;s sale of the &quot;Herald&quot;, the latter had little trouble being elected as a district delegate to the 1888 Republican National Convention. Among the delegates, at-large were Governor Foraker and Congressman McKinley. Hanna financed many of the arrangements for the Sherman campaign and was widely regarded as its manager. Sherman, as was customary at the time, remained in Washington and did not attend the convention in Chicago. There was widespread speculation in the press that Governor Foraker, nominally a Sherman supporter, would declare a favorite son candidacy or else support Blaine if he entered the race. The convention deadlocked, with Sherman in the lead but unable to secure the nomination. According to Hanna biographer Thomas Beer,

McKinley began to pick up small numbers of votes although not a declared candidate. Hanna became convinced that McKinley was the only Ohioan who could gain the nomination, and by telegram hinted that Sherman should withdraw in the congressman&#x27;s favor as the only Ohio Republican with a chance at the presidency. Sherman, believing this to be his best chance for election, refused, a decision which Hanna accepted, fighting for Sherman to the end. Hanna was greatly impressed by McKinley&#x27;s loyal conduct in refusing to begin a run himself. Foraker threw his support to Blaine, though he returned to Sherman when the New Englander did not run. In the end, the nomination fell to former Indiana senator Benjamin Harrison. Hanna never forgave what he saw as Foraker&#x27;s treason. After 1888, there was a strong dislike between the two men, and the separation split the Ohio Republican Party into two factions, a rupture that did not heal until after Hanna&#x27;s death in 1904. Foraker stated in his memoirs that the break occurred because Hanna bribed black delegates from the South in 1888. However, Ohio newspaper publisher J. B. Morrow contradicted Foraker&#x27;s account, stating: &quot;I was at the convention in 1888 and know Senator Foraker [as he later became] brought great scandal to the Ohio people who were there and to the delegates with his secret work with Mr. Blaine&#x27;s friends ... Mr. Hanna became thoroughly angered at what he thought was Senator Foraker&#x27;s bad faith.&quot; According to Horner, Foraker was the more embittered of the two as the years passed, feeling that if it had not been for that dispute, Foraker, not McKinley, might have become president.

Harrison was elected president after a campaign in which Hanna fundraised considerably, consoling himself with the thought that though Harrison was from Indiana, he had at least been born in Ohio. Harrison gave Hanna no control of any patronage in return for his fundraising. In the aftermath of Harrison&#x27;s victory, Hanna determined to bring an Ohioan to the presidency. With Harrison likely to be the Republican candidate in 1892, the first real chance would be in 1896. Sherman would be 73 in 1896, likely considered too old to seek the presidency. Hanna had come to admire McKinley; the two men shared many political views. Beginning in 1888, they forged an increasingly close relationship. According to McKinley biographer Margaret Leech:

However, Hanna biographer Clarence A. Stern suggested that while the industrialist admired McKinley&#x27;s loyalty to Sherman, the principal reason that he decided to promote McKinley&#x27;s career was the congressman&#x27;s advocacy of high tariffs, which he also favored.

Hanna and his allies, such as Congressman Benjamin Butterworth, opposed Foraker&#x27;s effort to secure a third term as governor in 1889. Foraker gained renomination, but fell in the general election. In November 1889, Hanna traveled to Washington to manage McKinley&#x27;s campaign for Speaker of the House. The effort failed; another Republican, Thomas B. Reed of Maine, was elected.

In 1890 McKinley was defeated for re-election to Congress. This was not seen as a major setback to his career; he was deemed beaten by Democratic gerrymandering in redistricting, and because of his sponsorship of a tariff bill—the increased tariffs had caused prices to rise. In 1891, McKinley proved the consensus choice for the Republican nomination for governor. With McKinley&#x27;s candidacy needing little of his attention, Hanna spent much of his time working to secure Sherman&#x27;s re-election by the Ohio Legislature (senators were elected by state legislatures until the ratification of the 17th Amendment in 1913) by raising funds to gain the election of Republican candidates. Hanna traveled as far away from Ohio as New York and Iowa, soliciting funds, some of which went to McKinley, but which for the most part went to the state Republican committee.

Victories by McKinley in the gubernatorial race and by the Republicans in securing a majority in the legislature in 1891 did not guarantee Sherman another term, as he was challenged for his seat by Foraker. Hanna was instrumental in keeping enough Republican support to secure victory by Sherman in the Republican caucus, assuring his election by the legislature. Hanna hired detectives to find legislators who had gone into hiding and were believed to be Foraker supporters, and saw to it they supported Sherman. Stern notes that the defeat of Foraker &quot;was ascribable largely to the efforts of Hanna&quot;. McKinley&#x27;s victory in what was generally a bad year for Republicans made him a possible presidential contender, and Hanna&#x27;s involvement in the McKinley and Sherman victories established him as a force in politics. President Harrison attempted to neutralize Hanna, who was ill-disposed to the President and likely to oppose his renomination, by offering to make him treasurer of the Republican National Committee. Hanna declined, feeling it would make him beholden to the administration.

=== Preparing for a run ===
As early as 1892, McKinley and Hanna began to prepare for the 1896 campaign. Charles Dick recalled being asked to take the Republican state chairmanship:

President Harrison had proven unpopular even in his own party, and with the start of 1892, McKinley was talked about as a potential candidate. At the 1892 Republican National Convention in Minneapolis, McKinley&#x27;s keynote address sparked wild applause from a convention-friendly to him. This popularity did not translate into delegate votes; Harrison&#x27;s supporters were in control of the convention throughout. Hanna, a delegate from Ohio, promoted McKinley to delegates. McKinley, never a declared candidate, finished third, a fraction of a vote behind Blaine, who had declared himself not to be a candidate. Despite Harrison&#x27;s success, McKinley was carried from the convention hall to his hotel by supporters after he adjourned the convention. According to Morgan, many delegates &quot;saw in [McKinley] their nominee for 1896&quot;.

Harrison and his adherents were unimpressed by McKinley&#x27;s conduct, recalling that he had cut off talk of a candidacy in 1888, but had not done so in 1892. Nevertheless, Hanna wrote in a letter that &quot;I do not consider that Governor McKinley was placed in any false position by what was done ... Governor McKinley&#x27;s position today as a result of all that transpired at Minneapolis is in the best possible shape for his future. His bearing and conduct and personal magnetism won the hearts and respect of everybody.&quot; McKinley campaigned loyally for President Harrison, who was defeated by former president Cleveland in the November election, and according to the governor&#x27;s secretary, Charles Bawsel, &quot;[McKinley] is bound to be the nominee for the presidency, and the very fact of the defeat this year will elect him the next time.&quot;

Among those who suffered reverses in the financial Panic of 1893 was a McKinley friend in Youngstown. McKinley, out of gratitude for loans in his younger days, had guaranteed the friend&#x27;s business notes, without ever grasping the full amount of the obligations he was taking on. He was called upon to pay over $100,000 and proposed to resign as governor and earn the money as an attorney. Hanna was absent from the state when the crisis broke, causing the governor to say &quot;I wish Mark was here.&quot; McKinley&#x27;s wealthy supporters, including Hanna once he learned of the situation, undertook to buy up or pay the notes. McKinley was reluctant to take gifts, and eventually agreed to accept money only from those who expected nothing by lending the money but repayment. Even though both McKinley and his wife Ida insisted on putting their property in the hands of the supporters, who served as trustees, Hanna and his associates fundraised with such success from business owners and the general public that all McKinley property was returned intact, and when President McKinley died in 1901, no claims were made against his estate. A request by McKinley for the names of the subscribers so he might repay them was refused by the trustees. The episode made McKinley more popular with the public, as many Americans had suffered in the hard times and sympathized with the Ohio governor.

McKinley was easily re-elected as governor in 1893. Despite the poor economic times in Ohio, he remained popular and spoke across much of the nation for Republican candidates. He followed the usual Ohio custom and stepped down at the end of two two-year terms, returning home to Canton in January 1896 to municipal celebrations. The Canton &quot;Repository&quot; stated, &quot;It is just plain Mr. McKinley of Canton now, but wait a little while.&quot; To devote full-time to McKinley&#x27;s presidential campaign, Hanna in 1895 turned over management of his companies to his brother Leonard. Mark Hanna was certain, as he stated as McKinley&#x27;s campaign began, that &quot;nothing short of a miracle or death will prevent his being the nominee of the party in &#x27;96&quot;.

== Campaign of 1896 ==
=== Nominating McKinley ===

After leaving business, Hanna rented a house in Thomasville, Georgia, expressing a dislike for northern winters. He was joined there by the McKinleys in 1895, even before the governor left office, and also in the winter of 1896. The location was a plausibly nonpolitical vacation spot for McKinley and also permitted him to meet many southern Republicans, including blacks. Although southern Republicans rarely had local electoral success, they elected a substantial number of delegates to the national convention.

During 1895, Hanna journeyed east to meet with political bosses such as Senators Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania and Thomas Platt of New York. When Hanna returned to Canton, he informed McKinley that the bosses would guarantee his nomination in exchange for control of local patronage. McKinley was unwilling to make such a deal, and Hanna duly undertook to gain the former governor&#x27;s nomination without machine support.

Historian R. Hal Williams summarized the relationship between McKinley and Hanna:
Through the months leading up to the Republican convention in June in St. Louis, Hanna built his organization, paying for expenses, and applying the techniques of business to politics. Hanna met with many politicians at his Cleveland home. He paid for thousands of copies of McKinley&#x27;s speeches to be printed and shipped quantities of McKinley posters, badges, and buttons across the nation. New Hampshire Senator William E. Chandler commented, &quot;If Mr. Hanna has covered every district in the United States, in the same manner, he did those in Alabama, McKinley will be nominated.&quot;

McKinley&#x27;s most formidable rival for the nomination was former president Harrison, but in February 1896, Harrison declared he would not run for president a third time. The eastern bosses were hostile to McKinley for failing to agree to the offer they had made to Hanna, and they decided to seek support for local favorite son candidates, believing that McKinley could be forced to bargain for support at the convention if he was denied a majority. The bosses supported candidates such as Speaker Reed, Senator Quay and former vice president Levi P. Morton of New York. Hanna spent much money and effort to undercut Reed in his native New England, and on &quot;McKinley Clubs&quot; in Pennsylvania to force Quay to spend time and money shoring up his base.
A key to defeating the bosses&#x27; &quot;favorite son&quot; strategy was Illinois. A young Chicago businessman and McKinley supporter, Charles Dawes (who would thirty years later be vice president under Coolidge) worked at Illinois district and state conventions to elect delegates pledged to McKinley. Dawes and Hanna worked closely together, with the latter relying on the young entrepreneur to secure support from his connections in the Chicago business community. Despite the opposition of Illinois&#x27; Republican political machine, Dawes and Hanna were able to secure all but a few of Illinois&#x27; delegates for McKinley, giving the former Ohio governor a strong advantage going into the convention. According to Williams, &quot;As early as March 1896, the bandwagon had become a steamroller.&quot;
As the convention approached, journalists awoke to the fact that McKinley would, most likely, be the Republican nominee. Those newspapers that were Democratic in their outlook, including publisher William Randolph Hearst&#x27;s New York &quot;Journal&quot;, sent reporters to Canton to dig up dirt on McKinley. The candidate had a sterling reputation for personal and political honesty, and reporters found that even McKinley&#x27;s few personal enemies spoke well of him. McKinley&#x27;s financial problem in 1893 was one of the few marks on his record, and the newspapers began to suggest that those who had made large contributions to aid him would own him as president. Attacks on some of McKinley&#x27;s associates, such as Chicago publisher H. H. Kohlsaat or McKinley&#x27;s old friend from his days as a practicing lawyer, Judge William R. Day, cut little ice with voters; the press had better luck with Hanna. The &quot;Journal&quot; began to describe McKinley&#x27;s backers as a &quot;Syndicate&quot;, staking money to secure a bought-and-paid-for president. &quot;Journal&quot; reporter Alfred Henry Lewis attracted considerable attention when he wrote, &quot;Hanna and the others will shuffle and deal him like a pack of cards.&quot;

In St. Louis, the bosses again tried to secure political favors in exchange for their support; with little need to deal, Hanna, backed by McKinley via telephone from Canton, refused. McKinley was nominated easily. To balance the ticket, McKinley and Hanna selected New Jersey party official and former state legislator Garret Hobart, an easterner, as vice-presidential candidate. The convention duly nominated Hobart; Hanna was elected chairman of the Republican National Committee for the next four years.

=== Currency question; Democratic nomination ===

A major issue, going into the 1896 election cycle, was the question of the currency. The United States, since 1873, had effectively been on the gold standard—the metal, if presented to the government, would be assayed and struck into coin for a slight charge to cover expenses. Silver, in contrast, though widely mined, could not be presented for conversion into coin, but had to be sold as a commodity. The gold standard was unpopular in many agricultural and mining areas, as the quantity of gold available limited the money supply, making it difficult for farmers to obtain loans and pay debts. Advocates of the free and unlimited coinage of silver believed that doing so would cure the country&#x27;s economic malaise by increasing the money supply. Advocates of the gold standard argued that a &quot;free silver&quot; policy (sometimes called &quot;bimetallism&quot;) would inflate the currency, and lead to difficulties in international trade with nations on the gold standard. At the time, the precious metal in a silver dollar was worth about $0.53, and under such proposals, silver worth that much would be returned to depositors as a one-dollar coin, &quot;free&quot;—that is, without a charge for the Mint&#x27;s costs for assaying and coining.

Despite the controversy in the country, McKinley and Hanna decided that an explicit mention of the gold standard in the party platform would be a better strategy than remaining silent on the issue. McKinley sent Hanna to the convention with a draft plank calling for maintenance of the gold standard, which Hanna successfully placed in the party platform. The adoption of the plank caused some Republicans, mostly from the West, to walk out of the convention. As they left, Hanna stood on a chair, shouting &quot;Go! Go! Go!&quot;

McKinley expected the election to be fought on the issue of tariffs; he was a well-known protectionist. The Democrats met in convention in July in Chicago; former Missouri congressman Richard P. Bland was deemed likely to be the nominee. As McKinley awaited his opponent, he privately commented on the nationwide debate over silver, stating to his Canton crony, Judge Day, that &quot;This money matter is unduly prominent. In thirty days you won&#x27;t hear anything about it.&quot; The future Secretary of State and Supreme Court justice responded: &quot;In my opinion in thirty days you won&#x27;t hear of anything else.&quot;

On the third day of the Democratic convention, former Nebraska representative William Jennings Bryan concluded the debate on the party platform. Bryan stampeded the convention with what came to be known as the &quot;Cross of Gold speech&quot;, decrying the gold standard, which he believed disproportionately hurt the working classes. To the horror of Wall Street, the Democrats nominated Congressman Bryan for president, a nomination in which the Populist Party soon joined. Hanna had taken a yachting vacation in early July before beginning general election work; with a wave of popular support for Bryan, Hanna wrote &quot;The Chicago convention has changed everything&quot; and returned to his labors.
=== General election campaign ===
According to Horner, &quot;In 1896, as the country was mired in an economic slowdown that affected millions, a real, substantive policy debate was conducted by candidates who believed firmly in their respective positions.&quot; Bryan, whose campaign was ill-financed, felt that his best means of persuading the voter of his position was personal communication, and embarked on an unprecedented itinerary of whistle stop appearances by train. If the train passed any large group of homes and did not stop for Bryan to speak, it would at least disgorge a bundle of political tracts for local distribution. McKinley felt he could not match Bryan&#x27;s speaking tour, as the Democrat was a better stump speaker. Despite Hanna&#x27;s urgings to the candidate to get on the road, the former governor decided on a front porch campaign; he would remain at home in Canton and allow the people to come to him. As McKinley&#x27;s wife, Ida, was an invalid, this also boosted his image as a good husband.

When McKinley, Hanna and their associates saw the emotional appeal of the Bryan campaign for free silver, they decided upon an extensive and expensive effort to educate the electorate. The McKinley campaign had two main offices; one in Chicago, effectively run by Dawes, and one in New York, used by Hanna as a base of operations as he sought to gain support from New York financiers. Hanna&#x27;s task was to raise the money; other campaign officials, such as Dawes, determined how to spend it. Being relatively unknown on the national scene, Hanna initially had little success, despite Wall Street&#x27;s fear of Bryan. Some Wall Street titans, although disliking Bryan&#x27;s positions, did not take him seriously as a candidate and refused to contribute to the McKinley campaign. Those who did know Hanna, such as his old schoolmate Rockefeller—the magnate&#x27;s Standard Oil gave $250,000—vouched for him. Beginning in late July 1896, Hanna had an easier time persuading industrialists to give to the McKinley/Hobart campaign. J.P. Morgan entertained him aboard the Corsair II and he obtained money from other bankers. Hanna also gave large sums himself. This money went to pay for advertising, brochures, printed speeches and other means of persuading the voter; the country was flooded with such paper.

According to Rhodes, McKinley &quot;spoke from the front veranda of his house in Canton to many deputations, some of them spontaneous, others arranged for.&quot; Any delegation was welcome in Canton, so long as its leader wrote to McKinley in advance and introduced himself and his group. Delegations ranged up to thousands of people; if possible, delegation leaders were brought to Canton in advance to settle with McKinley what each would say. If this could not be arranged, the delegation was met at the train station by a McKinley agent, who would greet it and learn what the leader proposed to say in his address. The agent would suggest any fine-tuning necessary to make it fit within campaign themes, and send the information ahead by runner to McKinley, giving him time to prepare his response. The delegations left behind gifts, which were put to use when possible, but four eagles, named &quot;McKinley&quot;, &quot;Mark Hanna&quot;,&quot;Republican&quot;, and &quot;Protection&quot;, were donated to the local zoo.

Despite the initial popularity of Bryan&#x27;s message, Hanna was convinced the Democrat&#x27;s support would recede. &quot;He&#x27;s talking Silver all the time, and that&#x27;s where we&#x27;ve got him&quot;, Hanna stated, pounding his desk, in July. He proved correct; the silver enthusiasm waned by September and Bryan had no ready replacement for it. McKinley, on the other hand, convinced that his &quot;sound money&quot; campaign had worked, began to promote his tariff issue, stating to the crowds on his front lawn, &quot;I do not know what you think about it, but I believe it is a good deal better to open the mills of the United States to the labor of America than to open the mints of the United States to the silver of the world.&quot;

During the campaign, the Democratic newspapers, especially the papers owned by Hearst, attacked Hanna for his supposed role as McKinley&#x27;s political master. The articles and cartoons have contributed to a lasting popular belief that McKinley was not his own man, but that he was effectively owned by the corporations, through Hanna. Homer Davenport&#x27;s cartoons for the Hearst papers were especially effective in molding public opinion about Hanna. The Clevelander was often depicted as &quot;Dollar Mark&quot;, in a suit decorated with dollar signs (a term for which &quot;dollar mark&quot; was a common alternative). McKinley&#x27;s personal financial crisis allowed him to be convincingly depicted as a child, helpless in the hands of businessmen and their mere tool in the 1896 campaign. Historian Stanley Jones, who studied the 1896 election, stated of this view:

Hanna&#x27;s fundraising campaign, in which he asked banks and millionaires for a contribution equal to 0.25% of their assets, was unprecedented in its scale, but the basic concept was not unusual. According to Hanna biographer Croly, &quot;Mr. Hanna merely systematized and developed a practice which was rooted deep in contemporary American political soil, and which was sanctioned both by custom and, as he believed, by necessity.&quot; The largest election fundraising before that time had occurred in the 1888 presidential race, which was a polarizing election, closely fought over the tariff issue. In the 1888 campaign, Senator Quay (on behalf of Harrison) had sought funds from businessmen much as Hanna would eight years later. The first Harrison campaign raised about $1.8 million; Dawes, in charge of campaign spending for the Republicans in 1896, later stated that the McKinley campaign raised just over $3.5 million, though this did not include spending by state and local committees. In addition, the Republicans were supported by &quot;in-kind&quot; corporate contributions, such as discounted railway fares for delegations coming to Canton. These discounts were so steep that they led to the quip that it was cheaper to visit Canton than to stay at home. Contributions to Bryan&#x27;s campaign were much smaller; he had few wealthy supporters and the largest donor was most likely Hearst; he donated about $40,000, and gave the Bryan campaign support in his papers.

In late October, Hanna wrote to Harrison, thanking him for his campaigning efforts, &quot;The outlook is generally encouraging, and I feel there is no doubt of our success.&quot; On Tuesday, November 3, the voters had their say in most states. McKinley won 271 electoral votes to Bryan&#x27;s 176. The Democratic candidate won in the South and in the western states except California and Oregon. Bryan was also successful in his native Nebraska and neighboring Kansas and South Dakota. McKinley swept the populous northeastern states and the Midwest. He had hoped to end sectionalism, but his only successes in the &quot;Solid South&quot; were in the border states of Delaware, Maryland, West Virginia and Kentucky. McKinley took 51.0% of the vote, the first presidential majority since Grant in 1872; the intense voter interest in the campaign resulted in a turnout of 79.3%. On election night, Hanna wired from Cleveland to Canton, &quot;The feeling here beggars description ... I will not attempt bulletins. You are elected to the highest office of the land by a people who always loved and trusted you.&quot;

On November 12, 1896, the President-elect wrote to his longtime friend, offering him a position in his Cabinet, and stating:

== Senator (1897–1904) ==

=== McKinley advisor (1897–1901) ===

==== Securing a Senate seat ====

In the wake of McKinley&#x27;s election, according to historian James Ford Rhodes (who was also Hanna&#x27;s brother-in-law, though a Democrat), &quot;Mark Hanna occupied an enviable position. Had it been usual, the freedom of Cleveland would have been conferred upon him.&quot; According to John Hay, who would later become Secretary of State under McKinley, &quot;What a glorious record Mark Hanna has made this year! I never knew him intimately until we went into this fight together, but my esteem and admiration for him have grown every hour.&quot;

Hanna stated that he would accept no office in the McKinley administration, as he feared it would be seen as a reward for his political efforts. He had long wished to be a senator, speaking of this desire as early as 1892. Senator Sherman, now aged almost 74, would face a difficult re-election battle with the Democrats and the Foraker faction in 1898. On January 4, 1897, McKinley offered Sherman the office of Secretary of State; he immediately accepted. The poor record Sherman posted prior to his departure from office in 1898 led to attacks on Hanna, suggesting that a senile man had been placed in a key Cabinet position to accommodate him. Foraker, in his memoirs, strongly implied that Sherman was moved out of the way to allow Hanna to have his Senate seat. An embittered Sherman stated in a letter after his departure as secretary, &quot;When [McKinley] urged me to accept the position of Secretary of State, I accepted with some reluctance and largely to promote the wishes of Mark Hanna. The result was that I lost the position both of Senator and Secretary ... They deprived me of the high office of Senator by the temporary appointment as Secretary of State.&quot;

Horner argues that the position of Secretary of State was the most important non-elective post in government, then often seen as a stepping stone to the presidency, and though Sherman no longer sought to be president, he was aware of the prestige. According to Rhodes, &quot;Sherman was glad to accept the Secretaryship of State. He exchanged two years in the Senate with a doubtful succession for apparently a four years&#x27; tenure of the Cabinet head of the new Republican administration, which was undoubtedly a promotion.&quot; Rhodes suggested that Hanna did not give credence to warnings about Sherman&#x27;s mental capacity in early 1897, though some of those tales must have been told by New York businessmen whom he trusted. The stories were not believed by McKinley either; the President-elect in February 1897 called accounts of Sherman&#x27;s mental decay &quot;the cheap inventions of sensational writers or other evil-disposed or mistaken people&quot;.

Sherman&#x27;s acceptance of the post of Secretary of State did not assure Hanna of succeeding him as senator. A temporary appointment to the Senate was to be made by Ohio&#x27;s governor, Republican Asa Bushnell; the legislature would then, in 1898, hold elections both for the final portion of Sherman&#x27;s term (expiring in March 1899) and for the full six-year term to follow. Bushnell was of the Foraker faction—Foraker was by then a senator-elect, selected by the legislature to fill Ohio&#x27;s other Senate seat for the term 1897 to 1903. Sherman, who was at that time still grateful for his Cabinet appointment, used his influence on Hanna&#x27;s behalf; so did McKinley. Governor Bushnell did not want to appoint a leader of the opposing faction and authorized Foraker to offer the place to Representative Theodore E. Burton, who declined it. Rhodes suggests that the difficulty over obtaining a Senate seat for Hanna led McKinley to persist in his offer to make his friend Postmaster General into mid-February 1897. Bushnell was a candidate for renomination and re-election in 1897; without Hanna&#x27;s support his chances were smaller, and on February 21, Bushnell wrote to Hanna that he would appoint him in Sherman&#x27;s place. Foraker, in his memoirs, stated that Hanna was given the Senate seat because of McKinley&#x27;s desires.

The 1897 legislative elections in Ohio would determine who would vote on Hanna&#x27;s bid for election for a full six-year term, and were seen as a referendum on McKinley&#x27;s first year in office—the President visited Ohio to give several speeches, as did Bryan. McKinley was active behind the scenes, urging Republicans both inside and outside Ohio to support the senator. The 1897 Ohio Republican convention voted to support Hanna, as did county conventions in 84 of Ohio&#x27;s 88 counties. The Republicans won the election, with the overwhelming number of Republican victors pledged to vote for Hanna. However, a number of Republicans, most of the Foraker faction, did not want to re-elect Hanna and formed an alliance with the Democrats.

When the legislature met on January 3, 1898, the anti-Hanna forces succeeded in organizing both houses of the legislature, The dissidents had not yet agreed upon a candidate; after several days of negotiation, they settled on the Republican mayor of Cleveland, Robert McKisson. The Cleveland mayor was the insurgents&#x27; candidate for both the short and long Senate term and had been elected in 1895 to his municipal position despite the opposition of Hanna and the Cleveland business community. Rumors flew in Columbus that legislators had been kidnapped by either or both sides, and allegations of bribery were made. James Rudolph Garfield, the late president&#x27;s son, stated that he had been told by one Republican from Cleveland that he had to vote for McKisson because if he did not, his contracts to sell the city brick pavers would be cut off. According to Horner,

In the end, &quot;Hanna&#x27;s tactics—whatever they really were&quot; succeeded; he was re-elected with the barest possible majority.

==== Relationship with the President ====
Mark Hanna and William McKinley continued their friendship as they assumed their offices in March 1897. Senator Hanna was looking for a residence; President McKinley suggested that he stay at the Executive Mansion (as the White House was still formally known) until he found one. According to Hearst&#x27;s New York &quot;Journal&quot;, &quot;the Senator doubtless feels that if anyone has the right to make himself at home in the White House he is the man&quot;. Hanna soon moved into the Arlington Hotel, close to the White House, where he occupied a large suite. After the death of Vice President Hobart in November 1899, Hanna took over the lease on his house on Lafayette Square, across Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House.

Despite civil service reform, a president had a large number of posts to fill. It was customary at the time to fill many of the lower level positions with party political workers. Hanna had a voice in some of McKinley&#x27;s appointments, but the President made the final decision. Hanna was allowed to recommend candidates for the majority of federal positions in Ohio and was permitted a veto over Foraker&#x27;s candidates. Hanna was also dominant in the South, where there were few Republican congressmen to lobby the President. He and McKinley decided on a system where many southern appointees were recommended by the state&#x27;s member of the Republican National Committee and the defeated Republican congressional candidate for the area in question. Hanna and McKinley gave few places to those who had served under Harrison, as the two presidents were not friendly. &quot;Silver Republicans&quot;, who had bolted the party at the convention or later, received nothing.

Although Hanna was reputed to control the administration&#x27;s patronage, in fact, other men were more influential. McKinley&#x27;s friend Joseph Smith, who had served as State Librarian of Ohio during McKinley&#x27;s tenure as governor, probably had more influence over federal jobs until his death in 1898. Charles Dawes, who was slated to be Comptroller of the Currency as soon as the incumbent left office, was also a McKinley confidant. Joseph Bristow, whose duties as Fourth Assistant Postmaster General under McKinley involved patronage appointments, later wrote that the President &quot;gave Hanna&#x27;s requests great consideration and had confidence in the clearness of his opinion, but in the end he always followed his own judgment&quot;.

As the year 1900 began, Hanna hinted that he might not want to run McKinley&#x27;s re-election campaign, stating that he was suffering from rheumatism. In spite of his statement, the senator did want to run the campaign, but McKinley (who apparently saw an opportunity to show the public that he was not Hanna&#x27;s creature) was slow to ask him. This was a source of great stress to Hanna, who was concerned about the campaign and his relationship with McKinley; the senator fainted in his office during the wait and may have suffered a heart attack. In late May, the President announced that Hanna would run his campaign. Margaret Leech suggested that McKinley was angry at Hanna for unknown reasons, thus the President&#x27;s &quot;uncharacteristic coldness&quot;. Morgan, in contrast, wrote that &quot;the president was using his usual indirect pressure and the power of silence. He wanted and needed Hanna, but on his own terms.&quot;

==== Spanish–American War ====
Even during the second Cleveland administration, Americans took keen interest in the ongoing revolt in Cuba, then a Spanish colony. Most Americans believed that Cuba should be independent and that Spain should leave the Western Hemisphere. Beginning in 1895, Congress passed a number of resolutions calling for Cuban independence. Although Cleveland pursued a policy of neutrality, his Secretary of State, Richard Olney, warned Spain that the patience of the United States was not inexhaustible. Sherman, then a senator, favored neutrality but believed that the US would inevitably go to war over Cuba. Soon after Hanna was appointed to the Senate, McKinley called Congress into special session to consider tariff legislation. Despite the stated purpose of the session, a number of resolutions were introduced calling for independence for Cuba, by force if necessary. When the press asked Hanna if he felt there would be action on Cuba during the session, he responded: &quot;I don&#x27;t know. You can&#x27;t tell about that. A spark might drop in there at any time and precipitate action.&quot;

Through 1897, McKinley maintained neutrality on Cuba, hoping to negotiate autonomy for the island. Nevertheless, pro-war elements, prominently including the Hearst newspapers, pressured McKinley for a more aggressive foreign policy. On May 20, 1897, the Senate passed a resolution favoring intervention in Cuba, 41–14, with Hanna in the minority. As the crisis slowly built through late 1897 and early 1898, Hanna became concerned about the political damage if McKinley, against popular opinion, kept the nation out of war. &quot;Look out for Mr. Bryan. Everything that goes wrong will be in the Democratic platform in 1900. You can be damn sure of that!&quot; Nevertheless, the Ohio senator believed that McKinley&#x27;s policy of quietly pressing Spain for colonial reform in Cuba had already yielded results without war, and would continue to do so.

On February 15, 1898, the American warship &quot;Maine&quot; sank in Havana harbor. Over 250 officers and men were killed. It was (and is) unclear if the explosion which caused &quot;Maine&quot;″s sinking was from an external cause or internal fault. McKinley ordered a board of inquiry while asking the nation to withhold judgment pending the result, but he also quietly prepared for war. The Hearst newspapers, with the slogan, &quot;Remember the &quot;Maine&quot; and to hell with Spain!&quot; pounded a constant drumbeat for war and blamed Hanna for the delay. According to the Hearst papers, the Ohio senator was the true master in the White House, and was vetoing war as bad for business. Hearst&#x27;s &quot;New York Journal&quot; editorialized in March 1898:

As the nation waited for the report of the board of inquiry, many who favored war deemed McKinley too timid. Hanna and the President were burned in effigy in Virginia. Assistant Secretary of the Navy Theodore Roosevelt shook his fist under Hanna&#x27;s nose at the Gridiron Dinner and stated, &quot;We will have this war for the freedom of Cuba in spite of the timidity of the commercial classes!&quot; Nevertheless, Hanna supported McKinley&#x27;s patient policy and acted as his point man in the Senate on the war issue.

The Navy&#x27;s report blamed an external cause, believed by many to be a Spanish mine or bomb, for the sinking of &quot;Maine&quot; (modern reports have suggested an internal explosion within a coal bunker). Despite the increased calls for war, McKinley hoped to preserve peace. However, when it became clear that the United States would accept nothing but Cuban independence, which the Spanish were not prepared to grant, negotiations broke off. On April 11, McKinley asked Congress for authority to secure Cuban independence, using force if necessary. Hanna supported McKinley in obtaining that authority, though he stated privately, &quot;If Congress had started this, I&#x27;d break my neck to stop it.&quot; Spain broke off diplomatic relations on April 20; Congress declared war five days later, retroactive to April 21.

The war resulted in a complete American victory. Nevertheless, Hanna was uncomfortable with the conflict. He stated during the war to a member of the public, &quot;Remember that my folks were Quakers. War is just a damn nuisance.&quot; After the Battle of El Caney, he viewed the American casualty lists and stated, &quot;Oh, God, now we&#x27;ll have this sort of thing again!&quot; After the war, Hanna supported McKinley&#x27;s decision to annex Spanish colonies such as Puerto Rico and Guam.

==== Campaign of 1900 ====
Vice President Hobart had died in late 1899. President McKinley was content to leave the choice of a vice presidential candidate for 1900 to the upcoming Republican convention. New York Senator Platt disliked his state&#x27;s governor, former Assistant Secretary of the Navy Theodore Roosevelt, who had pursued a reformist agenda in his year and a half in office. Platt hoped to sideline Roosevelt politically by making him vice president. Roosevelt was a popular choice in any event because of his well-publicized service during the Spanish–American War, and Platt had little trouble persuading state delegations to vote for Roosevelt after McKinley&#x27;s renomination. Quay was a close Platt ally in the effort to make Roosevelt vice president. Hanna, who felt Roosevelt was overly impulsive, did not want him on the ticket, but did not realize that the efforts were serious until he was already at the convention in Philadelphia. As many of the delegates were political appointees, Hanna hoped to persuade McKinley to use patronage to get the delegates to vote for another candidate. After emerging from the telephone booth from which he had tried and failed to get McKinley to agree, Senator Hanna stated, &quot;Do whatever you damn please! I&#x27;m through! I won&#x27;t have anything more to do with the convention! I won&#x27;t take charge of the campaign! I won&#x27;t be chairman of the national committee again!&quot; When asked what the matter was, Hanna replied,

On his return to Washington after the convention nominated McKinley and Roosevelt, Hanna wrote to the President, &quot;Well, it was a nice little scrap at Phila[delphia]. Not exactly to my liking with my hand tied behind me. However, we got through in good shape and the ticket is all right. Your duty to the country is to live for four years from next March.&quot;

The Democrats nominated Bryan a second time at their convention. This time, Bryan ran with a broader agenda, and attacked McKinley as an imperialist for taking the Spanish colonies. The Democratic candidate also urged increased use of the antitrust laws, and alleged that McKinley had been lax in their enforcement. Hanna summed up the Republican campaign in four words, &quot;Let well enough alone.&quot;

Hanna was called upon to do only small amounts of fundraising this time: no great educational campaign was required, and the corporations were willing to give. The President gave only one speech, the formal acceptance of his nomination in Canton in July. Roosevelt, on the other hand, traveled widely across the nation giving speeches. The New Yorker traveled in the campaign, reaching 24 of the 45 states. Hanna was now a public figure, and wanted to campaign for the Republicans in the western states. McKinley, however, was reluctant, as Hanna had varied from the administration&#x27;s position on trusts in a recent speech. McKinley sent Postmaster General Charles Emory Smith to Chicago, where Hanna then was, to talk him out of the trip. Hanna rapidly discerned that Smith had been sent by the President, and told him, &quot;Return to Washington and tell the President that God hates a coward.&quot; McKinley and Hanna met in Canton several days later and settled their differences over lunch. Hanna made his speaking tour in the West. According to Hanna biographer Thomas Beer, Hanna&#x27;s tour was a great success, though many viewers were surprised he did not wear suits decorated with the &quot;dollar mark&quot;.

Hanna spent much of his time based at the campaign&#x27;s New York office, while renting a seaside cottage in Elberon, New Jersey. In September, a strike by the United Mine Workers threatened a crisis which might cause problems for McKinley. Hanna believed that the miners&#x27; grievances were just, and he persuaded the parties to allow him to arbitrate. With Hanna&#x27;s aid, the two sides arrived at a negotiated settlement.

On November 6, 1900, the voters re-elected McKinley, who took 51.7% of the popular vote, a slight increase from 1896. He won 292 electoral votes to Bryan&#x27;s 155. McKinley took six states that Bryan had taken in 1896 while holding all the states he had won. Although the majority was not large by later standards, according to historian Lewis L. Gould in his study of the McKinley presidency, &quot;in light of the election results since the Civil War, however, it was an impressive mandate.&quot;

==== Assassination of McKinley ====
McKinley traveled much during his presidency, and in September 1901, journeyed to the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York. On September 6, 1901, while receiving the public in the Temple of Music on the Exposition grounds, McKinley was shot by an anarchist, Leon Czolgosz. Hanna, along with many of the President&#x27;s close allies, hurried to his bedside.

As the President lay, wounded, he enquired &quot;Is Mark there?&quot;; the doctors told him that Senator Hanna was present, but that he should not exert himself with an interview. McKinley appeared to be improving, and Hanna, with the doctors&#x27; reassurance, left Buffalo for an encampment of the Grand Army of the Republic in Cleveland, at which Hanna was to speak. While there, he received a telegram stating that the President had taken a turn for the worse, and hurried back to Buffalo. There he found an unconscious McKinley, whose sickbed had become a deathbed. On the evening of September 13, Hanna was allowed to see the dying man, as were others close to the President, such as his wife and his brother, Abner McKinley. Hanna, weeping, went to the library in the Milburn House where the President lay, and as he awaited the end, made the necessary plans and arrangements to return his friend&#x27;s remains to Canton. At 2:15 am on September 14, President McKinley died.

=== Roosevelt years and death (1901–04) ===

McKinley&#x27;s death left Hanna devastated both personally and politically. Although the two had not been allies, the new president, Roosevelt, reached out to Hanna, hoping to secure his influence in the Senate. Hanna indicated that he was willing to come to terms with Roosevelt on two conditions: that Roosevelt carry out McKinley&#x27;s political agenda, and that the President cease from his habit of calling Hanna &quot;old man&quot;, something which greatly annoyed the senator. Hanna warned Roosevelt, &quot;If you don&#x27;t, I&#x27;ll call you Teddy.&quot; Roosevelt, who despised his nickname, agreed to both terms, though he imperfectly carried out the second condition.

==== Panama Canal involvement ====
Hanna was a supporter of building a canal across Central America to allow ships to pass between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans without making the lengthy journey around Cape Horn. The senator believed a route across the Colombian province of Panama to be superior to its Nicaraguan rival. How he came to support this route is uncertain, though attorney and lobbyist William Nelson Cromwell later claimed to have personally converted Hanna to the Panama cause in 1901. This was disputed by the French canal promoter, Philippe Bunau-Varilla, who stated that at the end of his meeting with Hanna at the Arlington Hotel, the senator exclaimed, &quot;Monsieur Bunau-Varilla, you have convinced me.&quot;

The Nicaragua route had many supporters and a bill sponsored by Iowa Congressman William Peters Hepburn, which would authorize the construction of a canal on the Nicaragua route, had passed the House of Representatives. In June 1902, it was considered by the Senate, and on June 5 and 6, Hanna made a speech against the Hepburn Bill. In his speech, he referred to enormous maps, which were displayed in the Senate Chamber as he spoke. This was a novel technique, especially as he referred to the possibility of active volcanoes on the Nicaragua route in his speech, and the maps showed active volcanoes marked with red dots and extinct ones with black. There was an almost continuous band of black dots through Nicaragua, with eight red ones; no dots were placed on the map of Panama. Hanna pointed out many advantages of the Panama route: it was shorter than the Nicaraguan route, would require much less digging, and had existing harbors at either end. Hanna was in poor health as he gave the speech; Alabama Senator John Tyler Morgan, the Senate sponsor of the Hepburn Bill, tried to ask Hanna a question, only to be met with, &quot;I do not want to be interrupted, for I am very tired.&quot; At the end, Hanna warned that if the US built the Nicaragua canal, another power would finish the Panama route. One senator stated that he had been converted to the &quot;Hannama Canal&quot;. The bill was amended to support a Panama route, according to some accounts in part because Cromwell remembered that Nicaragua depicted volcanoes on its postage stamps, and combed the stock of Washington stamp dealers until he found enough to send to the entire Senate. The House afterwards agreed to the Senate amendment, and the bill authorizing a Panama canal passed.

The US entered into negotiations with Colombia for rights to build a canal; a treaty was signed but was rejected by the Colombian Senate. In November 1903, Panama, with the support of the United States, broke away from Colombia, and Bunau-Varilla, the representative of the new government in Washington, signed a treaty granting the US a zone in which to build a canal. The United States Senate was called upon to ratify the treaty in February 1904; the debate began as Hanna lay dying. The treaty was ratified on February 23, 1904, eight days after Hanna&#x27;s death.

==== Re-election, rumors of a presidential run, and death ====

At the 1903 Ohio Republican convention, Foraker filed a resolution to endorse Roosevelt for re-election. This would normally have been introduced at the 1904 convention, but Foraker hoped to use the resolution to take control of the Ohio party from Hanna. The resolution placed Hanna in a difficult position: if he supported it, he proclaimed he would not run for president; if he opposed it, he risked Roosevelt&#x27;s wrath. Hanna wired Roosevelt, who was on a western trip, that he intended to oppose it and would explain all when both men were in Washington. Roosevelt responded that while he had not requested support from anyone, those friendly to his administration would naturally vote for such a statement. Hanna resignedly supported the resolution.

The 1903 convention also endorsed Hanna for re-election to the Senate, and nominated Hanna&#x27;s friend Myron Herrick for governor. The Foraker faction was allowed the nomination for lieutenant governor, given to Warren G. Harding, who later became president. Hanna campaigned for several weeks for the Republicans in Ohio, and was rewarded with an overwhelming Republican victory. With no drama, Hanna was re-elected in January 1904 for the term 1905–1911 by a legislative vote of 115–25, a much larger margin than Foraker had received in 1902.

Despite the differences between the two men, Roosevelt in November 1903 asked Hanna to run his re-election campaign. Hanna saw this as an unsubtle attempt by the President to ensure that Hanna would not oppose him, and was slow to respond to his request. In the interim, he allowed talk of a Hanna for president campaign to continue, although he did not plan to run. Financier J. P. Morgan, who disliked Roosevelt&#x27;s policies, offered to finance the Hanna presidential campaign when he hosted the Hannas at Thanksgiving, though the senator remained silent at the offer. In December, Hanna and Roosevelt had a lengthy meeting and resolved many of their differences. Roosevelt agreed that Hanna would not have to serve another term as chairman of the Republican National Committee. This in theory freed Hanna to run for president, but Roosevelt could see that Hanna was an exhausted man and would not run.

On January 30, 1904, Hanna attended the Gridiron Club dinner at the Arlington Hotel. He neither ate nor drank, and when asked how his health was, responded &quot;Not good.&quot; He never again left his Washington residence, having fallen ill with typhoid fever. As the days passed, politicians began to wait in the Arlington lobby, close to Hanna&#x27;s house, for news; a letter from the President, &quot;May you soon be with us, old fellow, as strong in body and as vigorous in your leadership as ever&quot; was never read by the recipient. Hanna drifted in and out of consciousness for several days; on the morning of February 15, his heart began to fail. Roosevelt visited at 3 pm, unseen by the dying man. At 6:30 pm, Senator Hanna died, and the crowd of congressional colleagues, government officials, and diplomats who had gathered in the lobby of the Arlington left the hotel, many sobbing. Roosevelt biographer Edmund Morris noted Hanna&#x27;s achievement in industry and in politics, &quot;He had not done badly in either field; he had made seven million dollars, and a President of the United States.&quot;

== Views and legacy ==
According to Professor Gerald W. Wolff, &quot;the one solid absolute in [Hanna&#x27;s] life was a profound belief in the living standard capitalism had brought to America.&quot; Hanna believed, like many conservative businessmen of his time, that labor, business, and government should work together cooperatively for the benefit of society. These views, which had coalesced in Hanna by the 1876 coal strike, informed his political views once he turned to that field. According to Croly, Hanna always did his best to foster good relations with his workers; the biographer proffered in support of his statement a quote from the Cleveland &quot;Leader&quot; of April 28, 1876: &quot;This morning Mr. Hanna, of Rhodes &amp; Co., met the striking laborers on the docks at Ashtabula Harbor, and after consultation the men accepted the terms offered and resumed work.&quot; According to Wolff, after the coal strike, Hanna &quot;tried diligently to show by example how relations between labor, capital, and management could be ordered for the benefit of all&quot;.

Despite his efforts at harmonious worker relations, Hanna was often depicted by Davenport during the 1896 campaign with his foot on a skull labeled &quot;Labor&quot;. During the following year&#x27;s Ohio legislative elections, which determined Hanna&#x27;s electors for his 1898 re-election bid, he was accused of being harsh to his employees. He responded in a speech,

After Hanna issued the challenge, unions representing his workers confirmed his statement. Hanna became the first president of the National Civic Federation (NCF), which tried to foster harmonious relations between business and labor. The NCF opposed militant labor unions; it also resisted businessmen who sought to entirely prevent regulation. It recognized labor&#x27;s right to organize to seek better wages and conditions. In a 1903 speech to a labor convention, Hanna stated that the efforts of labor to organize into unions should be considered no more shocking than those of businesses organizing into trade groups.

A phrase sometimes attributed to Hanna is: &quot;No man in public office owes the public anything&quot;. This phrase supposedly appeared in a letter by Hanna to Ohio Attorney General David K. Watson in 1890, urging him to drop a lawsuit against the Standard Oil Company. The phrase became an issue against Hanna in the 1897 campaign in Ohio. Watson, a Republican, denied that Hanna had written the phrase, but refused to discuss the matter further with reporters. Hanna&#x27;s early biographers, Croly and Beer, found the supposed quote dubious but as they did not definitely deny that Hanna had written it, a number of later works attribute the quote to Hanna. However, Professor Thomas E. Felt, who wrote an article about the controversy, believed Hanna unlikely to use such an inflammatory phrase to a man with whom he was not close, and which, in any event, did not accurately represent his political views.

Hanna is often credited with the invention of the modern presidential campaign. His campaign for McKinley in 1896 broke new ground because of its highly systematized and centralized nature, as well as for its fundraising success. Although Hanna has been depicted as the first national political boss, historians agree that McKinley dominated the relationship between the two. Nevertheless, Hanna is recognized for his innovative campaign work.

== Public image today ==

New Jersey Senator Bill Bradley published a volume of memoirs, &quot;Time Present, Time Past&quot; in 1996. In it, the Democrat mentioned having written a high-school report on Hanna—his history teacher, Bradley related, told him that the lesson of the 1896 campaign is that money is power. Bradley, a former basketball player, mentioned that when he was being interviewed in high school, he stated that Hanna was one of his heroes. By the time he wrote the book, however, Bradley had come to believe in limits on campaign spending and blamed Hanna for a sharp escalation in campaign costs. Bradley also stated what Horner terms mischaracterizations of Hanna: that he was the Republican boss of Ohio, and that he did his best to disrupt Roosevelt&#x27;s presidency. Bradley alleged that since 1896, Republicans have raised money easily from the rich. Despite his condemnation of Hanna, Bradley wrote that he regretted that he could not find a Hanna-like figure who could play an analogous role in advancing his political career.

In 2000, Texas Governor George W. Bush successfully ran for the presidency. As the campaign progressed, the media compared Hanna and Bush adviser Karl Rove, who was believed by some to hold a Svengali-like influence over the Texas governor. During the campaign, and until his departure from the White House in 2007, media members often suggested that Rove was able to manipulate Bush, and that Rove exerted considerable control over the government. Bush&#x27;s advisor was deemed a present-day incarnation of Hanna, who was almost invariably presented negatively and at variance with historical fact. For example, writer Jack Kelly in a 2000 column incorrectly stated that McKinley&#x27;s front porch campaign was at the direction of Hanna to ensure the candidate did not vary from campaign themes, rather than McKinley deciding that it was his best response to Bryan&#x27;s national tour. These comparisons were fuelled by Rove&#x27;s interest in, and from some reports, liking for Hanna. Rove studied the McKinley administration at the University of Texas under McKinley biographer Lewis L. Gould, and believes that Hanna&#x27;s influence has been overstated.

According to Horner, Davenport&#x27;s depiction of Hanna still lingers as the modern image of the former senator:

== Family ==

On September 27, 1864, Hanna married Charlotte Augusta Rhodes (1843 - 1921). Through her father Daniel Rhodes, she was related to US Senator Stephen A. Douglas. Hanna&#x27;s brothers-in-law were industrialist and historian James Ford Rhodes, who won a Pulitzer Prize; and Col. James Pickands, a cofounder of Pickands Mather &amp; Company. His cousin Edith Hanna married William Yale of the Yale family, who was a spy for Standard Oil of the Rockefellers, and a companion of Lawrence of Arabia. His nephew, Thomas B. Yale, was an OSS spy during World War II and became Director of Finance of the CIA under George H. W. Bush. He was involved in Project Azorian with Howard Hughes.

The couple had three children:
* Daniel Rhodes Hanna, born Dec. 27, 1866, married to Daisy Gordon, and secondly to May Harrington. He owned &quot;Cleveland News &quot; and &quot;The Cleveland Leader&quot;.
* Mabel A. Hanna, born June 13, 1871, married Harry Parsons, the personal assistant of her father. They lived in a mansion in Clifton Park.
* Ruth Hanna, born March 27, 1880, married to Congressman Albert G. Simms. She became a congresswoman and political activist.

== Electoral history ==
All elections are by the Ohio General Assembly, as state legislatures elected senators until the ratification of the 17th Amendment in 1913.



== References ==
Bibliography
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Other sources
* 
* 

* Marvin, George U. &quot;His Last Fight Is Ended: Hanna Succumbs to the Grim Reaper and the Entire Nation Mourns His Loss,&quot; The Cleveland Leader, February 16, 1904.

==External links==

* Marcus A. Hanna, late a senator from Ohio, Memorial addresses delivered in the House of Representatives and Senate frontispiece 1904



|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q509441" start="0" end="19" title="Mark Hanna" label="Marcus Alonzo Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="93" end="103" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851312" start="131" end="162" title="List of United States Senators from Ohio" label="United States Senator from Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145369" start="190" end="219" title="Republican National Committee" label="Republican National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="262" end="278" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="384" end="391" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="in 1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q699227" start="396" end="403" title="1900 United States presidential election" label="in 1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016603" start="442" end="448" title="Lisbon, Ohio" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="506" end="515" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="573" end="592" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="727" end="745" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q445392" start="1094" end="1106" title="John Sherman" label="John Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q699139" start="1152" end="1169" title="1884 United States presidential election" label="president in 1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="1543" end="1551" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="1564" end="1586" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q745405" start="1601" end="1612" title="bimetallism" label="bimetallism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500299" start="1623" end="1634" title="Free Silver" label="Free Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="1898" end="1916" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080820" start="1943" end="1964" title="Ohio General Assembly" label="Ohio General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891873" start="1965" end="1972" title="United States Senate election in Ohio, 1898" label="in 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866985" start="1989" end="2018" title="Assassination of William McKinley" label="McKinley&amp;#x27;s assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137799" start="2061" end="2078" title="History of the Panama Canal" label="a canal in Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="2105" end="2120" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626009" start="2282" end="2297" title="Homer Davenport" label="Homer Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="2566" end="2572" title="Society of Friends" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q421960" start="2662" end="2679" title="Columbiana County, Ohio" label="Columbiana County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="2946" end="2953" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="3018" end="3026" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="3566" end="3576" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="3975" end="3994" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="4067" end="4090" title="Case Western Reserve University" label="Western Reserve College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4299" end="4308" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="4766" end="4780" title="National Guard of the United States" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824471" start="4908" end="4927" title="150th Ohio Infantry" label="150th Ohio Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472116" start="4962" end="4974" title="Fort Stevens (Washington, D.C.)" label="Fort Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q257497" start="5125" end="5136" title="Jubal Early" label="Jubal Early"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="5214" end="5231" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314195" start="5455" end="5510" title="Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States" label="Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957191" start="5760" end="5776" title="finishing school" label="finishing school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="5855" end="5863" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q433174" start="5872" end="5890" title="Stephen A. Douglas" label="Stephen A. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q698842" start="5944" end="5951" title="1860 United States presidential election" label="in 1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="6068" end="6083" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="6318" end="6329" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="6380" end="6390" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165999" start="6597" end="6616" title="lake freighter" label="Great Lakes steamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q433767" start="6743" end="6756" title="Herbert Croly" label="Herbert Croly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712335" start="7019" end="7041" title="M.A. Hanna Company" label="M.A. Hanna and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="7186" end="7207" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071196" start="7331" end="7342" title="leased line" label="leased line"/>
<link wikidata="Q698955" start="7349" end="7379" title="1868 United States presidential election" label="the 1868 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="7434" end="7450" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550749" start="7478" end="7487" title="United States Note" label="greenback"/>
<link wikidata="Q251267" start="8229" end="8244" title="Cuyahoga County, Ohio" label="Cuyahoga County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346321" start="8768" end="8780" title="Edwin Cowles" label="Edwin Cowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="9347" end="9366" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="that emperor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="9491" end="9507" title="Rutherford Hayes" label="Rutherford Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34597" start="9615" end="9629" title="James Garfield" label="James Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945540" start="9655" end="9669" title="1880 Republican National Convention" label="the convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="9719" end="9744" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q445392" start="9745" end="9757" title="John Sherman" label="John Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q699120" start="9931" end="9948" title="1880 United States presidential election" label="the fall campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505891" start="10109" end="10129" title="front porch campaign" label="front porch campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q543780" start="10213" end="10219" title="Mentor, Ohio" label="Mentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066346" start="10234" end="10246" title="Charles W. F. Dick" label="Charles Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611358" start="10583" end="10598" title="Roscoe Conkling" label="Roscoe Conkling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558808" start="10669" end="10678" title="Stalwart (politics)" label="Stalwarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359302" start="10706" end="10716" title="Half-Breed (politics)" label="Half-Breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q435517" start="11327" end="11343" title="Winfield Hancock" label="Winfield Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372820" start="12027" end="12045" title="Lake View Cemetery" label="Lake View Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556015" start="12163" end="12193" title="1884 Republican National Convention" label="Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498" start="12278" end="12295" title="Chester A. Arthur" label="Chester A. Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="12453" end="12466" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q881341" start="12827" end="12844" title="Joseph B. Foraker" label="Joseph B. Foraker"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="13035" end="13040" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q448778" start="13049" end="13064" title="James G. Blaine" label="James G. Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="13355" end="13363" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="13373" end="13389" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="13673" end="13695" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="13735" end="13740" title="board of directors" label="board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064413" start="13937" end="13958" title="Charles Francis Adams, Jr." label="Charles Francis Adams"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14845" end="14859" title="Coal miners&amp;#x27; strike of 1873#Aftermath" label="gone on strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="15002" end="15018" title="Rutherford Hayes" label="Rutherford Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q491239" start="15112" end="15124" title="Canton, Ohio" label="Canton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556289" start="15708" end="15743" title="1888 Republican National Convention" label="1888 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438638" start="16152" end="16164" title="favorite son" label="favorite son"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="17065" end="17082" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q699168" start="18062" end="18083" title="1888 United States presidential election" label="was elected president"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="19044" end="19050" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q817433" start="19119" end="19139" title="Benjamin Butterworth" label="Benjamin Butterworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="19364" end="19384" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094078" start="19425" end="19439" title="Thomas Brackett Reed" label="Thomas B. Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="19610" end="19624" title="gerrymandering" label="gerrymandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801942" start="19677" end="19690" title="McKinley Tariff" label="a tariff bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080820" start="19975" end="19991" title="Ohio Legislature" label="Ohio Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="20067" end="20081" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="17th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="20208" end="20212" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145369" start="21338" end="21367" title="Republican National Committee" label="Republican National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556636" start="21777" end="21812" title="1892 Republican National Convention" label="1892 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q960189" start="21845" end="21860" title="keynote address" label="keynote address"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418422" start="23394" end="23407" title="Panic of 1893" label="Panic of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q216820" start="23433" end="23443" title="Youngstown, Ohio" label="Youngstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q238397" start="24157" end="24169" title="Ida Saxton McKinley" label="his wife Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760219" start="25082" end="25104" title="The Repository" label="&amp;quot;Repository&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192860" start="25622" end="25642" title="Thomasville, Georgia" label="Thomasville, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059259" start="26171" end="26183" title="Matthew Quay" label="Matthew Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q163894" start="26204" end="26216" title="Thomas C. Platt" label="Thomas Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557067" start="26629" end="26654" title="1896 Republican National Convention" label="the Republican convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="26993" end="27006" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q926897" start="27015" end="27034" title="William E. Chandler" label="William E. Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q298997" start="27740" end="27754" title="Levi P. Morton" label="Levi P. Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q184565" start="28091" end="28104" title="Charles Dawes" label="Charles Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="28159" end="28167" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="28961" end="28984" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628287" start="29511" end="29525" title="H. H. Kohlsaat" label="H. H. Kohlsaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q707528" start="29600" end="29614" title="William R. Day" label="William R. Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722825" start="29862" end="29880" title="Alfred Henry Lewis" label="Alfred Henry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="30276" end="30286" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q310841" start="30330" end="30343" title="Garret Hobart" label="Garret Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145369" start="30463" end="30492" title="Republican National Committee" label="Republican National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="30713" end="30726" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="30727" end="30736" title="gold" label="the metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="30847" end="30853" title="Silver" label="Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q842206" start="31090" end="31102" title="money supply" label="money supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q745405" start="31423" end="31434" title="bimetallism" label="bimetallism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785103" start="31590" end="31603" title="Morgan dollar" label="silver dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141049" start="31777" end="31785" title="United States Mint" label="the Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501855" start="32075" end="32080" title="party platform" label="plank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501855" start="32166" end="32180" title="party platform" label="party platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801942" start="32436" end="32460" title="McKinley Tariff" label="well-known protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557043" start="32480" end="32493" title="1896 Democratic National Convention" label="in convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q531828" start="32542" end="32558" title="Richard P. Bland" label="Richard P. Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="32875" end="32888" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="33042" end="33050" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="33066" end="33088" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247561" start="33204" end="33224" title="Cross of Gold speech" label="Cross of Gold speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="33436" end="33450" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="Populist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013553" start="33963" end="33977" title="William Jennings Bryan 1896 presidential campaign" label="whose campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994034" start="34135" end="34168" title="whistle stop train tour" label="whistle stop appearances by train"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505891" start="34536" end="34556" title="front porch campaign" label="front porch campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="35591" end="35603" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="35756" end="35767" title="J.P. Morgan" label="J.P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284191" start="35795" end="35805" title="USS Gloucester (1891)" label="Corsair II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626009" start="38150" end="38165" title="Homer Davenport" label="Homer Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q699168" start="39196" end="39222" title="1888 United States presidential election" label="the 1888 presidential race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="40634" end="40640" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="40645" end="40657" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40744" end="40756" title="sectionalism#United States" label="sectionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538559" start="40794" end="40805" title="Solid South" label="Solid South"/>
<link wikidata="Q669269" start="40824" end="40837" title="Border states (American Civil War)" label="border states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="40841" end="40849" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="40851" end="40859" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="40861" end="40874" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="40879" end="40887" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680399" start="41576" end="41593" title="James Ford Rhodes" label="James Ford Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117101" start="41804" end="41812" title="John Hay" label="John Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q720157" start="44418" end="44430" title="Asa S. Bushnell (Governor)" label="Asa Bushnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q252449" start="45036" end="45054" title="Theodore E. Burton" label="Theodore E. Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753094" start="45204" end="45222" title="United States Postmaster General" label="Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343859" start="46578" end="46593" title="Robert McKisson" label="Robert McKisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="46830" end="46838" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q935721" start="46938" end="46960" title="James Rudolph Garfield" label="James Rudolph Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q19460273" start="47863" end="47878" title="Arlington Hotel (Washington, D.C.)" label="Arlington Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48040" end="48056" title="President&amp;#x27;s Park#Lafayette Square" label="Lafayette Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455053" start="48065" end="48084" title="Pennsylvania Avenue (Washington, D.C.)" label="Pennsylvania Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162467" start="48116" end="48136" title="Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act" label="civil service reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881026" start="49433" end="49460" title="Comptroller of the Currency" label="Comptroller of the Currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707449" start="49530" end="49544" title="Joseph L. Bristow" label="Joseph Bristow"/>
<link wikidata="Q699227" start="49924" end="49944" title="1900 United States presidential election" label="re-election campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="49981" end="49991" title="rheumatism" label="rheumatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514908" start="50895" end="50913" title="Cuban War of Independence" label="the ongoing revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q708039" start="51220" end="51233" title="Richard Olney" label="Richard Olney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278231" start="51521" end="51539" title="Dingley Act" label="tariff legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q671602" start="52809" end="52826" title="USS Maine (ACR-1)" label="&amp;quot;Maine&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899864" start="53672" end="53688" title="burned in effigy" label="burned in effigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="53692" end="53700" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="53734" end="53752" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608632" start="53799" end="53814" title="Gridiron Dinner" label="Gridiron Dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887938" start="55133" end="55151" title="Battle of El Caney" label="Battle of El Caney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="55360" end="55371" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="55376" end="55380" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152373" start="55551" end="55585" title="1900 Republican National Convention" label="the upcoming Republican convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557727" start="57298" end="57317" title="1900 Democratic National Convention" label="at their convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="57493" end="57502" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064277" start="58322" end="58341" title="Charles Emory Smith" label="Charles Emory Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q986968" start="58997" end="59016" title="Elberon, New Jersey" label="Elberon, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59034" end="59067" title="Coal strike of 1902#The 1899 and 1900 strikes" label="strike by the United Mine Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q112391468" start="59658" end="59672" title="Lewis L. Gould" label="Lewis L. Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693466" start="59942" end="59965" title="Pan-American Exposition" label="Pan-American Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="59969" end="59986" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q683720" start="60044" end="60059" title="Temple of Music" label="Temple of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q348187" start="60122" end="60135" title="Leon Czolgosz" label="Leon Czolgosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118606" start="60523" end="60549" title="Grand Army of the Republic" label="Grand Army of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="62020" end="62035" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078" start="62141" end="62150" title="Cape Horn" label="Cape Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="62192" end="62200" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="62214" end="62220" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="62243" end="62252" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q11956777" start="62338" end="62361" title="William Nelson Cromwell" label="William Nelson Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099164" start="62488" end="62510" title="Philippe Bunau-Varilla" label="Philippe Bunau-Varilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891726" start="62676" end="62691" title="History of the Nicaragua Canal" label="Nicaragua route"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580239" start="62753" end="62775" title="William Peters Hepburn" label="William Peters Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="63675" end="63682" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701978" start="63691" end="63708" title="John Tyler Morgan" label="John Tyler Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="64212" end="64225" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398781" start="64551" end="64567" title="Senate of Colombia" label="Colombian Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089201" start="64634" end="64658" title="Separation of Panama from Colombia" label="broke away from Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q676676" start="64742" end="64750" title="Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty" label="a treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q498979" start="64767" end="64773" title="Panama Canal Zone" label="a zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q882184" start="65931" end="65944" title="Myron Herrick" label="Myron Herrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="66040" end="66057" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="66751" end="66763" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="66885" end="66897" title="Thanksgiving" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608632" start="67323" end="67336" title="Gridiron Club" label="Gridiron Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="67530" end="67543" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048117" start="68203" end="68216" title="Edmund Morris (writer)" label="Edmund Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091495" start="69988" end="70013" title="National Civic Federation" label="National Civic Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="70117" end="70128" title="labor union" label="labor union"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="70731" end="70751" title="Standard Oil Company" label="Standard Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q504025" start="71885" end="71897" title="Bill Bradley" label="Bill Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352232" start="72380" end="72397" title="Campaign finance" label="campaign spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="72905" end="72910" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="72920" end="72934" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545551" start="72948" end="72970" title="George W. Bush presidential campaign, 2000" label="ran for the presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q311135" start="73042" end="73051" title="Karl Rove" label="Karl Rove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262246" start="73088" end="73096" title="Svengali" label="Svengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="73934" end="73953" title="University of Texas" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q112391468" start="73980" end="73994" title="Lewis L. Gould" label="Lewis L. Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q433174" start="74329" end="74347" title="Stephen A. Douglas" label="Stephen A. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680399" start="74411" end="74428" title="James Ford Rhodes" label="James Ford Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582457" start="74496" end="74525" title="Pickands Mather &amp;amp; Company" label="Pickands Mather &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74558" end="74570" title="Bureau of Secret Intelligence#Leland Harrison and William Yale" label="William Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q37491029" start="74578" end="74589" title="Yale (surname)" label="Yale family"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="74609" end="74621" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130469" start="74629" end="74641" title="Rockefellers" label="Rockefellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="74662" end="74680" title="Lawrence of Arabia" label="Lawrence of Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="74717" end="74720" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="OSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="74783" end="74786" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="74793" end="74810" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q794050" start="74831" end="74846" title="Project Azorian" label="Project Azorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="74852" end="74865" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132195" start="75014" end="75028" title="Cleveland News" label="Cleveland News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723366" start="75046" end="75066" title="The Cleveland Leader" label="The Cleveland Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850357" start="75200" end="75212" title="Clifton Park (Lakewood, Ohio)" label="Clifton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177707" start="75216" end="75226" title="Ruth Hanna" label="Ruth Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637990" start="75272" end="75287" title="Albert G. Simms" label="Albert G. Simms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162250" wikidata="Q159646" url="?curid=162250" title="Albert I, Prince of Monaco">
<text>Albert I (Albert Honoré Charles Grimaldi; 13 November 1848 – 26 June 1922) was Prince of Monaco from 10 September 1889 until his death in 1922. He devoted much of his life to oceanography, exploration and science. Alongside his expeditions, Albert I&#x27;s reign oversaw major reforms on political, social, and economic levels, with the Monégasque Revolution leading to the end of absolute monarchy and his promulgation of a constitution in 1911.

==Early life==
Born on 13 November 1848 in Paris, France, the son of Prince Charles III (1818–1889), and Countess Antoinette Ghislaine de Merode (1828–1864), a Belgian noblewoman, maternal aunt of Donna Maria Vittoria dal Pozzo, Princess della Cisterna, Duchess consort of Aosta and Queen consort of Spain.

As a young man, Prince Albert served in the Spanish Navy as a navigator. During the Franco-Prussian War, he joined the French Navy where he was awarded the Legion of Honor. In addition to his interest in oceanographic studies, Albert had a keen interest in the origins of man and in Paris, he founded the &quot;Institute for Human Paleontology&quot; that was responsible for a number of archeological digs. The &quot;Grimaldi Man&quot; found in the Baousse-Rousse cave was named in his honour. Albert&#x27;s intellectual achievements gained him worldwide recognition and in 1909, the British Academy of Science made him a member.

==First marriage==

On 21 September 1869 at the Château de Marchais (which is still in the possession of the Grimaldi family today) in Champagne, Prince Albert was married to Lady Mary Victoria Hamilton (1850–1922), of Lanarkshire, Scotland, a daughter of the 11th Duke of Hamilton and his wife, Princess Marie Amelie of Baden. The couple met for the first time in August 1869 at a ball hosted by the Emperor and Empress of France; their marriage had been arranged by Albert&#x27;s grandmother Caroline.

Caroline had tried to make a match between Albert and Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge, the first cousin of Queen Victoria, and sought the help of Napoléon III (Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte) and his wife, Empress Eugénie. The Emperor convinced Caroline that Queen Victoria would never allow a relative of hers to marry into a family who made a living out of gambling. He then suggested Mary, his third cousin once removed and sister of his good friend, the 12th Duke of Hamilton, as a suitable alternative. Mary was a granddaughter of Charles, Grand Duke of Baden and related by blood to the French Imperial family through her maternal grandmother Stéphanie de Beauharnais, Emperor Napoléon I&#x27;s adopted daughter and second cousin of Napoléon III&#x27;s mother, Hortense de Beauharnais. The Hamiltons were well aware of the extent of Monaco&#x27;s estate, which was no bigger than theirs, but were sufficiently impressed by its status as an independent principality. The couple married at Château de Marchais on 21 September 1869.

Within a year of their marriage, the couple&#x27;s only child (Louis) was born, but Mary disliked Monaco and found the Mediterranean too hot. While Albert was away fighting in the Franco-Prussian war, she left Monaco permanently. The couple divorced and their marriage was annulled by the Church on 3 January 1880, although a special provision was made by the Vatican to allow Louis to remain legitimate in the eyes of the Church. Civilly, the marriage was dissolved on 28 July 1880, by the Order of Prince Charles III. That same year, the former Princess of Monaco remarried in Florence, Italy, to a Hungarian nobleman, Prince Tassilo Festetics von Tolna.

==Accession and second marriage==
On 10 September 1889, Albert ascended the throne of Monaco on the death of his father. That same year in Paris, on 30 October, he married the Dowager Duchess de Richelieu, née Marie Alice Heine (1858–1925). The American daughter of a New Orleans building contractor of German-Jewish descent, Alice Heine had married the Duc de Richelieu but had been widowed by age 21 and left with a young son, Armand. Her marriage to Prince Albert proved an equal blessing for him and the tiny principality of Monaco, since Alice brought a strong business acumen, well in advance of her youth. Having helped put her husband&#x27;s principality on a sound financial footing, she would devote her energies to making Monaco one of Europe&#x27;s great cultural centers, with an opera, theater, and a ballet under the direction of the famed Russian impresario Serge Diaghilev.

Despite the initial success of the marriage of Prince Albert and Princess Alice, in 1902, they separated legally, without issue, though did not divorce. According to Anne Edwards&#x27; book &quot;The Grimaldis of Monaco&quot;, this was due to the Princess&#x27;s friendship with the composer Isidore de Lara. By the same token, the courtesan Caroline Otero, La Belle Otero, who had served him as a high class prostitute between 1893 and 1897, recalled Albert fondly in her memoirs and claimed that he was not a virile man and suffered from erection difficulty. Princess Alice had La Belle Otero banned from the principality in 1897 for being seen with her husband.

==Later life==
In March 1910, there were mass protests against his rule. The Monegasques demanded a constitution and a parliament to rein in the absolute monarch or else they would overthrow him and establish a republic. They were dissatisfied about French domination of the principality&#x27;s politics and economy. There was severe unemployment, as the principality lacked factories and farmland, and the casinos did not allow citizens to work there. On 5 January 1911, Prince Albert I granted Monaco a constitution, but the document had little real meaning in terms of reducing autocratic rule and was soon suspended by the Prince when World War I broke out. Also in 1911, Prince Albert created the Monte Carlo Rally, an automobile race designed to draw tourists to Monaco and the Casino.

Despite his military service, or perhaps because of it, the Prince became a pacifist, establishing the International Institute of Peace in Monaco as a place to develop a peaceful settlement for conflict through arbitration. In the tension-filled times leading up to World War I, Prince Albert made numerous attempts to dissuade Germany&#x27;s Kaiser Wilhelm II from war.

When war came, Prince Albert could not avoid becoming involved. In one incident, he even wrote personally to the Kaiser in an effort to ameliorate the consequences of Gen. Karl von Bülow&#x27;s wrath. Without the Prince&#x27;s intervention, the French villages of Sissonne and Marchais would have been destroyed. In the &quot;Great War to End All Wars&quot;, Monaco declared its neutrality, but in fact, provided the Allied forces with hospitals, convalescent centers, and soldiers, including Prince Albert&#x27;s only son, Louis.

Albert died on 26 June 1922 in Paris, France, and was succeeded by his son, Louis II.

==Oceanography, paleontology, geography==
Prince Albert I of Monaco devoted much of his life to the study of the sea and oceans, and Monaco diplomats around the world forwarded scientific papers to him. At 22 years old, he embarked on a career in the then relatively new science of oceanography. Understanding the importance of the relationship between living creatures and their environment, he devised a number of techniques and instruments for measurement and exploration. Albert I was also the “instigator and promulgator” of the oceanographic science he contributed to create. He founded the Institut océanographique, Foundation Albert I, Prince of Monaco in 1906, a private foundation recognized of public utility. It has two buildings: The Oceanographic Institute of Paris, now renamed Ocean House, and what became the world-renowned Oceanographic Museum of Monaco. This includes an aquarium, a museum, and a library, with research facilities in Paris.

He owned four, increasingly impressive research yachts, &quot;Hirondelle&quot;, &quot;Princesse Alice&quot;, &quot;Princesse Alice II&quot; and &quot;Hirondelle II&quot;. Accompanied by some of the world&#x27;s leading marine scientists, he travelled the length and breadth of the Mediterranean, making numerous oceanographic studies, maps and charts. In 1896, on an oceanographic survey of the Azores, he discovered the Princess Alice Bank.
From an early age, Prince Albert I of Monaco evidenced a strong fascination for the polar regions. In the years 1898-1907 he made four scientific cruises to Svalbard on his yacht &quot;Princesse Alice&quot;. His efforts are honored by the later naming of Albert I Land on Spitsbergen.

The first cruise in the summer of 1898 was an oceanographical and zoological reconnaissance, aimed mainly at adding to the collections of the Oceanographic Museum of Monaco, for which the construction had just started.

On the second expedition, in 1899, the focus was on the hydrography and topography of Raudfjorden, on the north-western tip of Spitsbergen, of which a map was published. His efforts are acknowledged by the later naming of Albert I Land, which comprises the part of Spitsbergen west of Raudfjorden.

The third trip, in 1906, meteorology was added to the range of observations and surveys were pursued. The Prince also provided support for two other expeditions, that of the Scotsman, William Bruce, to Prins Karls Forland, and that of the Norwegian, Gunnar Isachsen, to northwestern Spitsbergen. His funding of the latter lead to regular Norwegian scientific expeditions on Svalbard, and in 1928 the foundation of the Norwegian Polar Institute.

The Prince&#x27;s fourth expedition in 1907, was aimed at completing the results from the previous summer. Prince Albert also lent his support, either financially, or through gifts or loans of oceanographic instruments, to numerous Arctic and Antarctic explorers. The same year, he provided funds and support for the foundation of the Friends of the French National Museum of Natural History Society. In 1909 he joined the Société de Géographie and the British Academy. In 1910 the Prince was the main founder of the Institute of Human Paleontology (&quot;Institut de paléontologie humaine&quot;) in Paris, close to the &quot;Jardin des plantes&quot; which is the seat of the French National Museum of Natural History. Finally, he showed a keen interest in environmental protection, especially in Svalbard. This is demonstrated by his responses to a questionnaire that Hugo Conwentz, a German botanist sent him in 1912.

In 1918, the US National Academy of Sciences awarded Prince Albert its Alexander Agassiz Medal for his achievements. The Explorers Club elected Albert I to its highest category of membership — Honorary Member — in 1921. He was also awarded the Cullum Geographical Medal of the American Geographical Society. Prince Rainier of Monaco and the International Association for the Physical Sciences of the Oceans established the Prince Albert I Medal in the physical and chemical sciences of the oceans in his honor.

==Philately==

Albert I constituted a collection of postage stamps. The collection was later continued by Louis II and finally became part of the postal museum Rainier III that created in 1950.

==Numismatics==
Albert I was featured on a €2 commemorative coin issued by the Principality of Monaco in 2022.

==Honours==
;Decorations
==Ancestry==
==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159646" start="0" end="8" title="Albert I, Prince of Monaco" label="Albert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457774" start="79" end="95" title="Prince of Monaco" label="Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="175" end="187" title="oceanography" label="oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301694" start="337" end="358" title="Monégasque Revolution" label="Monégasque Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q63982" start="423" end="437" title="Constitution of Monaco" label="a constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="491" end="504" title="Paris, France" label="Paris, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q382433" start="517" end="535" title="Charles III, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q445061" start="553" end="592" title="Antoinette de Mérode" label="Countess Antoinette Ghislaine de Merode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028279" start="608" end="626" title="Belgian nobility" label="Belgian noblewoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138610" start="645" end="650" title="Don (honorific)" label="Donna"/>
<link wikidata="Q240291" start="651" end="700" title="Maria Vittoria dal Pozzo" label="Maria Vittoria dal Pozzo, Princess della Cisterna"/>
<link wikidata="Q429367" start="702" end="726" title="Dukes of Aosta" label="Duchess consort of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q878242" start="731" end="753" title="List of Spanish consorts" label="Queen consort of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q676404" start="800" end="812" title="Spanish Navy" label="Spanish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="840" end="859" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="875" end="886" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="912" end="927" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="960" end="973" title="oceanographic" label="oceanographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1143" end="1156" title="archeological" label="archeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139762" start="1173" end="1185" title="Grimaldi Man" label="Grimaldi Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="1340" end="1366" title="Royal Society" label="British Academy of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257429" start="1435" end="1454" title="Château de Marchais" label="Château de Marchais"/>
<link wikidata="Q273827" start="1522" end="1531" title="Champagne (province)" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q234868" start="1562" end="1589" title="Lady Mary Victoria Hamilton" label="Lady Mary Victoria Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q530296" start="1606" end="1617" title="Lanarkshire" label="Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1619" end="1627" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q336964" start="1647" end="1668" title="William Hamilton, 11th Duke of Hamilton" label="11th Duke of Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q62264" start="1683" end="1713" title="Princess Marie Amelie of Baden" label="Princess Marie Amelie of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q444983" start="1881" end="1889" title="Maria Caroline Gibert de Lametz" label="Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q233997" start="1946" end="1981" title="Mary Adelaide of Cambridge" label="Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="2003" end="2017" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="2042" end="2081" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoléon III (Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte)"/>
<link wikidata="Q157130" start="2096" end="2111" title="Eugénie de Montijo" label="Empress Eugénie"/>
<link wikidata="Q336666" start="2348" end="2369" title="William Douglas-Hamilton, 12th Duke of Hamilton" label="12th Duke of Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q57799" start="2426" end="2454" title="Charles, Grand Duke of Baden" label="Charles, Grand Duke of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q62024" start="2539" end="2563" title="Stéphanie de Beauharnais" label="Stéphanie de Beauharnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2565" end="2583" title="Napoleon" label="Emperor Napoléon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q229875" start="2657" end="2680" title="Hortense de Beauharnais" label="Hortense de Beauharnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059344" start="2686" end="2695" title="Duke of Hamilton" label="Hamiltons"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257429" start="2884" end="2903" title="Château de Marchais" label="Château de Marchais"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="3287" end="3294" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533861" start="3555" end="3582" title="Tassilo Festetics von Tolna" label="Tassilo Festetics von Tolna"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="3724" end="3729" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663290" start="3769" end="3789" title="Duke of Richelieu" label="Duchess de Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="3791" end="3794" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q508460" start="3795" end="3812" title="Alice Heine" label="Marie Alice Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3830" end="3838" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="3853" end="3864" title="New Orleans, Louisiana" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q289612" start="3865" end="3884" title="building contractor" label="building contractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="3888" end="3901" title="German-Jewish" label="German-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663290" start="3939" end="3955" title="Duc de Richelieu" label="Duc de Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="4098" end="4110" title="principality" label="principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q211513" start="4459" end="4474" title="Serge Diaghilev" label="Serge Diaghilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768304" start="4643" end="4655" title="Anne Edwards" label="Anne Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q971436" start="4769" end="4784" title="Isidore de Lara" label="Isidore de Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q376924" start="4809" end="4818" title="courtesan" label="courtesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q275991" start="4835" end="4849" title="La Belle Otero" label="La Belle Otero"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="5017" end="5036" title="erection difficulty" label="erection difficulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301694" start="5184" end="5197" title="Monegasque Revolution" label="mass protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q63982" start="5648" end="5660" title="Constitution of Monaco" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q725531" start="5845" end="5862" title="Monte Carlo Rally" label="Monte Carlo Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="5927" end="5933" title="Casino" label="Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6202" end="6213" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="6279" end="6296" title="Wilhelm II of Germany" label="Kaiser Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q61030" start="6480" end="6494" title="Karl von Bülow" label="Karl von Bülow"/>
<link wikidata="Q856205" start="6572" end="6580" title="Sissonne" label="Sissonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020195" start="6585" end="6593" title="Marchais, Aisne" label="Marchais"/>
<link wikidata="Q316543" start="6916" end="6924" title="Louis II, Prince of Monaco" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393020" start="7060" end="7076" title="Foreign relations of Monaco" label="Monaco diplomats"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="7209" end="7221" title="oceanography" label="oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152460" start="7524" end="7548" title="Institut océanographique" label="Institut océanographique"/>
<link wikidata="Q851527" start="7768" end="7788" title="Oceanographic Museum" label="Oceanographic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="7817" end="7825" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="7829" end="7835" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="7843" end="7850" title="library" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="8283" end="8289" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339831" start="8309" end="8328" title="Princess Alice Bank" label="Princess Alice Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q60670" start="8414" end="8427" title="polar regions" label="polar regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="8487" end="8495" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103486" start="8585" end="8598" title="Albert I Land" label="Albert I Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q21162" start="8602" end="8613" title="Spitsbergen" label="Spitsbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="8662" end="8675" title="oceanographic" label="oceanographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="8682" end="8692" title="zoological" label="zoological"/>
<link wikidata="Q851527" start="8758" end="8778" title="Oceanographic Museum" label="Oceanographic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182468" start="8892" end="8903" title="hydrography" label="hydrography"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="8908" end="8918" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q596820" start="8922" end="8933" title="Raudfjorden" label="Raudfjorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q21162" start="8963" end="8974" title="Spitsbergen" label="Spitsbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103486" start="9058" end="9071" title="Albert I Land" label="Albert I Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="9160" end="9171" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9319" end="9332" title="William Speirs Bruce#Arctic voyages" label="William Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q177392" start="9337" end="9356" title="Prins Karls Forland" label="Prins Karls Forland"/>
<link wikidata="Q794962" start="9385" end="9400" title="Gunnar Isachsen" label="Gunnar Isachsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="9473" end="9482" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q962986" start="9553" end="9578" title="Norwegian Polar Institute" label="Norwegian Polar Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555938" start="9824" end="9833" title="Antarctic" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17341687" start="9916" end="9980" title="Friends of the Natural History Museum Paris" label="Friends of the French National Museum of Natural History Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297128" start="10004" end="10025" title="Société de Géographie" label="Société de Géographie"/>
<link wikidata="Q723551" start="10034" end="10049" title="British Academy" label="British Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q730948" start="10207" end="10225" title="Jardin des plantes" label="Jardin des plantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q838691" start="10257" end="10298" title="National Museum of Natural History, France" label="French National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q73508" start="10450" end="10463" title="Hugo Conwentz" label="Hugo Conwentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="10467" end="10473" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="10474" end="10482" title="botany" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="10518" end="10546" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411550" start="10573" end="10596" title="Alexander Agassiz Medal" label="Alexander Agassiz Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q402425" start="10746" end="10771" title="Cullum Geographical Medal" label="Cullum Geographical Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156372" start="10779" end="10808" title="American Geographical Society" label="American Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653012" start="10843" end="10908" title="International Association for the Physical Sciences of the Oceans" label="International Association for the Physical Sciences of the Oceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243780" start="10925" end="10946" title="Prince Albert I Medal" label="Prince Albert I Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337681" start="10954" end="10962" title="physical oceanography" label="physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076133" start="10967" end="10975" title="chemical oceanography" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="11066" end="11079" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q185025" start="11174" end="11185" title="Rainier III, Prince of Monaco" label="Rainier III"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162253" wikidata="Q6517205" url="?curid=162253" title="Fort Stotsenburg">
<text>Fort Stotsenburg, during the World War II era, was the location of the Philippine Department&#x27;s 26th Cavalry Regiment (PS), 86th Field Artillery Battalion, and 88th Field Artillery Regiment; along with the Philippine Division&#x27;s 23rd and 24th Field Artillery Regiments. Also based here were the 12th Ordnance Company and a platoon of the 12th Quartermaster Regiment.

Fort Stotsenburg is situated in Sapang Bato, Angeles City and is approximately 80 km north of Manila. This was one of the locations where, under the National Defense Act of 1935, field artillery training was conducted. It was named after Colonel John M. Stotsenburg, a Captain of the Sixth U.S. Cavalry, and a Colonel of the First Nebraska Volunteers who was killed while leading his regiment in action near Quingua, Bulacan, the Philippines on April 23, 1899.

c.1917, Fort Stotsenburg was home to the 1st Philippine Artillery Regiment.

== Origins ==
By October 1902, American forces had established more or less permanent quarters near the Angeles railroad station in an area of the town known as Talimundoc (now the barangay of Lourdes Sur). The rumor is that cavalry foragers had come across a fertile plain further to the north and that sweet grass was abundant in this area. The U.S. cavalry forces had encountered problems caused by the fact that their horses became sick and often died after eating Philippine &quot;sawgrass.&quot;

By the latter part of 1902, plans were under consideration to relocate the American military reservation to this area near the barrio of Sapang Bato. The preliminary survey dates from 1902. In the following year, President Theodore Roosevelt signed an executive order, establishing Fort Stotsenburg in the location later occupied by Clark Air Base.

== Facilities and structures ==

=== Gateposts ===

The entrance pillars to Fort Stotsenburg were originally located on what is now known as Dau Highway. During the Japanese occupation of Clark Air Base from 1942 to 1945, Imperial forces used these pillars for fill material during their repairs to the base runway. They were unearthed intact in the vicinity of the old Base Operations Building in 1965. Following their discovery, the original pillars were relocated near the Consolidated Base Personnel Office, which at that time served as the on-base American Legion Post.

In 1984, as part of an overall plan to highlight the base&#x27;s long history, the 13th Air Force History Office received permission to move the gateposts once again. Because putting them at their original site would have placed them in an area which possessed low visibility, it was decided to install them on the southern boundary of the parade ground instead. Special crews and a giant crane rented from a company in Manila moved the posts in what turned out to be an all-day affair. Quite a number of onlookers viewed the move and cheered as the last post was dropped into its new position.

=== Parade Ground West End, Thirteenth Air Force Area ===

The post flagpole has always been in its present location in front of Building 2122 with the original flagstaff constructed on September 16, 1906, at a cost of $220. It was the location for reveille at 6 a.m.; a cannon was fired at 5 p.m. for retreat ceremonies; and taps was sounded at 10 p.m. In accordance with the provisions of the Military Bases Agreement as revised in 1979, the flagpole became the only one upon which the American flag could be displayed. In March 1984, at Major General Kenneth D. Burn&#x27;s request, the Government of the Philippines amended this provision to allow another U.S. flag to be flown at the site of the joint US/Philippine Cemetery, near the Main Gate of Clark Air Base.

=== Camp gymnasium ===

The camp gymnasium was completed in 1912 and this building has been used for many purposes over the years, including Post Exchange and &quot;Charlie Corn&#x27;s Canteen.&quot; It last housed the offices of the Thirteenth Air Force Chief of Staff for Operations and Intelligence and the 6200th Tactical Fighter Training Group.

=== Parade Ground, West End, Building 2125 ===

This building, which last housed the Thirteenth Air Force&#x27;s Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and Intelligence and the 6200th Tactical Fighter Training Group, responsible for Cope Thunder Exercises, originally was completed in 1913. In the early decades of Fort Stotsenburg&#x27;s history, it housed Charlie Corn&#x27;s canteen and restaurant in the basement, the post exchange on the first floor and the post theater on the second floor. Following the American recapture of Clark in February 1945, it served as the Fifth Air Force Headquarters building. Years of renovation and modification have all but disguised the original structure, which originally possessed an open portico.

=== Post Commander&#x27;s office ===

The first building on this site was made of nipa and bamboo in 1902 and served as post headquarters. In 1906, it was rebuilt of lumber and roofed with tarpaper. It was reconstructed of concrete in 1912 and, for a time, housed a bowling alley. Throughout most of its history, this building served as the office of post commanders and their executive officers, even during the Japanese occupation.

=== Parade Ground, West End, Building 2127 ===

Constructed between 1912 and 1913, Building 2127 originally served as barracks for enlisted personnel from cavalry and field artillery units. Its most famous occupants were the Philippine Scouts of the 26th Cavalry, who lived there at the time of the outbreak of World War II. This massive structure last housed the Air Force Office of Special Investigation on the first floor, the Central Civilian Personnel Office on the second floor, and the Deputy Chief of Staff for Logistics along with the Pacific Air Forces Contracting Center on the third floor. A similar barracks, constructed at the same time, preserves more of the original character of these buildings. It is located just down Austin Street and housed the Base Social Actions function and the offices of the general educational institutions.

=== Telephone Exchange (Building 2425) ===

Directly across Weston Avenue from the old 26th Cavalry(PS) barracks stands this small structure that was constructed in November 1914 at a cost of only $260. During its long history, Building 2425 sometimes served as a post office facility, but for most of its life has housed Clark&#x27;s telephone operations office, as it last did. During the battle for Clark in late January 1945, this building sustained a number of hits. Despite a number of renovations, these hits on the building have been left uncovered as testimony to the ferocity of the fighting.

=== Old Railway Station (Building 2697) ===

The Manila-Dagupan Railway line was once the most efficient ways of traversing the island of Luzon. This rail line passed right through what before 1979 was the Clark Air Base Military Reservation, and for many years, the most efficient method of travel between Fort Stotsenburg and Manila was by train. Arrivals and departures were gala occasions, marked by the presence of crowds and bands at the Fort Stotsenburg terminal. After World War II, this means of travel lessened significantly and the use of this facility as a passenger terminal was discontinued. It last housed the television studios of Detachment 1, Air Force Pacific Broadcasting Squadron&#x27;s Far East Network-Philippines.

=== Officers&#x27; Row ===

Almost since the beginning, Fort Stotsenburg&#x27;s Wirt Davis Avenue, which borders the Parade Ground to the north, has been known by this name. This Avenue was home to the quarters of the Commander of the Thirteenth Air Force from 1946 until the Americans vacated the base in 1991. A similar structure, but somewhat smaller, serves as the quarters for the Clark Air Base Command Deputy Commander. Other concrete homes in this area served as the quarters for Thirteenth&#x27;s Vice Commander and other key subordinate unit personnel. The balance of the homes along this row are &quot;barns.&quot; The concrete quarters were constructed around 1910 and 1913 and the trees also date from this period. The trees are acacia (monkeypod) and were over 25 years old in 1939.

=== U.S. Facility Commander&#x27;s Residence ===

The original building, which was made of wood with corrugated iron roofing, was erected at the beginning of the 20th century. The present concrete structure was completed on November 26, 1910, at a cost of $10,901.25. It was called Field Officers&#x27; Quarters, but some post commanders had an office on the first floor in addition to their offices in Building 2121. During the Japanese occupation, Japanese staff officers used the building for offices and housing. Major General Eugene L. Eubank, Thirteenth Air Force Commander from July 1946 to October 1948, was the first to occupy this building after its re-designation as the General&#x27;s Family Quarters in August 1946.

=== Old Houses along the parade ground ===
Although some were built as early as 1903, all the houses along Wirt Davis Avenue, originally called Officers&#x27; Row, were completed by 1904. The original cost per house was $1,309.90. The distinctive construction allowed cooling breezes to pass under the raised floor and through the wide, screened verandas, while the steep, metal roofs dissipated trapped heat and allowed a rapid run-off of the heavy rains. All flooring was made from Oregon pine, imported to the Philippines. The huge trees shading the houses are acacia and were planted at the time of construction.

Similar houses were constructed as late as 1931 on the three parallel streets behind Davis Avenue. On the opposite side of the Parade Ground were large open areas surrounding troop barracks, blacksmith shops, house corrals and stables.

Taken as a whole, these buildings serve as one of the best preserved examples of U.S. military tropical construction still extant, and the Thirteenth Air Force has decreed that these historic structures, especially the ones along Davis Avenue, must be preserved. These &quot;barns&quot; were once highly sought after for officer/civilian housing because of their size, coolness, and history.

=== Post Commander&#x27;s residence ===

At the midpoint of Davis Avenue stands a &quot;barn&quot; that used to serve as the Post Commander&#x27;s residence prior to World War II. This building was differentiated from the rest of the officers&#x27; quarters along the Parade Ground by two red posts flanking the stairs. A persistent myth has it that each morning two horses would be hitched to these posts, so that the commander could select his mount for the day. The building&#x27;s central location was considered to be a position of prestige, a fact that was not lost on Japanese troop commanders who also occupied this house during World War II.

==Recapture==
The site, now mostly rubble, was recaptured by the 37th Infantry Division late on 31 January 1945.

==Notable personnel==
*Paul D. Phillips, battery officer (1941), retired as a Brigadier General.

== In literature ==
John Grisham&#x27;s novel The Reckoning includes a description of the Second World War raid by American and Japanese guerrillas on the Japanese-held Fort Stotsenburg and the destruction of numerous Japanese Zero aircraft.

== See also ==

* Clark Air Base
* Geography of the Philippines
* Military History of the Philippines
* Military History of the United States

==References==
* Rosmer, D. (1986). &quot;An annotated pictorial history of Clark Air Base: 1899-1986 (4th ed.)&quot;. Republic of the Philippines: Office of History, Clark Air Base.

;Specific</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6517205" start="0" end="16" title="Fort Stotsenburg" label="Fort Stotsenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="29" end="41" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185036" start="71" end="92" title="Philippine Department" label="Philippine Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632422" start="100" end="126" title="26th Cavalry Regiment (PS)" label="26th Cavalry Regiment (PS)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="128" end="158" title="86th Field Artillery Battalion (Philippine Scouts)" label="86th Field Artillery Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="164" end="193" title="88th Field Artillery Regiment" label="88th Field Artillery Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185039" start="210" end="229" title="Philippine Division (United States)" label="Philippine Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631622" start="237" end="241" title="23rd Field Artillery Regiment" label="23rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631982" start="246" end="276" title="24th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="24th Field Artillery Regiments"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="303" end="324" title="12th Ordnance Company" label="12th Ordnance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548907" start="346" end="373" title="12th Quartermaster Regiment" label="12th Quartermaster Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q55741" start="421" end="433" title="Angeles City" label="Angeles City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="470" end="476" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972170" start="525" end="553" title="National Defense Act of 1935" label="National Defense Act of 1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402493" start="555" end="570" title="field artillery" label="field artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245969" start="622" end="641" title="John M. Stotsenburg" label="John M. Stotsenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818116" start="660" end="678" title="6th Cavalry Regiment (United States)" label="Sixth U.S. Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q54760" start="784" end="791" title="Quingua, Bulacan" label="Quingua"/>
<link wikidata="Q13755" start="793" end="800" title="Bulacan" label="Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="806" end="817" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631956" start="879" end="912" title="1st Philippine Artillery Regiment" label="1st Philippine Artillery Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q61878" start="1096" end="1104" title="barangay" label="barangay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55741" start="1555" end="1566" title="Sapang Bato" label="Sapang Bato"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1631" end="1640" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="1641" end="1659" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="2321" end="2336" title="American Legion" label="American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128691" start="2427" end="2441" title="13th Air Force" label="13th Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="2764" end="2770" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q379570" start="3189" end="3197" title="reveille" label="reveille"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="3428" end="3441" title="American flag" label="American flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="3480" end="3493" title="Major General" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925797" start="3530" end="3559" title="Government of the Philippines" label="Government of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304153" start="4292" end="4304" title="Red Flag - Alaska" label="Cope Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817902" start="4633" end="4648" title="Fifth Air Force" label="Fifth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q843726" start="4883" end="4887" title="Nypa fruticans" label="nipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="4892" end="4898" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="4967" end="4973" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="5024" end="5032" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106471" start="5067" end="5080" title="bowling alley" label="bowling alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q371571" start="5461" end="5478" title="Philippine Scouts" label="Philippine Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045517" start="5780" end="5798" title="Pacific Air Forces" label="Pacific Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q511355" start="7318" end="7335" title="television studio" label="television studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434543" start="7401" end="7417" title="Far East Network" label="Far East Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="8174" end="8180" title="acacia" label="acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q259500" start="8182" end="8191" title="Albizia saman" label="monkeypod"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="9444" end="9450" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="9769" end="9779" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q12783051" start="10925" end="10947" title="37th Infantry Division (United States)" label="37th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q123091698" start="10997" end="11013" title="Paul D. Phillips" label="Paul D. Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q106465" start="11092" end="11104" title="John Grisham" label="John Grisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635501" start="11118" end="11131" title="The Reckoning (Grisham novel)" label="The Reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095676" start="11333" end="11347" title="Clark Air Base" label="Clark Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418238" start="11350" end="11378" title="Geography of the Philippines" label="Geography of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857661" start="11381" end="11416" title="Military History of the Philippines" label="Military History of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483473" start="11419" end="11456" title="Military History of the United States" label="Military History of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162255" wikidata="Q123704" url="?curid=162255" title="Swing (dance)">
<text>Swing dance is a group of social dances that developed with the swing style of jazz music in the 1920s–1940s, with the origins of each dance predating the popular &quot;swing era&quot;. Hundreds of styles of swing dancing were developed; those that have survived beyond that era include Charleston, Balboa, Lindy Hop, and Collegiate Shag. Today, the best-known of these dances is the Lindy Hop, which originated in Harlem in the early 1930s. While the majority of swing dances began in African-American communities as vernacular African-American dances, some influenced swing-era dances, like Balboa, developed outside of these communities.

&quot;Swing dance&quot; was not commonly used to identify a group of dances until the latter half of the 20th century. Historically, the term &quot;swing&quot; referred to the style of jazz music, which inspired the evolution of the dance. Jitterbug is any form of swing dance, though it is often used as a synonym for the six-count derivative of Lindy Hop called &quot;East Coast Swing&quot;. It was also common to use the word to identify a kind of dancer (i.e., a &quot;swing dancer&quot;). A &quot;jitterbug&quot; might prefer to dance Lindy Hop, Shag, or any of the other swing dances. The term was famously associated with swing era band leader Cab Calloway because, as he put it, &quot;[The dancers] look like a bunch of jitterbugs out there on the floor due to their fast, often bouncy movements.&quot;

The term &quot;swing dancing&quot; is often extended to include other dances that do not have certain characteristics of traditional swing dances: West Coast Swing, Carolina Shag, East Coast Swing, Hand Dancing, Jive, Rock and Roll, Modern Jive, and other dances developed during the 1940s and later. A strong tradition of social and competitive boogie woogie and Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll in Europe add these dances to their local swing dance cultures.

==Original forms dating from the 1920s and early 1930s==

* Charleston (dance) is danced partnered or solo, often to faster music. It includes a number of positions, including side-by-side, hand-to-hand, and tandem. In &quot;jockey position&quot;, the closed position is opened out so that both partners may face forward, without breaking apart. In side-by-side Charleston, partners open the closed position entirely, so that their only points of connection are at their touching hips and arm contact, wherein the leader&#x27;s right hand and arm touch the follower&#x27;s back and the follower&#x27;s left hand and arm touch the leader&#x27;s shoulder and arm. Both partners then swing their free arms as they would in solo Charleston. In both jockey and side-by-side Charleston, the leader steps back onto their left foot, while the follower steps back onto their right. In tandem Charleston, one partner stands in front of the other (usually the follower, though the arrangement may vary), both face in the same direction to start, and both begin by stepping back onto the left foot. The partner behind holds the front partner&#x27;s hands, and their joined arms swing backwards and forwards, as in the basic step.
* Balboa, also known as &quot;Bal&quot;, is an 8-count dance that is done in closed position. The earliest form of the dance (often called &quot;Pure Balboa&quot;) evolved in the mostly conservative dance halls of southern California where space was limited and strict codes of conduct were enforced. These dance halls usually prohibited the wild kicks of the Charleston and Lindy Hop. Pure Balboa is characterized by an upright posture with partners standing chest to chest. Step variations generally play with the rhythm or look and feel (style) from below the knee downwards and deal with changes in direction. Balboa is frequently danced to fast jazz (usually anything from 180 to 320 BPM), though many like a slower (170-190 BPM) tempo. While most dancers differentiate between pure Balboa and Bal-Swing, both are considered to be a part of the dance. Bal-Swing evolved from Balboa when original Balboa dancers experimented with fancier variations of the dance which forced the chest to chest connection to be broken. In this form of Balboa a variety of spins, turns, dips, tricks, and even air steps are introduced.
* Lindy Hop evolved in the early 1930s. It is a dance of African American origin characterized by a high degree of physical vigor. It is characterized by an 8-count basic, the &quot;swingout&quot;, that transitions from open position through closed position and back. It has an emphasis on improvisation and the ability to include other steps in 8-count and 6-count rhythms. The name &quot;Lindy Hop&quot; is often attributed to &quot;Shorty&quot; George Snowden during an interaction with a newspaper writer who asked him what kind of dance they were doing. Because Charles Lindbergh had just made his famous solo flight across the Atlantic Ocean, Shorty George is said to have replied, &quot;the Lindy Hop.&quot; Whether it was Shorty George who coined the name is disputed by some writers, but, in any case, the name stuck. The Savoy Ballroom in Harlem was the home of the Lindy Hop. As its popularity increased, professional troupes were formed. These troupes toured the United States and Europe performing versions of the Lindy Hop.
* Collegiate Shag (or &quot;Shag&quot;) is done primarily to uptempo swing and sometimes pre-swing jazz music (185–200+ BPM). It is believed that the dance originated in the Carolinas in the 1920s, later spreading across the United States during the 1930s. The shag is still danced today by swing dance enthusiasts worldwide. Shag is believed to have been the first and most popular swing dance of the original swing era

==Forms dating from the late 1930s and early 1940s==

*St. Louis shag (or &quot;Shag&quot;) is a dance that evolved out of the Charleston. As its name suggests, it is recognized as having started in St. Louis, Missouri. St. Louis Shag features a stationary 8-count basic that is most commonly composed of triple-step, kick, triple-step, kick. It is a very fast closed position dance that is usually done to stomp, jump, and boogie-woogie music.

* Big Apple is both a partner dance and a &quot;called&quot; circle dance that originated in the Afro-American community of the United States in the beginning of the 20th century. The dance that eventually became known as the Big Apple is speculated to have been created in the early 1930s by African-American youth dancing at the Big Apple Club, which was at the former House of Peace Synagogue on Park Street in Columbia, South Carolina. The synagogue was converted into a black juke joint called the &quot;Big Apple Night Club&quot;.
* Little Apple This dance was a partnered version of the Big Apple, which is also believed to have originated in the Carolinas of the Southern United States.

==Derivatives of swing dance from the 1940s and 1950s==

* East Coast Swing is a simpler 6-count variation that spawned from the six-count variations of the Lindy Hop. It evolved with swing-band music of the 1940s and the work of the Arthur Murray dance studios in the 1940s. It is also known as Six-count Swing, Triple-Step Swing, or Single-Step Swing. East Coast Swing has very simple structure and footwork along with basic moves and styling. It is popular for its simple nature and is often danced to slow, medium, or fast tempo jazz, blues, or rock and roll. Occasionally, Rockabilly, aka Rock-a-billy, is mistaken for East Coast Swing, but Rockabilly is more closely related to Western Swing.
* West Coast Swing was developed in the 1940s, as a stylistic variation on the Los Angeles style of the Lindy Hop. It is a slotted dance and is done to a wide variety of music including: blues, rock and roll, country western, pop, hip hop, smooth, cool jazz, R&amp; B, and funk music.
* Western Swing has long been the name for jazz-influenced western music of the 1940s and, by extension, two-step, line dancing or swing dance done to such music. Contemporary 21st century Country Swing or dancing or &quot;Country Western Swing Dancing&quot; (C/W Swing) has a distinct culture, with classes and instructional videos on YouTube and DVD teaching dips, lifts, aerials and flips. It adds variations from other country dances, swing styles, salsa and more. As the name suggests, it is most often danced to country and western music.
* Boogie-woogie developed originally in the 1940s, with the rise of boogie woogie music. It is popular today in Europe, and was considered by some to be the European counterpart to East Coast Swing, a 6-count dance standardized for the American ballroom industry. It is danced to rock music of various kinds, blues or boogie woogie music but usually not to jazz. As the dance has developed, it has also taken to 8-count variations and swing outs similar to Lindy Hop, while keeping the original boogie woogie footwork.
* Carolina Shag was danced along the strands between Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, and Wilmington, North Carolina, during the 1940s but, during the 1990s and later, has expanded to many other places. It is most often associated with beach music, which refers to songs that are rhythm-and-blues-based and, according to Bo Bryan, a noted shag historian and resident of Beaufort County, is a term that was coined at Carolina Beach, North Carolina.
* Imperial Swing is a cross between East Coast and West Coast Swing. Imperial Swing uses the triple step footwork from East Coast Swing, but is a slotted dance with smooth (not bouncy) foot styling from West Coast Swing. Slotted dancing was introduced to Imperial Swing in the  late 1970s and has completely replaced the original dancing in the round. Imperial Swing shares the same core moves with West Coast Swing: the starter (or basic) step, the crossover or side pass, the sugar push (or patty-cake) and the whip. It started at the Club Imperial in St Louis. George Edick, who owned the club, let teenagers dance on the lower level and the swing dancers of the time taught them what was learned from their trips to the east coast. As people traveled around, they added parts of west coast, bop and Carolina shag to complement the dance and make it distinctive. &quot;The Imperial&quot; has elements of &quot;East Coast&quot;, &quot;West Coast&quot;, &quot;Carolina Shag&quot; and &quot;Bop&quot;.
* Jive is a dance of International Style Ballroom dancing. It is a very upbeat dance in which the performers look to be hopping off the ground. It initially was based on Eastern swing taken to England by American Troops in World War II and evolved before becoming the now standardized form of today.
* Skip Jive is a British variant of the Jive, popular in the 1950s and 1960s, danced to trad jazz.
* Modern Jive (also known as LeRoc and Ceroc©) developed in the 1980s, reputedly from a French form of Jive. Modern Jive is not technically of the Jive family, which typically use a 6-count pattern of various combinations of walking and triple steps (Ballroom Jive – back/replace triple-triple; Swing Jive – triple-triple back/replace), etc. It is pared down to a simple box step and concentrates on the simpler forms of couple dance styling, gauged to provide a social atmosphere rather than technical aptitude. There are debates about whether it is a form of swing dancing due to lack of syncopations, rhythmic footwork variations, a static partner dynamic, and lack of swinging music, amongst the swing community at large, but they do consider themselves a style of swing.
* Rock and Roll – Developing in the 1950s in response to rock and roll music, rock-and-roll is very popular in Australia and danced socially as well as competitively and in performances. The style has a long association with Lindy Hop in that country, as many of the earliest Lindy Hoppers in the early 1990s moved to Lindy Hop from a rock-and-roll tradition. There are ongoing debates about whether rock-and-roll constitutes swing dancing, particularly in reference to the music to which it is danced: there is some debate as to whether or not it swings. 
* Acrobatic Rock&#x27;n&#x27;Roll – Popular in Europe, acrobatic rock&#x27;n&#x27;roll is popularly associated with Russian gymnasts who took up the dance, though it is popular throughout Europe today. It is a performance dance and sport rather than a social dance, though there are people who remove the acrobatic stunts to dance it on a social level.
* Washington Hand Dancing originated around Washington, DC in the mid-1950s, and a new generation of dancers started innovating and dancing to Motown music. From its very beginning, DC Hand-dance was referred to and called “DC Hand-Dance/Hand-Dancing”, “DC Swing”, “DC Style” (swing) and “fast dance” (meaning DC Hand-Dance). This is the first time a version of “swing” dance was termed “hand-dance/hand-dancing”. DC Hand-Dance is characterized by very smooth footwork and movements, and close-in and intricate hand-turns, danced to a 6-beat, 6-count dance rhythm. The more modern footwork consists of smooth and continuous floor contact, sliding and gliding-type steps versus hopping and jumping-type steps of the older style which stylistically still held elements of its Jitterbug/Lindy Hop roots, and there are no aerials.
* Push and Whip are Texas forms of swing dance developed in the 1940s and 1950s. They are slotted swing dances, danced to a wide variety of music including blues, pop, jazz, and rock and roll. Similar to West Coast Swing, they emphasize the closed position, double resistance/rock step, and lead-follow and also incorporate intricate arm work. Slow Whip is a variation on Whip/Push that is danced to slow blues music, typically 60 BPM or slower.

==Swing dancing today==

Swing dancing was most popular in the 1930s and 1940s, but it still continues today. Dance moves have evolved with the music. Swing dancing styles are the foundation of many other dance styles including disco, country line dancing, and hip hop. Swing dancing clubs and contests are still held around the world.

The American Bop Association (ABA) is a non-profit corporation of 34 member swing dance clubs who are dedicated to the preservation and promotion of the broad range of dance and music styles more commonly known as bop, all forms of swing, jitterbug, and shag.

==Competition==

=== Formats ===
The swing dance competitions use one of the few formats (&quot;categories&quot;):
* Showcase and classic are formats that are close to the ones used in ballroom dancing: pairs that had trained together perform pre-choreographed dances. Showcase format allows lifts, drops, and aerials. Classic competition allows few drops, but otherwise limits moves to the ones that can be used in social dancing.
* Strictly swing and Jack-and-Jill competitions, in contrast, demand spontaneity and lead/follow communications. Pre-choreographed dance patterns are prohibited and are penalized if discovered. Strictly swing competition feature dance couples performing to the randomly selected music. In the Jack-and-Jill category the couples are also randomly selected and rotated.

===Levels===
In West Coast Swing the competitions are divided into sections by level of experience.
The levels are Newcomer, Novice, Intermediate, Advanced and All-Star. There is no official system in the United States to ensure that couples dance at the appropriate level of experience. The World Swing Dance Council holds a Registry of all points attained at different levels of competition.

There is no points system for the majority of Lindy Hop competitions.

===Judging criteria===
Swing dancing falls under the American Rhythm category. There are several different categories at competitions depending on what type of dance you do.

Judging for competition is based on the three &quot;T&#x27;s&quot; as well as showmanship.

===Heats===
Most competition dance floors can only hold about 12 couples dancing at a time. If the number of participants is larger than what the floor can hold, the competition will hold qualifying rounds. Once they get to 24 couples there will then be the quarterfinal round (2 separate rounds of about 12 each), then the semifinal (1 round of about 12), and finally the final round (1 round, usually 6 or 7 couples).

== See also ==
* Frankie Manning
* Norma Miller
* Swing Rueda
* Herräng Dance Camp

== References ==
== Sources ==

==External links==

* DanceCal.com – DanceCal, a list of Swing camps and weekend events
* NASDE.com – National Association of Swing Dance Events
* SwingDanceCouncil.com – World Swing Dance Council WSDC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q123704" start="0" end="11" title="Swing (dance)" label="Swing dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209069" start="26" end="39" title="Social dance" label="social dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="64" end="69" title="swing music" label="swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="79" end="83" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658626" start="169" end="178" title="swing era" label="swing era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066703" start="287" end="297" title="Charleston (dance)" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q804690" start="299" end="305" title="Balboa (dance)" label="Balboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134329" start="307" end="316" title="Lindy Hop" label="Lindy Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9302770" start="322" end="337" title="Collegiate shag" label="Collegiate Shag"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="415" end="421" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="486" end="502" title="African Americans" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909628" start="518" end="528" title="vernacular dance" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689643" start="529" end="551" title="African-American dance" label="African-American dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q950354" start="882" end="891" title="Jitterbug" label="Jitterbug"/>
<link wikidata="Q273079" start="1293" end="1305" title="Cab Calloway" label="Cab Calloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738733" start="1601" end="1617" title="West Coast Swing" label="West Coast Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044924" start="1619" end="1632" title="Carolina Shag" label="Carolina Shag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009578" start="1634" end="1650" title="East Coast Swing" label="East Coast Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647143" start="1652" end="1664" title="Hand dancing" label="Hand Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17237" start="1666" end="1670" title="Jive (dance)" label="Jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q556496" start="1672" end="1685" title="Rock and Roll (dance)" label="Rock and Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942004" start="1687" end="1698" title="Modern Jive" label="Modern Jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q892964" start="1800" end="1813" title="Boogie-woogie (dance)" label="boogie woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066703" start="1967" end="1985" title="Charleston (dance)" label="Charleston (dance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q804690" start="3127" end="3133" title="Balboa (dance)" label="Balboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135350" start="3202" end="3217" title="closed position" label="closed position"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="3775" end="3779" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="3814" end="3817" title="beats per minute" label="BPM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3924" end="3933" title="Bal-Swing" label="Bal-Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134329" start="4249" end="4258" title="Lindy Hop" label="Lindy Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759057" start="5078" end="5092" title="Savoy Ballroom" label="Savoy Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9302770" start="5287" end="5302" title="Collegiate Shag" label="Collegiate Shag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276336" start="5762" end="5776" title="St. Louis shag" label="St. Louis shag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066703" start="5834" end="5844" title="Charleston (dance)" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="5906" end="5915" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6114" end="6119" title="Stomp (music)" label="stomp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515757" start="6121" end="6125" title="Jump (music)" label="jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q212952" start="6131" end="6144" title="Boogie-woogie (music)" label="boogie-woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904933" start="6155" end="6164" title="Big Apple (dance)" label="Big Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631414" start="6524" end="6548" title="House of Peace Synagogue" label="House of Peace Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q38453" start="6567" end="6591" title="Columbia, South Carolina" label="Columbia, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711595" start="6634" end="6644" title="juke joint" label="juke joint"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6692" end="6704" title="Little Apple (dance)" label="Little Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009578" start="6908" end="6924" title="East Coast Swing" label="East Coast Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865273" start="7083" end="7096" title="Arthur Murray" label="Arthur Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="7382" end="7386" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738733" start="7550" end="7566" title="West Coast Swing" label="West Coast Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="7735" end="7740" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="7742" end="7755" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="7757" end="7772" title="Country music" label="country western"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="7774" end="7777" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="7779" end="7786" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q831354" start="7788" end="7794" title="smooth jazz" label="smooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q327547" start="7796" end="7805" title="cool jazz" label="cool jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730388" start="7835" end="7848" title="Western Swing" label="Western Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730388" start="8022" end="8035" title="Country Swing" label="Country Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="8351" end="8376" title="Country music" label="country and western music"/>
<link wikidata="Q892964" start="8380" end="8393" title="Boogie-woogie (dance)" label="Boogie-woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q212952" start="8446" end="8459" title="boogie woogie" label="boogie woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044924" start="8899" end="8912" title="Carolina Shag" label="Carolina Shag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875789" start="9130" end="9141" title="beach music" label="beach music"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149113" start="9215" end="9223" title="Bo Bryan" label="Bo Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044392" start="9310" end="9324" title="Carolina Beach" label="Carolina Beach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9344" end="9358" title="Imperial Swing" label="Imperial Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215301" start="9488" end="9501" title="slotted dance" label="slotted dance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9879" end="9892" title="George Edick&amp;#x27;s Club Imperial" label="Club Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17237" start="10346" end="10350" title="Jive (dance)" label="Jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535758" start="10646" end="10655" title="Skip jive" label="Skip Jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q492643" start="10732" end="10741" title="trad jazz" label="trad jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942004" start="10745" end="10756" title="Modern Jive" label="Modern Jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506398" start="10772" end="10777" title="LeRoc" label="LeRoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q859676" start="10782" end="10787" title="Ceroc" label="Ceroc"/>
<link wikidata="Q556496" start="11521" end="11534" title="Rock and Roll (dance)" label="Rock and Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="11576" end="11595" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll music"/>
<link wikidata="Q14867674" start="12067" end="12073" title="Swung note" label="swings"/>
<link wikidata="Q556496" start="12078" end="12109" title="Acrobatic Rock&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;Roll" label="Acrobatic Rock&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647143" start="12431" end="12454" title="Hand dancing" label="Washington Hand Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13258" end="13262" title="Push (dance)" label="Push"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13267" end="13271" title="Whip (dance)" label="Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="13276" end="13281" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085001" start="14486" end="14502" title="ballroom dancing" label="ballroom dancing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14593" end="14598" title="lift (dance move)" label="lifts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279667" start="14600" end="14605" title="Drop (dance move)" label="drops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592719" start="14611" end="14618" title="Aerial (dance move)" label="aerials"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160090" start="14754" end="14767" title="Jack-and-Jill" label="Jack-and-Jill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445086" start="16273" end="16288" title="Frankie Manning" label="Frankie Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967375" start="16291" end="16303" title="Norma Miller" label="Norma Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658633" start="16306" end="16317" title="Swing Rueda" label="Swing Rueda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744239" start="16320" end="16338" title="Herräng Dance Camp" label="Herräng Dance Camp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162260" wikidata="Q574402" url="?curid=162260" title="Johann Matthias Gesner">
<text>Johann Matthias Gesner (9 April 1691 – 3 August 1761) was a German classical scholar and schoolmaster.

==Life==

He was born at Roth an der Rednitz near Ansbach. His father, Johann Samuel Gesner, a pastor in Auhausen, died in 1704, leaving the family in straitened circumstances. Gesner&#x27;s mother, Maria Magdalena (born Hußwedel), remarried, and Johann Matthias&#x27;s stepfather, Johann Zuckermantel, proved supportive.

Noticing the boy&#x27;s gifts,
Zuckermantel prepared him for the Ansbach Gymnasium. As the costs of the school surpassed the family&#x27;s means, the boy was supported by public resources and spent his school years in a dwelling for poor students. He was given special attention and instruction by the rector of the Gymnasium, Georg Nikolaus Köhler, who sparked his interest in languages, loaned him Greek texts, and devised special exercises in which the boy had to reconstruct intelligible texts from fragments. Gesner later recalled his Gymnasium years the most pleasant in his life.

He went on to study metaphysics, Semitic languages, and classical literature as a theology student at the University of Jena, working under Johann Franz Buddeus, who befriended Gesner and allowed the student to live in his own house. Despite Buddeus&#x27;s support, however, he was passed over for a position in Jena. In 1714, he published a work on &quot;Philopatiis&quot; (ascribed to Lucian).

In 1715, he became librarian and vice-principal at Weimar, where he became good friends with Johann Sebastian Bach (Bach later dedicated his &quot;Canon a 2 perpetuus&quot; BWV 1075 to Gesner), in 1729 (having been dismissed as librarian at Weimar) rector of the gymnasium at Ansbach, and in 1730 rector of the Thomasschule at Leipzig. The faculty at the University of Leipzig refused Gesner teaching privileges, however.

At the University of Göttingen he became Professor of Poetry and Eloquence (1734) and subsequently librarian, continuing to publish works on classical languages and literature as well composing Latin poetry and publicizing the university. Having probably become familiar with a similar organization in Leipzig, in 1738 he founded the Deutsche Gesellschaft, devoted to the advancement of German literature. He died at Göttingen.

Baumgarten, in his &quot;Aesthetics&quot; (1750), quoted passages from writers such as Horace, Virgil, Catullus, Juvenalis, and Cicero. According to Lessing, many of those passages were taken from Gesner’s &quot;Novus Linguae et Eruditionis Romanae Thesaurus&quot; [&quot;New Thesaurus of the Roman Language and Learning&quot;] (1747).

Gesner won a wide reputation as a reformer, a scholar, and a humanist.

== Works ==
* an edition of Basilius Faber&#x27;s &quot;Thesaurus eruditionis scholasticae&quot; (1726), afterwards continued under the title &quot;Novus linguae et eruditionis Romanae thesaurus&quot; (1749)
* &quot;Opuscula minora varii argumenti&quot; (1743—1745)
* &quot;Index etymologicus latinitatis&quot; (1749)
* &quot;Primæ lineæ isagoges in eruditionem universalem&quot; (1756)
* &quot;Thesaurus epistolicus Gesnerianus&quot; (ed. Klotz, 1768—1770)
* editions of the &quot;Scriptores rei rusticae&quot;, of Quintilian, Claudian, Pliny the Younger, Horace and the Orphic poems (published after his death)

== References ==
== Sources ==
* JA Ernesti, &quot;Opuscula oratoria&quot; (1762), p. 305
* H Sauppe, &quot;Göttinger Professoren&quot; (1872)
* CH Pöhnert, &quot;J.M. Gesner und sein Verhaltnis zum Philanthropinismus und Neuhumanismus&quot; (1898), a contribution to the history of pedagogy in the 18th century
* articles by FA Eckstein in &quot;Allgemeine deutsche Biographie ix&quot;

==External links==
*Gesner: &quot;Novus Linguae et Eruditionis Romanae Thesaurus&quot; online edition in the project Camena</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q574402" start="0" end="22" title="Johann Matthias Gesner" label="Johann Matthias Gesner"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="67" end="84" title="classical scholar" label="classical scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459149" start="89" end="101" title="schoolmaster" label="schoolmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q504019" start="129" end="148" title="Roth an der Rednitz" label="Roth an der Rednitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859" start="154" end="161" title="Ansbach" label="Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q502820" start="209" end="217" title="Auhausen" label="Auhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542966" start="500" end="509" title="Gymnasium (Germany)" label="Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q154561" start="1121" end="1139" title="University of Jena" label="University of Jena"/>
<link wikidata="Q63500" start="1155" end="1175" title="Johann Franz Buddeus" label="Johann Franz Buddeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="1402" end="1408" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q182436" start="1431" end="1440" title="librarian" label="librarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955" start="1463" end="1469" title="Weimar" label="Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="1505" end="1526" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q699668" start="1723" end="1735" title="Thomasschule zu Leipzig" label="Thomasschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="1739" end="1746" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="1767" end="1788" title="University of Leipzig" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="1842" end="1865" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="2252" end="2261" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76517" start="2264" end="2274" title="Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten" label="Baumgarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="2351" end="2357" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="2359" end="2365" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q163079" start="2367" end="2375" title="Catullus" label="Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="2377" end="2386" title="Juvenalis" label="Juvenalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="2392" end="2398" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q34628" start="2413" end="2420" title="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" label="Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327432" start="2662" end="2670" title="Christian humanism" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q64182" start="2701" end="2715" title="Basilius Faber" label="Basilius Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q193769" start="3189" end="3199" title="Quintilian" label="Quintilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="3201" end="3209" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="3211" end="3228" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="3230" end="3236" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q72076" start="3320" end="3330" title="Johann August Ernesti" label="JA Ernesti"/>
<link wikidata="Q70084" start="3379" end="3387" title="Hermann Sauppe" label="H Sauppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922" start="3570" end="3578" title="pedagogy" label="pedagogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216313" start="3613" end="3624" title="Friedrich August Eckstein" label="FA Eckstein"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162263" wikidata="Q220393" url="?curid=162263" title="Telephone directory">
<text>A telephone directory, commonly called a telephone book, telephone address book, phonebook, or the white and yellow pages, is a listing of telephone subscribers in a geographical area or subscribers to services provided by the organization that publishes the directory. Its purpose is to allow the telephone number of a subscriber identified by name and address to be found.

The advent of the Internet, search engines, and smartphones in the 21st century greatly reduced the need for a paper phone book. Some communities, such as Seattle and San Francisco, sought to ban their unsolicited distribution as wasteful, unwanted and harmful to the environment.

The slogan &quot;Let Your Fingers Do the Walking&quot; refers to use of phone books.

== Content ==
Subscriber names are generally listed in alphabetical order, together with their postal or street address and telephone number. In principle every subscriber in the geographical coverage area is listed, but subscribers may request the exclusion of their number from the directory, often for a fee; their number is then said to be &quot;unlisted&quot; (US and Canada), &quot;ex-directory&quot; (British English), or &quot;private&quot; (Australia and New Zealand).

A telephone directory may also provide instructions: how to use the telephone service, how to dial a particular number, be it local or international, what numbers to access important and emergency services, utilities, hospitals, doctors, and organizations who can provide support in times of crisis. It may also have civil defense, emergency management, or first aid information. There may be transit maps, postal code/zip code guides, international dialing codes or stadium seating charts, as well as advertising.

In the US, under current rules and practices, mobile phone and voice over IP listings are not included in telephone directories. Efforts to create cellular directories have met stiff opposition from several fronts, including those who seek to avoid telemarketers.

== Types ==
A telephone directory and its content may be known by the colour of the paper it is printed on.
* White pages generally indicates personal or alphabetic listings.
* Yellow pages, golden pages, A2Z, or classified directory is usually a &quot;business directory&quot;, where businesses are listed alphabetically within each of many classifications (e.g., &quot;lawyers&quot;), almost always with paid advertising.
* Grey pages, sometimes called a &quot;reverse telephone directory&quot;, allowing subscriber details to be found for a given number. Not available in all jurisdictions. (These listings are often published separately, in a city directory, or under another name, for a price, and made available to commercial and government agencies.)

Other colors may have other meanings; for example, information on government agencies is often printed on blue pages or green pages.
==Publication==
Telephone directories can be published in hard copy or in electronic form. In the latter case, the directory can be on physical media such as CD-ROM, or using an online service through proprietary terminals or over the Internet.

In many countries, directories are both published in book form and also available over the Internet. Printed directories were usually supplied free of charge.

===CD ROM===
&quot;Selectphone&quot; (ProCD) Inc.) and &quot;PhoneDisc&quot; (Digital Directory Assistance Inc) were among the earliest such products. These were not a matter of a single click: PhoneDisc, depending on the mix of Residential, Business or both, involved up to eight CD-ROMs. &quot;SelectPhone&quot; is fewer CD-ROMs: five.

Both provide a reverse lookup feature (by phone number or by address), albeit involving up to five CD-ROMs.

===Internet===
The combination of phone number lookups, along with Internet access, was offered by some service providers; VoIP (Voice over IP) was an additional feature.

==History==
Telephone directories are a type of city directory. Books listing the inhabitants of an entire city were widely published starting in the 18th century, before the invention of the telephone.

The first telephone directory, consisting of a single piece of cardboard, was issued on 21 February 1878; it listed 50 individuals, businesses, and other offices in New Haven, Connecticut, that had telephones. The directory was not alphabetized and no numbers were included with the people listed in it. In 1879, Dr. Moses Greeley Parker suggested the format of the telephone directory be changed so that subscribers appeared in alphabetical order and each telephone be identified with a number. Parker came to this idea out of fear that Lowell, Massachusetts&#x27;s four operators would contract measles and be unable to connect telephone subscribers to one another.

The first British telephone directory was published on 15 January 1880 by The Telephone Company. It contained 248 names and addresses of individuals and businesses in London; telephone numbers were not used at the time as subscribers were asked for by name at the exchange. The directory is preserved as part of the British phone book collection by BT Archives.

The Reuben H. Donnelly company asserts that it published the first classified directory, or yellow pages, for Chicago, Illinois, in 1886.

In 1938, AT&amp;T commissioned the creation of a new typeface, known as Bell Gothic, the purpose of which was to be readable at very small font sizes when printed on newsprint where small imperfections were common.

In 1981, France became the first country to have an electronic directory on a system called Minitel. The directory is called &quot;11&quot; after its telephone access number.

In 1991, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled (in &quot;Feist v. Rural&quot;) that telephone companies do not have a copyright on telephone listings, because copyright protects creativity and not the mere labor of collecting existing information.
In late July 1995 Kapitol launched the Infobel.be website. Infobel was then the first telephone directory website launched on the then-nascent Internet. In 1996, in the US the first telephone directories went online. Yellowpages.com and Whitepages.com both saw their start in April. In 1999, the first online telephone directories and people-finding sites such as LookupUK.com went online in the UK. In 2003, more advanced UK searching including Electoral Roll became available on LocateFirst.com.

With online directories, and with many people giving up landlines for cell phones whose numbers are not listed in telephone directories, printed directories are no longer as necessary as they once were. Regulators no longer required that residential listings be printed, starting with New York in 2010. Yellow pages continued to be printed because some advertisers still reached consumers that way.

In the 21st century, printed telephone directories are increasingly criticized as waste. In 2012, after some North American cities passed laws banning the distribution of telephone books, an industry group sued and obtained a court ruling permitting the distribution to continue. In 2010, manufacture and distribution of telephone directories produced over 1,400,000 metric tons of greenhouse gases and consumed over 600,000 tons of paper annually.

==Reverse directories==

A reverse telephone directory is sorted by phone number, so the name and address of a subscriber is looked up by phone number.

== See also ==
* City directory

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* Phone Book of the World.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q220393" start="2" end="21" title="Telephone directory" label="telephone directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q220393" start="41" end="55" title="Telephone directory" label="telephone book"/>
<link wikidata="Q220393" start="57" end="79" title="Telephone directory" label="telephone address book"/>
<link wikidata="Q220393" start="81" end="90" title="Telephone directory" label="phonebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q220393" start="99" end="121" title="Telephone directory" label="white and yellow pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q322948" start="149" end="159" title="subscriber" label="subscriber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="404" end="417" title="search engine" label="search engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="424" end="435" title="smartphones" label="smartphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="531" end="538" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="543" end="556" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q214995" start="868" end="884" title="telephone number" label="telephone number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256467" start="1094" end="1102" title="Unlisted number" label="unlisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="1110" end="1112" title="American English" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="1117" end="1123" title="Canadian English" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="1152" end="1167" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379660" start="1291" end="1308" title="Local telephone service" label="telephone service"/>
<link wikidata="Q814610" start="1410" end="1428" title="emergency services" label="emergency services"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="1540" end="1553" title="civil defense" label="civil defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="1555" end="1575" title="emergency management" label="emergency management"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="1580" end="1589" title="first aid" label="first aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="1802" end="1815" title="voice over IP" label="voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q268733" start="1988" end="2000" title="telemarketer" label="telemarketer"/>
<link wikidata="Q934552" start="2181" end="2193" title="Yellow pages" label="Yellow pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671730" start="2430" end="2440" title="Reverse telephone directory" label="Grey pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="2829" end="2848" title="government agencies" label="government agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930138" start="2869" end="2879" title="blue pages" label="blue pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372066" start="2954" end="2963" title="hard copy" label="hard copy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="3873" end="3877" title="VoIP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123546" start="3970" end="3984" title="city directory" label="city directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="4291" end="4313" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4443" end="4463" title="Moses Greeley Parker" label="Moses Greeley Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="4664" end="4685" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="4723" end="4730" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836744" start="5144" end="5155" title="BT Archives" label="BT Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204878" start="5162" end="5180" title="R. H. Donnelley" label="Reuben H. Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="5306" end="5314" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="5350" end="5358" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633344" start="5369" end="5380" title="Bell Gothic" label="Bell Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133476" start="5605" end="5612" title="Minitel" label="Minitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="5702" end="5720" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441583" start="5737" end="5751" title="Feist v. Rural" label="Feist v. Rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="5798" end="5807" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5967" end="5977" title="Infobel.be" label="Infobel.be"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051969" start="6145" end="6160" title="Yellowpages.com" label="Yellowpages.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994404" start="6165" end="6179" title="Whitepages.com" label="Whitepages.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="6483" end="6491" title="landline" label="landline"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="6497" end="6507" title="cell phone" label="cell phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q934552" start="6730" end="6742" title="Yellow pages" label="Yellow pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="7209" end="7225" title="greenhouse gases" label="greenhouse gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123546" start="7447" end="7461" title="City directory" label="City directory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162264" wikidata="Q843136" url="?curid=162264" title="Penicillium">
<text>Penicillium () is a genus of ascomycetous fungi that is part of the mycobiome of many species and is of major importance in the natural environment, in food spoilage, and in food and drug production.

Some members of the genus produce penicillin, a molecule that is used as an antibiotic, which kills or stops the growth of certain kinds of bacteria. Other species are used in cheesemaking. According to the &quot;Dictionary of the Fungi&quot; (10th edition, 2008), the widespread genus contains over 300 species.

==Taxonomy==
The genus was first described in the scientific literature by Johann Heinrich Friedrich Link in his 1809 work ; he wrote, , () where means &quot;having tufts of fine hair&quot;. Link included three species—&quot;P. candidum&quot;, &quot;P. expansum&quot;, and &quot;P. glaucum&quot;—all of which produced a brush-like conidiophore (asexual spore-producing structure). The common apple rot fungus &quot;P. expansum&quot; was later selected as the type species.

In his 1979 monograph, John I. Pitt divided &quot;Penicillium&quot; into four subgenera based on conidiophore morphology and branching pattern: &quot;Aspergilloides&quot;, &quot;Biverticillium&quot;, &quot;Furcatum&quot;, and &quot;Penicillium&quot;. Species included in subgenus &quot;Biverticillium&quot; were later merged into &quot;Talaromyces&quot;.

=== Species ===


Selected species include:
* &quot;Penicillium albocoremium&quot;
* &quot;Penicillium aurantiogriseum&quot;, a grain contaminant
* &quot;Penicillium bilaiae&quot;, an agricultural inoculant
* &quot;Penicillium camemberti&quot;, used in the production of Camembert, Brie and Cambozola cheeses
* &quot;Penicillium candidum&quot;, which is used in making Brie and Camembert. It has been reduced to synonymy with &quot;Penicillium camemberti&quot;
* &quot;Penicillium chrysogenum&quot; (previously known as &quot;Penicillium notatum&quot;), which produces the antibiotic penicillin
* &quot;Penicillium claviforme&quot;
* &quot;Penicillium commune&quot;
* &quot;Penicillium crustosum&quot;
* &quot;Penicillium digitatum&quot;, a &quot;Citrus&quot; pathogen
* &quot;Penicillium echinulatum&quot; produces Mycophenolic acid
* &quot;Penicillium expansum&quot;, a pathogen of apples and other fruit, produces patulin
* &quot;Penicillium glabrum&quot;
* &quot;Penicillium glaucum&quot;, a mold that is used in the making of some types of blue cheese, including Bleu de Gex, Rochebaron, and some varieties of Bleu d&#x27;Auvergne and Gorgonzola.
* &quot;Penicillium imranianum&quot;
* &quot;Penicillium italicum&quot;, a &quot;Citrus&quot; pathogen
* &quot;Penicillium lacussarmientei&quot;
* &quot;Penicillium lusitanum&quot;, isolated from marine habitat
* &quot;Penicillium purpurogenum&quot;
* &quot;Penicillium roqueforti&quot;, used in making Roquefort, Danish Blue cheese, English Blue Stilton cheese, Gorgonzola cheese, and Cambozola 
* &quot;Penicillium stoloniferum&quot;
* &quot;Penicillium ulaiense&quot;, a &quot;Citrus&quot; pathogen in Asia
* &quot;Penicillium verrucosum&quot;, a grain contaminant which produces ochratoxin A
* &quot;Penicillium viridicatum&quot;

=== Etymology ===
The genus name is derived from the Latin root &quot;penicillum&quot;, meaning &quot;painter&#x27;s brush&quot;, and refers to the chains of conidia that resemble a broom.

== Characteristics ==
The thallus (mycelium) consists of highly branched networks of multinucleated, usually colourless hyphae, with each pair of cells separated by a septum. Conidiophores are at the end of each branch accompanied by green spherical constricted units called conidia. These propagules play a significant role in reproduction; conidia are the main dispersal strategy of these fungi.

Sexual reproduction involves the production of ascospores, commencing with the fusion of an archegonium and an antheridium, with sharing of nuclei. The irregularly distributed asci contain eight unicellular ascospores each.

== Ecology ==
Species of &quot;Penicillium&quot; are ubiquitous soil fungi preferring cool and moderate climates, commonly present wherever organic material is available. Saprophytic species of &quot;Penicillium&quot; and &quot;Aspergillus&quot; are among the best-known representatives of the Eurotiales and live mainly on organic biodegradable substances. Commonly known in America as molds, they are among the main causes of food spoilage, especially species of subgenus &quot;Penicillium&quot;. Many species produce highly toxic mycotoxins. The ability of these &quot;Penicillium&quot; species to grow on seeds and other stored foods depends on their propensity to thrive in low humidity and to colonize rapidly by aerial dispersion while the seeds are sufficiently moist. Some species have a blue color, commonly growing on old bread and giving it a blue fuzzy texture.

Some &quot;Penicillium&quot; species affect the fruits and bulbs of plants, including &quot;P. expansum&quot;, apples and pears; &quot;P. digitatum&quot;, citrus fruits; and &quot;P. allii&quot;, garlic. Some species are known to be pathogenic to animals; &quot;P. corylophilum&quot;, &quot;P. fellutanum&quot;, &quot;P. implicatum&quot;, &quot;P. janthinellum&quot;, &quot;P. viridicatum&quot;, and &quot;P. waksmanii&quot; are potential pathogens of mosquitoes.

&quot;Penicillium&quot; species are present in the air and dust of indoor environments, such as homes and public buildings. The fungus can be readily transported from the outdoors, and grow indoors using building material or accumulated soil to obtain nutrients for growth. &quot;Penicillium&quot; growth can still occur indoors even if the relative humidity is low, as long as there is sufficient moisture available on a given surface. A British study determined that &quot;Aspergillus&quot;- and &quot;Penicillium&quot;-type spores were the most prevalent in the indoor air of residential properties, and exceeded outdoor levels. Even ceiling tiles can support the growth of &quot;Penicillium&quot;—as one study demonstrated—if the relative humidity is 85% and the moisture content of the tiles is greater than 2.2%.

Some &quot;Penicillium&quot; species cause damage to machinery and the combustible materials and lubricants used to run and maintain them. For example, &quot;P. chrysogenum (formerly P. notatum)&quot;, &quot;P. steckii&quot;, &quot;P. cyclopium&quot;, and &quot;P. nalgiovensis&quot; affect fuels; &quot;P. chrysogenum&quot;, &quot;P. rubrum&quot;, and &quot;P. verrucosum&quot; cause damage to oils and lubricants; &quot;P. regulosum&quot; damages optical and protective glass.

== Economic value ==

Several species of the genus &quot;Penicillium&quot; play a central role in the production of cheese and of various meat products. To be specific, &quot;Penicillium&quot; molds are found in blue cheese. &quot;Penicillium camemberti&quot; and &quot;Penicillium roqueforti&quot; are the molds on Camembert, Brie, Roquefort, and many other cheeses. &quot;Penicillium nalgiovense&quot; is used in soft mold-ripened cheeses, such as Nalžovy (ellischau) cheese, and to improve the taste of sausages and hams, and to prevent colonization by other molds and bacteria.

In addition to their importance in the food industry, species of &quot;Penicillium&quot; and &quot;Aspergillus&quot; serve in the production of a number of biotechnologically produced enzymes and other macromolecules, such as gluconic, citric, and tartaric acids, as well as several pectinases, lipase, amylases, cellulases, and proteases. Some &quot;Penicillium&quot; species have shown potential for use in bioremediation, more specifically mycoremediation, because of their ability to break down a variety of xenobiotic compounds.

The genus includes a wide variety of species molds that are the source molds of major antibiotics. Penicillin, a drug produced by &quot;P. chrysogenum (formerly P. notatum),&quot; was accidentally discovered by Alexander Fleming in 1929, and found to inhibit the growth of Gram-positive bacteria (see beta-lactams). Its potential as an antibiotic was realized in the late 1930s, and Howard Florey and Ernst Chain purified and concentrated the compound. The drug&#x27;s success in saving soldiers in World War II who had been dying from infected wounds resulted in Fleming, Florey and Chain jointly winning the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1945.

Griseofulvin is an antifungal drug and a potential chemotherapeutic agent that was discovered in &quot;P. griseofulvum&quot;. Additional species that produce compounds capable of inhibiting the growth of tumor cells &quot;in vitro&quot; include: &quot;P. pinophilum&quot;, &quot;P. canescens&quot;, and &quot;P. glabrum&quot;.

==Reproduction==
Although many eukaryotes are able to reproduce sexually, as much as 20% of fungal species had been thought to reproduce exclusively by asexual means. However recent studies have revealed that sex occurs even in some of the supposedly asexual species. For example, sexual capability was recently shown for the fungus &quot;Penicillium roqueforti&quot;, used as a starter for blue cheese production. This finding was based, in part, on evidence for functional mating type (MAT) genes that are involved in fungal sexual compatibility, and the presence in the sequenced genome of most of the important genes known to be involved in meiosis. &quot;Penicillium chrysogenum&quot; is of major medical and historical importance as the original and present-day industrial source of the antibiotic penicillin. The species was considered asexual for more than 100 years despite concerted efforts to induce sexual reproduction. However, in 2013, Bohm et al. finally demonstrated sexual reproduction in &quot;P. chrysogenum&quot;.

These findings with &quot;Penicillium&quot; species are consistent with accumulating evidence from studies of other eukaryotic species that sex was likely present in the common ancestor of all eukaryotes. Furthermore, these recent results suggest that sex can be maintained even when very little genetic variability is produced.

Prior to 2013, when the &quot;one fungus, one name&quot; nomenclature change came into effect, &quot;Penicillium&quot; was used as the genus for anamorph (clonal forms) of fungi and &quot;Talaromyces&quot; was used for the teleomorph (sexual forms) of fungi. After 2013 however, fungi were reclassified based on their genetic relatedness to each other and now the genera &quot;Penicillium&quot; and &quot;Talaromyces&quot; both contain some species capable of only clonal reproduction and others that can reproduce sexually.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 


== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="20" end="25" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174726" start="29" end="41" title="Ascomycota" label="ascomycetous"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="42" end="47" title="fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975941" start="68" end="77" title="mycobiome" label="mycobiome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="235" end="245" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="277" end="287" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281188" start="377" end="389" title="cheesemaking" label="cheesemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q215466" start="590" end="620" title="Johann Heinrich Friedrich Link" label="Johann Heinrich Friedrich Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709823" start="740" end="751" title="Penicillium candidum" label="P. candidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q147358" start="765" end="776" title="Penicillium expansum" label="P. expansum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455376" start="794" end="804" title="Penicillium glaucum" label="P. glaucum"/>
<link wikidata="Q612960" start="846" end="858" title="conidiophore" label="conidiophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="974" end="986" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="1001" end="1010" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238261" start="1067" end="1076" title="subgenera" label="subgenera"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="1099" end="1109" title="morphology (biology)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690168" start="1325" end="1336" title="Talaromyces" label="Talaromyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632557" start="1397" end="1421" title="Penicillium albocoremium" label="Penicillium albocoremium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162856" start="1436" end="1463" title="Penicillium aurantiogriseum" label="Penicillium aurantiogriseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162857" start="1499" end="1518" title="Penicillium bilaiae" label="Penicillium bilaiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709823" start="1560" end="1582" title="Penicillium camemberti" label="Penicillium camemberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q131480" start="1616" end="1625" title="Camembert (cheese)" label="Camembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q193411" start="1627" end="1631" title="Brie cheese" label="Brie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329767" start="1636" end="1645" title="Cambozola" label="Cambozola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709823" start="1662" end="1682" title="Penicillium candidum" label="Penicillium candidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q137155" start="1814" end="1837" title="Penicillium chrysogenum" label="Penicillium chrysogenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q137155" start="1871" end="1890" title="Penicillium notatum" label="Penicillium notatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="1929" end="1939" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162858" start="1948" end="1970" title="Penicillium claviforme" label="Penicillium claviforme"/>
<link wikidata="Q10622907" start="1985" end="2004" title="Penicillium commune" label="Penicillium commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162859" start="2019" end="2040" title="Penicillium crustosum" label="Penicillium crustosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687731" start="2055" end="2076" title="Penicillium digitatum" label="Penicillium digitatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162861" start="2122" end="2145" title="Penicillium echinulatum" label="Penicillium echinulatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q420553" start="2161" end="2178" title="Mycophenolic acid" label="Mycophenolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q147358" start="2187" end="2207" title="Penicillium expansum" label="Penicillium expansum"/>
<link wikidata="Q414526" start="2262" end="2269" title="patulin" label="patulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162864" start="2278" end="2297" title="Penicillium glabrum" label="Penicillium glabrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455376" start="2312" end="2331" title="Penicillium glaucum" label="Penicillium glaucum"/>
<link wikidata="Q159341" start="2341" end="2345" title="Mold (fungus)" label="mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q746471" start="2390" end="2401" title="blue cheese" label="blue cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231078" start="2413" end="2424" title="Bleu de Gex" label="Bleu de Gex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797509" start="2426" end="2436" title="Rochebaron" label="Rochebaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q883954" start="2460" end="2480" title="Bleu d&amp;#x27;Auvergne" label="Bleu d&amp;#x27;Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q209044" start="2485" end="2495" title="Gorgonzola cheese" label="Gorgonzola"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404131" start="2505" end="2527" title="Penicillium imranianum" label="Penicillium imranianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013197" start="2542" end="2562" title="Penicillium italicum" label="Penicillium italicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10622966" start="2608" end="2635" title="Penicillium lacussarmientei" label="Penicillium lacussarmientei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2650" end="2671" title="Penicillium lusitanum" label="Penicillium lusitanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162871" start="2716" end="2740" title="Penicillium purpurogenum" label="Penicillium purpurogenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q133247" start="2755" end="2777" title="Penicillium roqueforti" label="Penicillium roqueforti"/>
<link wikidata="Q189221" start="2800" end="2809" title="Roquefort cheese" label="Roquefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q165855" start="2811" end="2829" title="Danish Blue cheese" label="Danish Blue cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q466749" start="2844" end="2858" title="Stilton cheese" label="Stilton cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q209044" start="2860" end="2877" title="Gorgonzola cheese" label="Gorgonzola cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329767" start="2883" end="2892" title="Cambozola" label="Cambozola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162860" start="2902" end="2926" title="Penicillium stoloniferum" label="Penicillium stoloniferum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162868" start="2941" end="2961" title="Penicillium ulaiense" label="Penicillium ulaiense"/>
<link wikidata="Q15020933" start="3015" end="3037" title="Penicillium verrucosum" label="Penicillium verrucosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885038" start="3080" end="3092" title="ochratoxin A" label="ochratoxin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q22285993" start="3101" end="3124" title="Penicillium viridicatum" label="Penicillium viridicatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3185" end="3190" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207495" start="3348" end="3355" title="thallus" label="thallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q326228" start="3357" end="3365" title="mycelium" label="mycelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5796041" start="3407" end="3421" title="multinucleated" label="multinucleated"/>
<link wikidata="Q193129" start="3442" end="3448" title="hyphae" label="hyphae"/>
<link wikidata="Q346579" start="3489" end="3495" title="septum" label="septum"/>
<link wikidata="Q612960" start="3497" end="3510" title="Conidiophores" label="Conidiophores"/>
<link wikidata="Q612960" start="3597" end="3604" title="conidia" label="conidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q723425" start="3768" end="3777" title="ascospore" label="ascospore"/>
<link wikidata="Q850653" start="3813" end="3824" title="archegonium" label="archegonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129321" start="3832" end="3843" title="antheridium" label="antheridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q723425" start="3897" end="3901" title="ascus" label="asci"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001591" start="4117" end="4128" title="Saprophytic" label="Saprophytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q335130" start="4174" end="4185" title="Aspergillus" label="Aspergillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q135266" start="4240" end="4250" title="Eurotiales" label="Eurotiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q159341" start="4333" end="4337" title="Mold (fungus)" label="mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465528" start="4374" end="4387" title="food spoilage" label="food spoilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238261" start="4411" end="4419" title="subgenus" label="subgenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q422449" start="4479" end="4488" title="mycotoxin" label="mycotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q147358" start="4914" end="4925" title="Penicillium expansum" label="P. expansum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687731" start="4957" end="4969" title="Penicillium digitatum" label="P. digitatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987716" start="5002" end="5010" title="Penicillium allii" label="P. allii"/>
<link wikidata="Q10622912" start="5084" end="5099" title="Penicillium corylophilum" label="P. corylophilum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10622917" start="5113" end="5126" title="Penicillium fellutanum" label="P. fellutanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10622953" start="5140" end="5153" title="Penicillium implicatum" label="P. implicatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10623065" start="5167" end="5182" title="Penicillium janthinellum" label="P. janthinellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22285993" start="5196" end="5210" title="Penicillium viridicatum" label="P. viridicatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10623092" start="5228" end="5240" title="Penicillium waksmanii" label="P. waksmanii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="5274" end="5284" title="mosquitoes" label="mosquitoes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5924" end="5936" title="Tile#Ceiling tiles" label="ceiling tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="6021" end="6038" title="relative humidity" label="relative humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q137155" start="6265" end="6279" title="Penicillium chrysogenum" label="P. chrysogenum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6290" end="6300" title="P. chrysogenum" label="P. notatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22285772" start="6315" end="6325" title="Penicillium steckii" label="P. steckii"/>
<link wikidata="Q137155" start="6339" end="6339" title="Penicillium notatum" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q7162856" start="6339" end="6351" title="Penicillium cyclopium" label="P. cyclopium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10622998" start="6369" end="6384" title="Penicillium nalgiovensis" label="P. nalgiovensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10623052" start="6439" end="6448" title="Penicillium rubrum" label="P. rubrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15020933" start="6466" end="6479" title="Penicillium verrucosum" label="P. verrucosum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6529" end="6541" title="Penicillium regulosum" label="P. regulosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q746471" start="6799" end="6810" title="blue cheese" label="blue cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709823" start="6818" end="6840" title="Penicillium camemberti" label="Penicillium camemberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q133247" start="6857" end="6879" title="Penicillium roqueforti" label="Penicillium roqueforti"/>
<link wikidata="Q131480" start="6903" end="6912" title="Camembert" label="Camembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q193411" start="6914" end="6918" title="Brie" label="Brie"/>
<link wikidata="Q189221" start="6920" end="6929" title="Roquefort" label="Roquefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q10622998" start="6961" end="6984" title="Penicillium nalgiovense" label="Penicillium nalgiovense"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="7354" end="7360" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q407569" start="7396" end="7404" title="gluconic acid" label="gluconic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="7406" end="7412" title="citric acid" label="citric"/>
<link wikidata="Q194322" start="7418" end="7431" title="tartaric acid" label="tartaric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q419568" start="7453" end="7462" title="pectinase" label="pectinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q380967" start="7465" end="7471" title="lipase" label="lipase"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153" start="7473" end="7480" title="amylase" label="amylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q410324" start="7483" end="7492" title="cellulase" label="cellulase"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="7499" end="7507" title="protease" label="protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q816441" start="7579" end="7593" title="bioremediation" label="bioremediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028806" start="7613" end="7628" title="mycoremediation" label="mycoremediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381377" start="7682" end="7702" title="Environmental xenobiotic" label="xenobiotic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="7791" end="7801" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="7804" end="7814" title="Penicillin" label="Penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q137155" start="7841" end="7855" title="Penicillium chrysogenum" label="P. chrysogenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37064" start="7916" end="7933" title="Alexander Fleming" label="Alexander Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="7978" end="7991" title="Gram-positive" label="Gram-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q41873" start="8006" end="8018" title="beta-lactams" label="beta-lactams"/>
<link wikidata="Q137106" start="8088" end="8101" title="Howard Florey" label="Howard Florey"/>
<link wikidata="Q58054" start="8106" end="8117" title="Ernst Chain" label="Ernst Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="8315" end="8338" title="Nobel Prize in Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q416096" start="8349" end="8361" title="Griseofulvin" label="Griseofulvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q578726" start="8368" end="8383" title="antifungal drug" label="antifungal drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140638" start="8400" end="8422" title="chemotherapeutic agent" label="chemotherapeutic agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q10622943" start="8452" end="8467" title="Penicillium griseofulvum" label="P. griseofulvum"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="8571" end="8579" title="in vitro" label="in vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10623028" start="8601" end="8614" title="Penicillium pinophilum" label="P. pinophilum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10622893" start="8628" end="8640" title="Penicillium canescens" label="P. canescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162864" start="8658" end="8668" title="Penicillium glabrum" label="P. glabrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="8708" end="8717" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="8741" end="8749" title="Sexual reproduction" label="sexually"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="8769" end="8775" title="fungus" label="fungal"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="8829" end="8836" title="Asexual reproduction" label="asexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="8886" end="8889" title="sex" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q133247" start="9016" end="9038" title="Penicillium roqueforti" label="Penicillium roqueforti"/>
<link wikidata="Q746471" start="9068" end="9079" title="blue cheese" label="blue cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q781214" start="9152" end="9163" title="mating type" label="mating type"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="9322" end="9329" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q137155" start="9337" end="9360" title="Penicillium chrysogenum" label="Penicillium chrysogenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="9828" end="9838" title="Eukaryote" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="9905" end="9914" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374271" start="10008" end="10027" title="genetic variability" label="genetic variability"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10072" end="10092" title="Teleomorph, anamorph and holomorph#One fungus, one name" label="one fungus, one name"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162265" wikidata="Q5106595" url="?curid=162265" title="Chris Freiling">
<text>Christopher Francis Freiling is a mathematician responsible for Freiling&#x27;s axiom of symmetry in set theory. He has also made significant contributions to coding theory, in the process establishing connections between that field and matroid theory.

Freiling obtained his Ph.D. in 1981 from the University of California, Los Angeles under the supervision of Donald A. Martin. He is a member of the faculty of the Department of Mathematics at California State University, San Bernardino.

==Selected publications==
*.

==References==
==External links==
* Home page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5106595" start="0" end="28" title="Chris Freiling" label="Christopher Francis Freiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276975" start="64" end="97" title="Freiling&amp;#x27;s axiom of symmetry" label="Freiling&amp;#x27;s axiom of symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="101" end="111" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q602136" start="159" end="172" title="coding theory" label="coding theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q898572" start="237" end="251" title="matroid theory" label="matroid theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="299" end="336" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q176776" start="362" end="378" title="Donald A. Martin" label="Donald A. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026944" start="446" end="489" title="California State University, San Bernardino" label="California State University, San Bernardino"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162267" wikidata="Q2276975" url="?curid=162267" title="Freiling's axiom of symmetry">
<text>Freiling&#x27;s axiom of symmetry (formula_1) is a set-theoretic axiom proposed by Chris Freiling. It is based on intuition of Stuart Davidson
but the mathematics behind it goes back to Wacław Sierpiński.

Let formula_2 denote the set of all functions from formula_3 to countable subsets of formula_3. (In other words, formula_5 where formula_6 is the collection of subsets of formula_7 of cardinality at most formula_8.)

The axiom formula_1 then states:

:For every formula_10, there exist formula_11 such that formula_12 and formula_13.

A theorem of Sierpiński says that under the assumptions of ZFC set theory, formula_1 is equivalent to the negation of the continuum hypothesis (CH). Sierpiński&#x27;s theorem answered a question of Hugo Steinhaus and was proved long before the independence of CH had been established by
Kurt Gödel and Paul Cohen.

Freiling claims that probabilistic intuition strongly supports this proposition while others disagree. There are several versions of the axiom, some of which are discussed below.

==Freiling&#x27;s argument==

Fix a function &quot;f&quot; in &quot;A&quot;. We will consider a thought experiment that involves throwing two darts at the unit interval. We are not able to physically determine with infinite accuracy the actual values of the numbers &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; that are hit. Likewise, the question of whether &quot;&quot;y&quot; is in &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)&quot; cannot actually be physically computed. Nevertheless, if &quot;f&quot; really &quot;is&quot; a function, then this question is a meaningful one and will have a definite &quot;yes&quot; or &quot;no&quot; answer.

Now wait until after the first dart, &quot;x&quot;, is thrown and then assess the chances that the second dart &quot;y&quot; will be in &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;). Since &quot;x&quot; is now fixed, &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is a fixed countable set and has Lebesgue measure zero. Therefore, this event, with &quot;x&quot; fixed, has probability zero. Freiling now makes two generalizations:

* Since we can predict with virtual certainty that &quot;&quot;y&quot; is not in &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)&quot; after the first dart is thrown, and since this prediction is valid no matter what the first dart does, we should be able to make this prediction before the first dart is thrown. This is not to say that we still have a measurable event, rather it is an intuition about the nature of being predictable.
* Since &quot;&quot;y&quot; is not in &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)&quot; is predictably true, by the symmetry of the order in which the darts were thrown (hence the name &quot;axiom of symmetry&quot;) we should also be able to predict with virtual certainty that &quot;&quot;x&quot; is not in &quot;f&quot;(&quot;y&quot;)&quot;.

The axiom formula_1 is now justified based on the principle that what will predictably happen every time this experiment is performed, should at the very least be possible. Hence there should exist two real numbers &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot; such that &quot;x&quot; is not in &quot;f&quot;(&quot;y&quot;) and &quot;y&quot; is not in &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;).

==Relation to the (Generalised) Continuum Hypothesis==
Fix formula_16 an infinite cardinal (&quot;e.g.&quot; formula_17). Let formula_18 be the statement: &quot;there is no map formula_19 from sets to formula_20-sized collections of sets such that for any formula_21 either formula_22 or formula_23.&quot;

Claim: formula_24.

Proof:
&quot;Part I&quot; (formula_25):

Suppose formula_26. Then there exists a bijection formula_27. We will exploit the well-ordering of formula_28 to build an ascending chain in formula_29.

Define a function formula_19 by formula_31. Given this function, it is straightforward to see that this demonstrates the failure of Freiling&#x27;s axiom. The map formula_32 induces a well-ordering formula_33 on formula_34 (sometimes called the &quot;pushforward&quot; of the standard ordering on formula_35). Picking any two formula_36, we can state without loss of generality that formula_37. But then, noting the definition of formula_38, we see that this implies formula_39. Thus we have found a function formula_38 witnessing formula_41.

&quot;Part II&quot; (formula_42):

Suppose that Freiling&#x27;s axiom fails. Then fix some formula_43 to verify this fact. Define an order relation on formula_44 by formula_45 iff formula_46. This relation is total and every point has formula_20 many predecessors. Define now a strictly increasing chain formula_48 as follows: at each stage choose formula_49. This process can be carried out since for every ordinal formula_50, formula_51 is a union of formula_52 many sets of size formula_52; thus is of size formula_54 and so is a strict subset of formula_44. We also have that this sequence is &quot;cofinal&quot; in the order defined, &quot;i.e.&quot; every member of formula_44 is formula_57 some formula_58. (For otherwise if formula_59 is not formula_57 some formula_61, then since the order is total formula_62; implying formula_63 has formula_64 many predecessors; a contradiction.) Thus we may well-define a map formula_65 by formula_66.
So formula_67 which is union of formula_68 many sets each of size formula_52. Hence formula_70. 

Note that formula_71 so we can easily rearrange things to obtain that formula_72 the above-mentioned form of Freiling&#x27;s axiom.

The above can be made more precise: formula_73. This shows (together with the fact that the continuum hypothesis is independent of choice) a precise way in which the (generalised) continuum hypothesis is an extension of the axiom of choice.

==Objections to Freiling&#x27;s argument==

Freiling&#x27;s argument is not widely accepted because of the following two problems with it (which Freiling was well aware of and discussed in his paper).

* The naive probabilistic intuition used by Freiling tacitly assumes that there is a well-behaved way to associate a probability to any subset of the reals. But the mathematical formalization of the notion of &quot;probability&quot; uses the notion of measure, yet the axiom of choice implies the existence of non-measurable subsets, even of the unit interval. Some examples of this are the Banach–Tarski paradox and the existence of Vitali sets.
*A minor variation of his argument gives a contradiction with the axiom of choice whether or not one accepts the continuum hypothesis, if one replaces countable additivity of probability by additivity for cardinals less than the continuum. (Freiling used a similar argument to claim that Martin&#x27;s axiom is false.) It is not clear why Freiling&#x27;s intuition should be any less applicable in this instance, if it applies at all. So Freiling&#x27;s argument seems to be more an argument against the possibility of well ordering the reals than against the continuum hypothesis.

==Connection to graph theory==
Using the fact that in ZFC, we have formula_74 (see above), it is not hard to see that the &quot;failure&quot; of the axiom of symmetry — and thus the success of formula_26 — is equivalent to the following combinatorial principle for graphs:

:* The complete graph on formula_44 can be so directed, that every node leads to at most formula_16-many nodes.

In the case of formula_78, this translates to:

:* The complete graph on the unit circle (or any set of the same size as the reals) can be so directed, that every node has a path to at most countably-many nodes.

Thus in the context of ZFC, the failure of a Freiling axiom is equivalent to the existence of a specific kind of choice function.

==References==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2276975" start="0" end="45" title="Freiling&amp;#x27;s axiom of symmetry" label="Freiling&amp;#x27;s axiom of symmetry (formula_1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="51" end="64" title="set theory" label="set-theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106595" start="83" end="97" title="Chris Freiling" label="Chris Freiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q297206" start="186" end="203" title="Wacław Sierpiński" label="Wacław Sierpiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="663" end="683" title="continuum hypothesis" label="continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q226072" start="739" end="753" title="Hugo Steinhaus" label="Hugo Steinhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="828" end="838" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q216809" start="843" end="853" title="Paul Cohen (mathematician)" label="Paul Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="1917" end="1933" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673893" start="5907" end="5922" title="tacit assumption" label="tacitly assumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="6069" end="6080" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q192276" start="6106" end="6113" title="Measure (mathematics)" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q737851" start="6245" end="6266" title="Banach–Tarski paradox" label="Banach–Tarski paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q257387" start="6288" end="6298" title="Vitali set" label="Vitali set"/>
<link wikidata="Q622185" start="6589" end="6608" title="Martin&amp;#x27;s axiom" label="Martin&amp;#x27;s axiom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6967" end="6972" title="Freiling&amp;#x27;s axiom of symmetry#Relation to the (Generalised) Continuum Hypothesis" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q45715" start="7165" end="7179" title="complete graph" label="complete graph"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162269" wikidata="Q214769" url="?curid=162269" title="Magnesium oxide">
<text>Magnesium oxide ([[Magnesium|Mg]][[Oxide|O]]), or magnesia, is a white hygroscopic solid mineral that occurs naturally as periclase and is a source of magnesium (see also oxide). It has an empirical formula of MgO and consists of a lattice of Mg2+ ions and O2− ions held together by ionic bonding. Magnesium hydroxide forms in the presence of water (MgO + H2O → Mg(OH)2), but it can be reversed by heating it to remove moisture.

Magnesium oxide was historically known as magnesia alba (literally, the white mineral from Magnesia), to differentiate it from &quot;magnesia nigra&quot;, a black mineral containing what is now known as manganese.

==Related oxides==
While &quot;magnesium oxide&quot; normally refers to MgO, the compound magnesium peroxide MgO2 is also known. According to evolutionary crystal structure prediction, MgO2 is thermodynamically stable at pressures above 116 GPa (gigapascals), and a semiconducting suboxide Mg3O2 is thermodynamically stable above 500 GPa. Because of its stability, MgO is used as a model system for investigating vibrational properties of crystals.

== Electric properties ==
Pure MgO is not conductive and has a high resistance to electric current at room temperature. The pure powder of MgO has a relative permittivity inbetween 3.2 to 9.9 formula_1 with an approximate dielectric loss of tan(δ) &gt; 2.16x103 at 1kHz.

==Production==
Magnesium oxide is produced by the calcination of magnesium carbonate or magnesium hydroxide. The latter is obtained by the treatment of magnesium chloride solutions, typically seawater, with limewater or milk of lime.
:Mg2+ + Ca(OH)2 → Mg(OH)2 + Ca2+
Calcining at different temperatures produces magnesium oxide of different reactivity. High temperatures 1500 – 2000 °C diminish the available surface area and produces dead-burned (often called dead burnt) magnesia, an unreactive form used as a refractory. Calcining temperatures 1000 – 1500 °C produce hard-burned magnesia, which has limited reactivity and calcining at lower temperature, (700–1000 °C) produces light-burned magnesia, a reactive form, also known as caustic calcined magnesia. Although some decomposition of the carbonate to oxide occurs at temperatures below 700 °C, the resulting materials appear to reabsorb carbon dioxide from the air.

==Applications==

===Refractory insulator===

MgO is prized as a refractory material, i.e. a solid that is physically and chemically stable at high temperatures. It has the useful attributes of high thermal conductivity and low electrical conductivity. According to a 2006 reference book: 
MgO is used as a refractory material for crucibles. It is also used as an insulator in heat-resistant electrical cable.

===Biomedical===
Among metal oxide nanoparticles, magnesium oxide nanoparticles (MgO NPs) have distinct physicochemical and biological properties, including biocompatibility, biodegradability, high bioactivity, significant antibacterial properties, and good mechanical properties, which make it a good choice as a reinforcement in composites.

====Heating elements====
It is used extensively as an electrical insulator in tubular construction heating elements as in electric stove and cooktop heating elements. There are several mesh sizes available and most commonly used ones are 40 and 80 mesh per the American Foundry Society. The extensive use is due to its high dielectric strength and average thermal conductivity. MgO is usually crushed and compacted with minimal airgaps or voids.

===Cement===
MgO is one of the components in Portland cement in dry process plants.

Sorel cement uses MgO as the main component in combination with MgCl2 and water.

===Fertilizer===
MgO has an important place as a commercial plant fertilizer and as animal feed.

===Fireproofing===
It is a principal fireproofing ingredient in construction materials. As a construction material, magnesium oxide wallboards have several attractive characteristics: fire resistance, termite resistance, moisture resistance, mold and mildew resistance, and strength, but also a severe downside as it attracts moisture and can cause moisture damage to surrounding materials.

===Medical===
Magnesium oxide is used for relief of heartburn and indigestion, as an antacid, magnesium supplement, and as a short-term laxative. It is also used to improve symptoms of indigestion. Side effects of magnesium oxide may include nausea and cramping. In quantities sufficient to obtain a laxative effect, side effects of long-term use may rarely cause enteroliths to form, resulting in bowel obstruction.

===Waste treatment===
Magnesium oxide is used extensively in the soil and groundwater remediation, wastewater treatment, drinking water treatment, air emissions treatment, and waste treatment industries for its acid buffering capacity and related effectiveness in stabilizing dissolved heavy metal species.

Many heavy metals species, such as lead and cadmium, are least soluble in water at mildly basic conditions (pH in the range 8–11). Solubility of metals increases their undesired bioavailability and mobility in soil and groundwater. Granular MgO is often blended into metals-contaminating soil or waste material, which is also commonly of a low pH (acidic), in order to drive the pH into the 8–10 range. Metal-hydroxide complexes tend to precipitate out of aqueous solution in the pH range of 8–10.

MgO is packed in bags around transuranic waste in the disposal cells (panels) at the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant, as a getter to minimize the complexation of uranium and other actinides by carbonate ions and so to limit the solubility of radionuclides. The use of MgO is preferred over CaO since the resulting hydration product () is less soluble and releases less hydration heat. Another advantage is to impose a lower pH value (about 10.5) in case of accidental water ingress into the dry salt layers, in contast to the more soluble which would create a higher pH of 12.5 (strongly alkaline conditions). The cation being the second most abundant cation in seawater and in rocksalt, the potential release of magnesium ions dissolving in brines intruding the deep geological repository is also expected to minimize the geochemical disruption.

===Niche uses===

* As a food additive, it is used as an anticaking agent. It is known to the US Food and Drug Administration for cacao products; canned peas; and frozen dessert. It has an E number of E530.
* As a reagent in the installation of the carboxybenzyl (Cbz) group using benzyl chloroformate in EtOAc for the N-protection of amines and amides.
* Doping MgO (about 1–5% by weight) into hydroxyapatite, a bioceramic mineral, increases the fracture toughness by migrating to grain boundaries, where it reduces grain size and changes the fracture mode from intergranular to transgranular. 
* Pressed MgO is used as an optical material. It is transparent from 0.3 to 7 μm. The refractive index is 1.72 at 1 μm and the Abbe number is 53.58. It is sometimes known by the Eastman Kodak trademarked name Irtran-5, although this designation is obsolete. Crystalline pure MgO is available commercially and has a small use in infrared optics.
* An aerosolized solution of MgO is used in library science and collections management for the deacidification of at-risk paper items. In this process, the alkalinity of MgO (and similar compounds) neutralizes the relatively high acidity characteristic of low-quality paper, thus slowing the rate of deterioration.
* Magnesium oxide is used as an oxide barrier in spin-tunneling devices. Owing to the crystalline structure of its thin films, which can be deposited by magnetron sputtering, for example, it shows characteristics superior to those of the commonly used amorphous Al2O3. In particular, spin polarization of about 85% has been achieved with MgO versus 40–60 % with aluminium oxide. The value of tunnel magnetoresistance is also significantly higher for MgO (600% at room temperature and 1,100 % at 4.2 K) than Al2O3 (ca. 70% at room temperature).
* MgO is a common pressure transmitting medium used in high pressure apparatuses like the multi-anvil press.

===Brake lining===
Magnesia is used in brake linings for its heat conductivity and intermediate hardness. It helps dissipate heat from friction surfaces, preventing overheating, while minimizing wear on metal components. Its stability under high temperatures ensures reliable and durable braking performance in automotive and industrial applications.

=== Thin film transistors ===
In thin film transistors(TFTs), MgO is often used as a dielectric material or an insulator due to its high thermal stability, excellent insulating properties, and wide bandgap. Optimized IGZO/MgO TFTs demonstrated an electron mobility of 1.63 cm²/Vs, an on/off current ratio of 10⁶, and a subthreshold swing of 0.50 V/decade at −0.11 V. These TFTs are integral to low-power applications, wearable devices, and radiation-hardened electronics, contributing to enhanced efficiency and durability across diverse domains.

===Historical uses===
* It was historically used as a reference white color in colorimetry, owing to its good diffusing and reflectivity properties. It may be smoked onto the surface of an opaque material to form an integrating sphere.
* Early gas mantle designs for lighting, such as the Clamond basket, consisted mainly of magnesium oxide.

==Precautions==
Inhalation of magnesium oxide fumes can cause metal fume fever.

==See also==
* 
* 

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Data page at UCL
*Ceramic data page at NIST
*NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards at CDC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214769" start="0" end="15" title="Magnesium oxide" label="Magnesium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q214769" start="17" end="44" title="Magnesium oxide" label="[[Magnesium|Mg]][[Oxide|O]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q214769" start="50" end="58" title="Magnesium oxide" label="magnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216678" start="71" end="82" title="hygroscopy" label="hygroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="89" end="96" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q426635" start="122" end="131" title="periclase" label="periclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="151" end="160" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="171" end="176" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q272477" start="189" end="206" title="empirical formula" label="empirical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="232" end="239" title="crystal structure" label="lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q62500" start="283" end="293" title="ionic bond" label="ionic bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q407548" start="298" end="317" title="Magnesium hydroxide" label="Magnesium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q214769" start="472" end="485" title="Magnesium oxide" label="magnesia alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790367" start="521" end="529" title="Ancient Magnesia" label="Magnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="563" end="577" title="magnesia nigra" label="magnesia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="633" end="642" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q419379" start="735" end="753" title="magnesium peroxide" label="magnesium peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q425366" start="926" end="934" title="suboxide" label="suboxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="1197" end="1213" title="room temperature" label="room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027242" start="1244" end="1265" title="relative permittivity" label="relative permittivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417868" start="1317" end="1332" title="dielectric loss" label="dielectric loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040795" start="1336" end="1342" title="Dissipation factor" label="tan(δ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q849523" start="1417" end="1428" title="calcination" label="calcination"/>
<link wikidata="Q407931" start="1432" end="1451" title="magnesium carbonate" label="magnesium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407548" start="1455" end="1474" title="magnesium hydroxide" label="magnesium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q265414" start="1519" end="1537" title="magnesium chloride" label="magnesium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q182849" start="1574" end="1583" title="limewater" label="limewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q849523" start="1634" end="1643" title="Calcination" label="Calcining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123417" start="1879" end="1889" title="refractory" label="refractory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123417" start="2357" end="2376" title="Refractory" label="refractory material"/>
<link wikidata="Q390417" start="2623" end="2631" title="crucible" label="crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864257" start="2669" end="2700" title="Mineral-insulated copper-clad cable" label="heat-resistant electrical cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q610112" start="3146" end="3161" title="heating element" label="heating element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211746" start="3178" end="3183" title="electric stove" label="stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738833" start="3188" end="3195" title="cooktop" label="cooktop"/>
<link wikidata="Q691310" start="3232" end="3236" title="Mesh (scale)" label="mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994887" start="3308" end="3332" title="American Foundry Society" label="American Foundry Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="3539" end="3554" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3558" end="3576" title="Cement kiln#The wet process and the dry process" label="dry process plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414196" start="3579" end="3591" title="Sorel cement" label="Sorel cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063326" start="3875" end="3900" title="magnesium oxide wallboard" label="magnesium oxide wallboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q274083" start="4236" end="4243" title="antacid" label="antacid"/>
<link wikidata="Q217972" start="4287" end="4295" title="laxative" label="laxative"/>
<link wikidata="Q653971" start="4336" end="4347" title="indigestion" label="indigestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380237" start="4515" end="4525" title="enterolith" label="enterolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244733" start="4549" end="4566" title="bowel obstruction" label="bowel obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611037" start="4643" end="4666" title="groundwater remediation" label="groundwater remediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="4912" end="4916" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="4921" end="4928" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="5256" end="5258" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="5314" end="5325" title="Precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449798" start="5405" end="5422" title="transuranic waste" label="transuranic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930556" start="5461" end="5488" title="Waste Isolation Pilot Plant" label="Waste Isolation Pilot Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="5534" end="5541" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577" start="5552" end="5560" title="actinide" label="actinide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="5565" end="5574" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="5600" end="5610" title="solubility" label="solubility"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="5614" end="5626" title="radionuclide" label="radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="5662" end="5665" title="CaO" label="CaO"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="5686" end="5703" title="hydrate" label="hydration product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640124" start="5741" end="5755" title="hydration enthalpy" label="hydration heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="5796" end="5798" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="5960" end="5968" title="alkaline" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="5986" end="5992" title="cation" label="cation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="6034" end="6042" title="seawater" label="seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314" start="6050" end="6058" title="rocksalt" label="rocksalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="6114" end="6119" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340555" start="6135" end="6161" title="deep geological repository" label="deep geological repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="6195" end="6206" title="geochemistry" label="geochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q726460" start="6277" end="6293" title="anticaking agent" label="anticaking agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="6317" end="6345" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="6409" end="6417" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q419534" start="6501" end="6521" title="benzyl chloroformate" label="benzyl chloroformate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407153" start="6525" end="6530" title="ethyl acetate" label="EtOAc"/>
<link wikidata="Q898525" start="6539" end="6551" title="protecting group" label="N-protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="6555" end="6560" title="amine" label="amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188777" start="6566" end="6571" title="amide" label="amide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130571" start="6576" end="6582" title="Doping (semiconductor)" label="Doping"/>
<link wikidata="Q413478" start="6615" end="6629" title="hydroxyapatite" label="hydroxyapatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790033" start="6633" end="6643" title="bioceramic" label="bioceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q911969" start="6667" end="6685" title="fracture toughness" label="fracture toughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046572" start="6783" end="6796" title="intergranular fracture" label="intergranular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834242" start="6800" end="6813" title="transgranular fracture" label="transgranular"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="6902" end="6918" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q306259" start="6943" end="6954" title="Abbe number" label="Abbe number"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="6994" end="7007" title="Eastman Kodak" label="Eastman Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q471729" start="7256" end="7271" title="deacidification" label="deacidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q258659" start="7525" end="7547" title="Spintronics" label="spin-tunneling devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q847609" start="7629" end="7649" title="magnetron sputtering" label="magnetron sputtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q962347" start="7760" end="7777" title="spin polarization" label="spin polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884383" start="7868" end="7892" title="tunnel magnetoresistance" label="tunnel magnetoresistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777991" start="8110" end="8127" title="multi-anvil press" label="multi-anvil press"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860119" start="8169" end="8182" title="brake linings" label="brake linings"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="8441" end="8451" title="Automotive industry" label="automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271916" start="8515" end="8542" title="thin film transistors" label="thin film transistors(TFTs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q806352" start="8680" end="8687" title="bandgap" label="bandgap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501076" start="8729" end="8746" title="electron mobility" label="electron mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q374535" start="9109" end="9120" title="colorimetry" label="colorimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275430" start="9140" end="9149" title="diffuser (optics)" label="diffusing"/>
<link wikidata="Q663650" start="9154" end="9166" title="reflectivity" label="reflectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767471" start="9246" end="9264" title="integrating sphere" label="integrating sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q781080" start="9274" end="9284" title="gas mantle" label="gas mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007630" start="9319" end="9333" title="Clamond basket" label="Clamond basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520741" start="9435" end="9451" title="metal fume fever" label="metal fume fever"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162270" wikidata="Q60116" url="?curid=162270" title="Conrad Gessner">
<text>Conrad Gessner (; ; 26 March 1516 – 13 December 1565) was a Swiss physician, naturalist, bibliographer, and philologist. Born into a poor family in Zürich, Switzerland, his father and teachers quickly realised his talents and supported him through university, where he studied classical languages, theology and medicine. He became Zürich&#x27;s city physician, but was able to spend much of his time on collecting, research and writing. Gessner compiled monumental works on bibliography (&quot;Bibliotheca universalis&quot; 1545–1549) and zoology ( 1551–1558) and was working on a major botanical text at the time of his death from plague at the age of 49. He is regarded as the father of modern scientific bibliography, zoology and botany. He was frequently the first to describe species of plants or animals in Europe, such as the tulip in 1559. A number of plants and animals have been named after him.

==Life ==
Conrad Gessner was born on 26 March 1516, in Zürich, Switzerland, the son of Ursus Gessner, a poor Zürich furrier. His early life was one of poverty and hardship, but Gessner&#x27;s father realized his talents, and sent him to live with and be schooled by a great uncle, who grew and collected medicinal herbs for a living. Here the boy became familiar with many plants and their medicinal purposes which led to a lifelong interest in natural history.

Gessner first attended the &quot;Carolinum&quot; in Zürich, then later entered the Fraumünster seminary. There he studied classical languages, appearing as Penia (Poverty) in Aristophanes&#x27; &quot;Plutus&quot;, at the age of 15. In school, he impressed his teachers so much that a few of them helped sponsor him so that he could further his education, including arranging a scholarship for him to attend university in France to study theology (1532–1533) at the age of 17. There he attended the University of Bourges and University of Paris. Religious persecution forced him to leave Paris for Strasbourg, but being unable to secure employment, he returned to Zürich. One of his teachers in Zürich acted as a foster father to him after the death of his father at the Battle of Kappel (1531), another provided him with three years of board and lodging, while yet another arranged his further education at the upper school in Strasbourg, the Strasbourg Academy. There he broadened his knowledge of ancient languages by studying Hebrew. In 1535, religious unrest drove him back to Zürich, where he made what some considered an imprudent marriage at the age of 19, of a woman from another poor family who had no dowry. Although some of his friends again came to his aid, he was appointed to obtaining a teaching position for him, this was in the lowest class and attracted a stipend barely more than a pittance. However, he then obtained a paid leave of absence to study medicine at the University of Basel (1536).

Throughout his life Gessner was interested in natural history, and collected specimens and descriptions of wildlife through travel and extensive correspondence with other friends and scholars. 
In 1543 Arnoldus Arlenius invited Gessner to Venice. Gessner travelled to Italy that same summer. He encountered Venetian printing and a hidden world of Greek manuscripts. 

Gessner&#x27;s approach to research consisted of four main components: observation, dissection, travel to distant lands, and accurate description. This rising observational approach was new to Renaissance scholars because people usually relied completely upon Classical writers for their research. He died of the plague, the year after his ennoblement on 13 December 1565.
==Work==

Conrad Gessner was a Renaissance polymath, a physician, philosopher, encyclopaedist, bibliographer, philologist, natural historian and illustrator. In 1537, at the age of 21, his publication of a Graecolatin dictionary led to his sponsors obtained for him the professorship of Greek at the newly founded academy of Lausanne (then belonging to Bern). Here he had leisure to devote himself to scientific studies, especially botany, and earn money to further his medical studies.

After three years of teaching at Lausanne, Gessner was able to travel to the medical school at the University of Montpellier, where he received his doctoral degree (1541) from Basel. He then returned to Zürich to practice medicine, which he continued to do for the rest of his life. There he was also appointed to the post of lecturer of Aristotelean physics at the &quot;Carolinum&quot;, the precursor of the University of Zürich.

After 1554 he became the city physician (). In addition to his duties there, and apart from a few journeys to foreign countries, and annual summer botanical journeys in his native land, and illnesses, he was able to devote himself to research and writing. His expeditions frequently involved visits to mountainous country, below the snow-line. Although primarily for purposes of botanical collection, he also extolled mountain climbing for the sake of exercise and enjoyment of the beauties of nature. In 1541 he prefixed to his treatise on milk and milk products, &quot;Libellus de lacte et operibus lactariis&quot; a letter addressed to his friend Jacob Avienus (Vogel) of Glarus on the wonders to be found among the mountains, declaring his love for them, and his firm resolve to climb at least one mountain every year, not only to collect flowers, but in order to exercise his body. In 1555 he issued his narrative &quot;Descriptio Montis Fracti sive Montis Pilati&quot; of his excursion to the Gnepfstein (1920 m), the lowest point in the Pilatus chain.

Gessner is credited with a number of the first descriptions of species in Europe, both animals such as the brown rat (&quot;Rattus norvegicus&quot;), guinea pig (&quot;Cavia porcellus&quot;) and turkey (&quot;Meleagris&quot;), as well as plants such as the tulip (&quot;Tulipa gesneriana&quot;). He first saw a tulip in April 1559, growing in the garden of the magistrate Johann Heinrich Herwart at Augsberg, and called it &quot;Tulipa turcarum&quot;, the Turkish tulip. He is also credited with being the first person to describe brown adipose tissue, in 1551, in 1565 the first to document the pencil, and in 1563 among the first Europeans to write about the effects of tobacco.

=== Publications ===

Gessner&#x27;s first work was a Latin-Greek Dictionary, the &quot;Lexicon Graeco-Latinum&quot; (1537), compiled during his studies in Basel. This was a revision of an original work by the Italian cleric, Varinus Phavorinus or Guarino of Favera (d. 1537), &quot;Magnum ac perutile dictionarium&quot; (1523). Over his lifetime he was able to produce some 70 publications on many different subjects.

His next major work was his unique &quot;Bibliotheca&quot; (1545), a landmark in the history of bibliography, in which he set out to catalogue all the writers who had ever lived and their works. In addition to his monumental work on animal life, the (1551–1558), he amassed a very large collection of notes and wood engravings of plants, but only published two botanical works in his lifetime, &quot;Historia plantarum et vires&quot; (1541) and the &quot;Catalogus plantarum&quot; (1542) in four languages. It was in the last decade of his life that he began to compile his major botanical work, &quot;Historia plantarum&quot;. Although he died prior to its completion, his work was utilised by many other authors over the next two centuries, but was finally published in 1754.

Not content with scientific works, Gessner was also active as a linguist and bibliographer, putting forth in 1555 his book entitled &quot;Mithridates. De differentiis linguarum [...]&quot;, an account of about 130 known languages, with the &quot;Lord&#x27;s Prayer&quot; in twenty-two languages. He also produced edited works of a number of classical authors (&quot;see Edited works&quot;), including Claudius Aelianus (1556) and Marcus Aurelius (1559).

A number of other works appeared after his death (posthumously), some long after (&quot;see Posthumous works&quot;). His work on insects was edited by various authors, including Thomas Penny, until Thomas Muffet brought it to publication as &quot;Insectorum sive minimorum animalium theatrum&quot; (1634), finally appearing in English translation as &quot;The Theatre of Insects&quot; in Edward Topsell&#x27;s &quot;History of Four-Footed Beasts and Serpents&quot; (1658).

==== &quot;Bibliotheca universalis&quot; (1545–1549)====

In 1545, after four years of research, Gessner published his remarkable &quot;Bibliotheca universalis&quot;, an exhaustive catalogue of all known works in Latin, Greek and Hebrew, of all writers who had ever lived, with the titles of their works, and brief annotations. The work, which included his own bio-bibliography, listed some three thousand authors alphabetically, and was the first modern bibliography published since the invention of printing. Through it, Gessner became known as the &quot;father of bibliography.&quot; In all, about twelve thousand titles were included.

A second part, a thematic index to the work, &quot;Pandectarum sive partitionum universalium libri xxi&quot;, appeared in 1548. Although the title indicated that twenty one parts were intended, only nineteen books were included. Part 20, intended to include his medical work, was never finished and part 21, a theological encyclopaedia, was published separately in 1549.

==== &quot;Historia animalium&quot; (1551–1558) ====
Gessner&#x27;s great zoological work, , is a 4,500-page encyclopedia of animals that appeared in Zürich in 4 volumes between 1551 and 1558: quadrupeds, amphibians, birds, and fishes. A fifth folio on snakes was issued in 1587. A German translation of the first 4 volumes titled &quot;Thierbůch&quot; was published in Zürich in 1563. This book was considered to be the first modern zoological work. It built a bridge between ancient, medieval and modern science.

In Gessner combines data from old sources, such as the Old Testament, Aristotle, Pliny, folklore, and medieval bestiaries, adding his own observations. He created a new, comprehensive description of the Animal Kingdom. This was the first attempt by anyone to describe many animals accurately. The book unlike many works of its time was illustrated with hand-colored woodcuts drawn from personal observations by Gessner and his colleagues.

Even though he sought to distinguish observed facts from myths and popular errors and was known for his accurate depiction of many animals in , he also included many fictional animals such as the Unicorn and the Basilisk, which he had only heard about from medieval bestiaries. But when Gessner doubted the accuracy of the opinions he relayed in his own writings, or the validity of the illustrations he included, he clearly said so. Besides any plant or animal&#x27;s potential advantage to people, Gessner was interested in learning about them because of the moral lessons they could teach and the divine truths they might tell. He went into as much detail about some unreal animals as he did about real ones. Later in 1556 he also combined real and fictional creatures in his edition of the works of Claudius Aelianus.

 includes sketches for many well-known animals, and some fictional ones, including unicorns and mermaids. He accomplished many of his works in a large part due to the web of acquaintances he established with leading naturalists throughout Europe, who included John Caius, English court physician to the Tudors and second founder of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. Not only did they send him their ideas, but also sent him plants, animals and gems. He returned the favor – and kept helpful specimens coming – by naming plants after correspondents and friends.

==== &quot;Historia plantarum&quot; (unfinished) ====

Over his lifetime, Gessner amassed a considerable collection of plants and seeds and made extensive notes and wood engravings. In the last decade of his life he began to compile his major botanical work, &quot;Historia plantarum&quot;. although he died prior to its publication his materials were utilised by many subsequent authors for the next two hundred years. These included some 1,500 engravings of plants and their important flowers and seeds, most of which were original. The scale and scientific rigour of these were unusual for the time, and Gessner was a skilled artist, producing detailed drawings of specific plant parts that illustrated their characteristics, with extensive marginal notation discussing their growth form and habitation. Finally, the work was published in 1754.

==== Censorship ====
There was extreme religious tension at the time that came out. Under Pope Paul IV the Pauline Index felt that the religious convictions of an author contaminated all his writings. Since Gessner was a Protestant his works were included in this index of prohibited books. Even though religious tensions were high, Gessner maintained friendships on both sides of the Catholic-Protestant divide. In fact, Catholic booksellers in Venice protested the Inquisition&#x27;s blanket ban on Gessner&#x27;s books, and some of his work was eventually allowed after it had been &quot;cleaned&quot; of its doctrinal errors.

====List of selected publications====
: &quot;see , &quot;
* 
* 
* , &quot;see also&quot; &quot;Bibliotheca universalis&quot;
* , see also &quot;Bibliotheca universalis&quot;
** 
** 1551 &quot;Quadrupedes vivipares&quot;
** 1554 &quot;Quadrupedes ovipares&quot;
** 1555 &quot;Avium natura&quot;
** 1558 &quot;Piscium &amp; aquatilium animantium natura&quot;
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Schatz Euonymi&quot;, 1582/1583
** &quot;Der erste Theil, deß köstlichen unnd theuren Schatzes Euonymi Philiatri [...] Erstlich in Latein beschrieben durch Euonymum Philiatrum, und neuwlich verteutscht durch Joannem Rudolphum Landenberger zu Zürych&quot;, 1582 Band 1
** &quot;Ander Theil des Schatzs Euonymi [...] Erstlich zusammen getragen, durch Herren Doctor Cunrat Geßner, Demnach von Caspar Wolffen der Artzneyen Doctor in Zürich in Latin beschriben und in Truck gefertiget, jetzund aber newlich von Johan. Jacobo Nüscheler Doctorn, in Teütsche Sprach vertolmetschet.&quot;, 1583 Band 2 Band 2
* 
* 
* 
* 
;


== Legacy ==

Gessner has been described as the father of modern scientific botany and zoology, and the father of modern bibliography. To his contemporaries he was best known as a botanist. Despite his traveling ways and the job of maintaining his own gardens, Gesner probably spent most of his time inside his own extensive library. He listed among his History of Animals sources more than 80 Greek authors and at least 175 Latin authors, as well as works by German, French, and Italian authors. He even attempted to establish a &quot;universal library&quot; of all books in existence. The project might sound strange to the modern mind, but Gessner invested tremendous energy in the project. He sniffed through remote libraries along with the collections of the Vatican Library and catalogs of printers and booksellers. By assembling this universal library of information, Gessner put together a database centuries before computers would ease such work. He cut relevant passages out of books, grouped the cuttings by general theme, subdivided the groups into more specific categories, and boxed them. He could then retrieve and arrange the cuttings as needed. In the words of science writer Anna Pavord, &quot;He was a one-man search engine, a 16th-century Google with the added bonus of critical evaluation.&quot;

To his contemporaries, Gessner was known as &quot;the Swiss Pliny.&quot; According to legend, when he knew his time was near, he asked to be taken to his library where he had spent so much of his life, to die among his favorite books. At the time of his death, Gesner had published 72 books, and written 18 more unpublished manuscripts. His work on plants was not published until centuries after his death.

In 1576 George Baker published a translation of the &quot;Evonymus&quot; of Conrad Gessner under the title of &quot;The Newe Jewell of Health, wherein is contained the most excellent Secretes of Physicke and Philosophie divided into fower bookes&quot;. Amongst his students was Felix Plater, who became a professor of medicine, and accumulated many plant specimens, but also illustrations of animals used in &quot;Historiae animalium&quot;. A year after his death, his friend Josias Simler published a biography of Gessner. Gessner and others founded the &quot;Physikalische Gesellschaft&quot; in Zurich, which later became the &quot;Naturforschende Gesellschaft in Zürich&quot; (NGZH) in 1746, to promote the study of natural sciences. Today it is one of the oldest Swiss scientific societies. The society&#x27;s annual publication, the &quot;Neujahrsblatt der Naturforschenden Gesellschaft in Zürich&quot; was devoted to a biography of Gessner in 1966, to celebrate the 400th anniversary of his death.

=== Eponomy ===

In 1753 Carl Linnaeus named &quot;Tulipa gesneriana&quot;, the type species of the &quot;Tulipa&quot; genus, in his honour. 
The flowering plant genus &quot;Gesneria&quot; and its family Gesneriaceae are named after him. A genus of moths is also named &quot;Gesneria&quot; after him.

=== Memorials ===

* The &quot;Gessner&quot; herbal garden at the Old Botanical Garden, Zürich, is named after him, and there is a bust in the garden in his memory (&quot;see image&quot;) 
* The cloister in the Carolinum, Zürich in the &quot;Grossmünster&quot; church, where Gessner is buried, also houses a herbal garden dedicated to him.
* Gessner was featured on the 50 Swiss francs banknotes issued between 1978 and 1994.
* On 16 March 2016 the State Museum in Zürich, in close collaboration with Zurich’s Central Library (Zentralbibliothek Zürich), dedicated a special exhibition to Gessner in celebration of the 500th anniversary of his birth.

== See also ==

* Bibliotheca universalis
* Historia Animalium
* Historia Plantarum
* History of botany

== Notes ==

;Bibliographic notes
==References==
== Further reading ==

=== Books and theses ===
* 
* 
* see also Authors of Plant Names
* 
* 
* &quot;see also Grzimek&#x27;s Animal Life Encyclopedia&quot;
* 
* 
* 
* see also Species Plantarum
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Chapters ===
* , in 
* , in 
* , in 
* , in 
* , in 

=== Articles ===
*Blair, Ann. “The 2016 Josephine Waters Bennett Lecture: Humanism and Printing in the Work of Conrad Gessner.” &quot;Renaissance Quarterly&quot; 70, no. 1 (2017): 1–43.
* 
* 

=== Websites ===

* &quot;listing of works held&quot;
* 
* 

;Biography
* 

; Zoology
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* 
* &quot;The Natural History of Horses, with Memoir of Gesner&quot; by Charles Hamilton Smith
* Images from Icones Animalium... 1560.
* Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by and/or portraits of Conrad Gessner in .jpg and .tiff format.
* In 2012, Amsterdam University Library digitised the so-called Gessner albums (press release). Some of Gessner&#x27;s drawings have been made available on Flickr: fish and other creatures of the sea, mammals.
* Gesner, Conrad (1565) &quot;De omni rerum fossilium genere, gemmis, lapidibus, metallis, et huiusmod&quot; – digital facsimile from the Linda Hall Library
* Conrad Gessner at enotes
* McCarthy, Eugene M. &quot;Conrad Gesner.&quot;, Macroevolution 2013</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q60116" start="0" end="14" title="Conrad Gessner" label="Conrad Gessner"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="60" end="65" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="77" end="87" title="natural history" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q134995" start="89" end="102" title="bibliographer" label="bibliographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="108" end="119" title="philologist" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327935" start="345" end="359" title="city physician" label="city physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q445" start="494" end="517" title="Bibliotheca universalis" label="Bibliotheca universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="632" end="638" title="plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q197195" start="1023" end="1030" title="furrier" label="furrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16061290" start="1397" end="1428" title="Carolinum, Zürich" label="&amp;quot;Carolinum&amp;quot; in Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q690944" start="1453" end="1464" title="Fraumünster" label="Fraumünster"/>
<link wikidata="Q949174" start="1492" end="1511" title="classical languages" label="classical languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899052" start="1526" end="1531" title="Penia" label="Penia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="1545" end="1557" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196456" start="1570" end="1576" title="Plutus (play)" label="Plutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495994" start="1868" end="1889" title="University of Bourges" label="University of Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="1894" end="1913" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="1967" end="1977" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q233594" start="2140" end="2156" title="Battle of Kappel" label="Battle of Kappel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="2581" end="2586" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q372608" start="2856" end="2875" title="University of Basel" label="University of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664265" start="3087" end="3104" title="Arnoldus Arlenius" label="Arnoldus Arlenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="3566" end="3572" title="Bubonic plague" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975665" start="3593" end="3604" title="ennoblement" label="ennoblement"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="3669" end="3677" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="3705" end="3719" title="encyclopaedist" label="encyclopaedist"/>
<link wikidata="Q134995" start="3721" end="3734" title="bibliographer" label="bibliographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="3736" end="3747" title="philologist" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="3749" end="3766" title="natural historian" label="natural historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q658975" start="3922" end="3947" title="University of Lausanne" label="the newly founded academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="3951" end="3959" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="3979" end="3983" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q776223" start="4213" end="4238" title="University of Montpellier" label="University of Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16061290" start="4480" end="4501" title="Carolinum, Zürich" label="&amp;quot;Carolinum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q206702" start="4524" end="4544" title="University of Zürich" label="University of Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327935" start="4572" end="4586" title="city physician" label="city physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q740358" start="4880" end="4889" title="snow-line" label="snow-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q63912" start="5222" end="5228" title="Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43160" start="5546" end="5556" title="Gnepfstein" label="Gnepfstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265" start="5591" end="5604" title="Mount Pilatus" label="Pilatus chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q184224" start="5714" end="5723" title="brown rat" label="brown rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79803" start="5757" end="5767" title="guinea pig" label="guinea pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q43794" start="5802" end="5808" title="turkey (bird)" label="turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q163060" start="5877" end="5894" title="Tulipa gesneriana" label="Tulipa gesneriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="6006" end="6014" title="Augsberg" label="Augsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q901269" start="6138" end="6158" title="brown adipose tissue" label="brown adipose tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q445" start="6750" end="6761" title="Bibliotheca universalis" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259197" start="7020" end="7035" title="wood engravings" label="wood engravings"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156442" start="7311" end="7329" title="Historia Plantarum (Gessner)" label="Historia plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="7552" end="7560" title="linguist" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="7734" end="7752" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7858" end="7870" title="#Edited works" label="Edited works"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="7889" end="7906" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Claudius Aelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="7918" end="7933" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645791" start="7993" end="8005" title="posthumous book" label="posthumously"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8035" end="8051" title="#Posthumous works" label="Posthumous works"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525471" start="8121" end="8133" title="Thomas Penny" label="Thomas Penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q668763" start="8141" end="8154" title="Thomas Muffet" label="Thomas Muffet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048705" start="8331" end="8345" title="Edward Topsell" label="Edward Topsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q445" start="8553" end="8576" title="Bibliotheca universalis" label="Bibliotheca universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="9503" end="9513" title="zoology" label="zoological"/>
<link wikidata="Q21907045" start="9622" end="9631" title="quadruped" label="quadruped"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="11188" end="11205" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Claudius Aelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227536" start="11468" end="11478" title="John Caius" label="John Caius"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="11511" end="11517" title="Tudors" label="Tudors"/>
<link wikidata="Q863940" start="11540" end="11577" title="Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge" label="Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259197" start="11940" end="11955" title="wood engravings" label="wood engravings"/>
<link wikidata="Q101430" start="12714" end="12726" title="Pope Paul IV" label="Pope Paul IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q22765" start="12731" end="12744" title="Pauline Index" label="Pauline Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q445" start="13351" end="13374" title="Bibliotheca universalis" label="Bibliotheca universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q445" start="13400" end="13423" title="Bibliotheca universalis" label="Bibliotheca universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536632" start="15980" end="15992" title="George Baker (surgeon)" label="George Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q667732" start="16250" end="16262" title="Felix Plater" label="Felix Plater"/>
<link wikidata="Q116008" start="16448" end="16461" title="Josias Simler" label="Josias Simler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970287" start="16606" end="16644" title="Naturforschende Gesellschaft in Zürich" label="Naturforschende Gesellschaft in Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="17002" end="17015" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163060" start="17028" end="17045" title="Tulipa gesneriana" label="Tulipa gesneriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="17057" end="17069" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q93201" start="17083" end="17089" title="Tulipa" label="Tulipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="17096" end="17101" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="17123" end="17138" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981007" start="17151" end="17159" title="Gesneria" label="Gesneria"/>
<link wikidata="Q156686" start="17181" end="17193" title="Gesneriaceae" label="Gesneriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553624" start="17252" end="17260" title="Gesneria (moth)" label="Gesneria"/>
<link wikidata="Q624114" start="17324" end="17337" title="herbal garden" label="herbal garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q437802" start="17345" end="17373" title="Old Botanical Garden, Zürich" label="Old Botanical Garden, Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="17474" end="17482" title="cloister" label="cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q16061290" start="17490" end="17507" title="Carolinum, Zürich" label="Carolinum, Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q684948" start="17521" end="17533" title="Grossmünster" label="Grossmünster"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="17652" end="17664" title="Swiss francs" label="Swiss francs"/>
<link wikidata="Q190260" start="17806" end="17830" title="Zentralbibliothek Zürich" label="Zentralbibliothek Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q445" start="17948" end="17971" title="Bibliotheca universalis" label="Bibliotheca universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849598" start="17974" end="17992" title="Historia animalium (Gessner book)" label="Historia Animalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156442" start="17995" end="18013" title="Historia Plantarum (Gessner)" label="Historia Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495041" start="18016" end="18033" title="History of botany" label="History of botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835905" start="18149" end="18171" title="Authors of Plant Names" label="Authors of Plant Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q501737" start="18195" end="18234" title="Grzimek&amp;#x27;s Animal Life Encyclopedia" label="Grzimek&amp;#x27;s Animal Life Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q849308" start="18261" end="18278" title="Species Plantarum" label="Species Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q966125" start="18734" end="18756" title="Charles Hamilton Smith" label="Charles Hamilton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q214341" start="18989" end="19009" title="University of Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551622" start="19326" end="19344" title="Linda Hall Library" label="Linda Hall Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162272" wikidata="Q2272835" url="?curid=162272" title="Tikhvin Cemetery">
<text>Tikhvin Cemetery () is a historic cemetery in the centre of Saint Petersburg. It is part of the Alexander Nevsky Lavra, and is one of four cemeteries in the complex. Since 1932 it has been part of the , which refers to it as the Necropolis of the Masters of Art ().

Opened in 1823 after the monastery&#x27;s first cemetery, the Lazarevskoe, had become overcrowded, the cemetery was initially called the &quot;New Lazarevsky&quot;. It acquired its name after the building of its cemetery church, consecrated to the icon of the Tikhvin Mother of God. It soon superseded the Lazarevskoe Cemetery and became a popular and prestigious burial ground. The first literary figure, Nikolay Karamzin, was buried in the cemetery in 1826, followed in 1833 by Nikolay Gnedich, an associate of Alexander Pushkin&#x27;s. Several other friends of Pushkin were later buried in the cemetery. Particularly significant interments were those of Mikhail Glinka in 1857, Fyodor Dostoevsky in 1881, Modest Mussorgsky and Alexander Borodin in the 1880s, and Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky in 1893.

During the Soviet period the cemetery was earmarked for development into a museum necropolis, envisaged primarily as a landscaped park, with strategically placed memorials to important figures of Russian history. With several notable artists having already been buried in the cemetery, it was decided to designate it as the &quot;Necropolis of the Masters of Art&quot;. During the 1930s many important Russian composers, painters, sculptors, writers and poets were exhumed from their original resting places across the city, and brought, with or without their monuments, to be reburied in the Tikhvin cemetery. At the same time the monuments of those figures deemed not in keeping with the artistic theme of the cemetery were removed or destroyed. Several more burials of particularly important artists took place during the Soviet period, as the cemetery established a role as a kind of national .

==Establishment==

The cemetery is located close to Alexander Nevsky Square, to the right of the pathway leading from the Gate Church to the . This land had previously been occupied with ornamental and vegetable gardens. The first cemetery in the monastery, the Lazarevskoe Cemetery, had been established in 1717, and by the early nineteenth century was becoming overcrowded. In March 1823 the monastery authorities proposed the creation of a new burial ground opposite the St. Petersburg Theological Consistory. The new cemetery, initially called the &quot;New Lazarevsky&quot; (), was established in the eastern part of the plot of land, between the pathway to the monastery, and the consistory building, enclosed with a wooden fence. Over time it expanded to the west, into the areas formerly occupied by monastic gardens, and in the 1870s it was enclosed with a stone wall.

==Cemetery church==
The brothers D. M. and N. M. Polezhaev, wealthy merchants, funded the construction of a cemetery church, laid down on 26 September 1869 and built to the design of architect N. P. Grebyonki. The church was consecrated on 2 February 1873 in the name of the icon of the Tikhvin Mother of God, which from about 1876 became the common name of the cemetery. Two icons, one of Saint Dimitry of Rostov, and one of Saint Mary of Egypt, were painted by Pavel Pleshanov for the church. In 1825 the church and cemetery were visited by Emperor Alexander I, prior to his journey to Taganrog.

The burial vault of Polezhaev family was in the crypt of the church, and in 1901 the church underwent renovations. In 1918 archpriest Peter Skipetrov of the Gate Church, who had been shot and killed during an early attempt by the Bolsheviks to requisition the monastery on 19 January 1918, was buried under the church&#x27;s altar. The church was closed in 1931 and between 1935 and 1937 it was converted into a post office, with the destruction of its facades and interiors. With the establishment of the State Museum of Urban Sculpture, the building housed its scientific department, and now houses an exhibition hall as part of the museum.

==Burials==

The rate of burials in the Old and New Lazarevskoe cemeteries was about equal during the early years of the latter&#x27;s existence, though by the 1830s the New Lazarevskoe Cemetery became more popular. Burials initially took place in the eastern part of the cemetery, and in 1825 the holy fool monk Patermufy was buried there. In 1826 the writer Nikolay Karamzin was buried in the cemetery, followed in 1833 by Nikolay Gnedich, a contemporary of Pushkin&#x27;s. Gnedich&#x27;s funeral on 6 February 1833 was attended by many prominent literary figures, including Pushkin, Ivan Krylov, Pyotr Vyazemsky, Pyotr Pletnyov, Fyodor Tolstoy and Alexey Olenin. With the exception of Pushkin, all would eventually be buried in the Lavra&#x27;s cemeteries; Krylov, Vyazemsky, Pletnyov and Olenin in the Tikhvin, and Tolstoy in the Lazarevskoe. In 1844 another contemporary poet of Pushkin&#x27;s, Yevgeny Baratynsky, was buried in the cemetery.

The cemetery became a popular and prestigious burial ground for those of many areas of society. The wealthy merchant A.I. Kosikovsky was buried under a monumental sarcophagus on a high pedestal surmounted by a canopy on eight fluted columns. Opposite it stood a similarly grand monument to the statesman Pavel Demidov, which has since been lost. In 1857 the remains of the composer Mikhail Glinka were returned from Berlin and buried in the cemetery, with a grand monument erected two years later to the design of architect I. I. Gornostayev, with sculptures by Nikolay Laveretsky. On 1 February 1881 the author Fyodor Dostoevsky was buried in the cemetery, with a similarly large monument. During the 1880s composers Modest Mussorgsky and Alexander Borodin were buried in the northern part of the grounds, with Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky following in 1893. Eventually all the members of the group of composers termed &quot;The Five&quot;, or the &quot;Mighty Handful&quot;; Mussorgsky, Borodin, as well as Mily Balakirev, César Cui and Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, were buried in the cemetery.

By the beginning of the 20th century the Tikhvin cemetery contained 1,325 monuments of various designs and sizes, including monumental crosses on pedestals, sarcophagi and steles. There were several family plots with chapels and large crypts of granite and marble.

==Soviet necropolis==
During the early Soviet period a number of monuments were stolen or destroyed. The cemetery was officially closed for burials in 1927, though they continued until 1932, and it was decided to turn it into a necropolis museum, displaying historically and artistically significant graves. Alongside this was concept of gathering together the graves of the friends and contemporaries of Alexander Pushkin for the 1937 centenary commemorations of the poet&#x27;s death. The architectural and planning department of Lensovet, the city administration, was tasked with creating a memorial park project. Plans were drawn up by architects E.N. Sandler and E.K. Reimers, with further input from the city&#x27;s chief architect L.A. Ilyin. The Funeral Affair Trust was established to run the necropolis museum, including removing abandoned gravestones for sale as building materials.

The Funeral Affair Trust was authorised to acquire and transfer important graves and monuments from other cemeteries and churches across the city. Meanwhile, those existing graves in the cemetery that were not considered particularly artistic or historic were to be demolished to create space for those brought from other locations. A list of graves in the cemetery was compiled and work began in 1935, planned for completion on 15 August the following year. A 3 July 1935 resolution from the Presidium of Lensovet set out the vision for the future of the necropolis museums. the Tikhvin cemetery and the Literary Walk [in the Volkovo Cemetery] ... after the reconstruction will be turned into necropolis parks of a remarkable and revolutionary culture, with the appearance of parks. Freed from ordinary graves, they will not be of a graveyard nature at all, but will actually represent extensive, architecturally decorated green spaces, sometimes decorated with certain monuments standing on the graves above these wonderful people. The short timeframe allowed for completion of the work led to the hasty and unsystematic demolition of a number of monuments, with the bulk of the work only being completed by August 1937, with remedial work continuing for many years afterwards.

The reconstruction radically altered the nature and appearance of the Tikhvin cemetery. With the intention being to create an &quot;artists&#x27; necropolis&quot;, graves of those from other sections of society were removed. Fewer than a hundred of the original monuments were preserved. Some were transferred to the neighbouring &quot;Necropolis of the XVIII century&quot;, the former Lazarevskoe Cemetery, while others, including those of Aleksandr Gradovsky, Anatoly Koni and Viktor Pashutin, were transferred to the other museum necropolis being established in the Volkov Cemetery. Meanwhile, the remains of prominent artists, sculptors, composers and musicians were reburied in the cemetery. Among them were personal friends of Pushkin, including Konstantin Danzas, Anton Delvig, and Fyodor Matyushkin. Some remains came from cemeteries earmarked for demolition, such as the , , and ; and others from those that were intended to be kept open, such as the Smolensky, Volkovo, Novodevichy, and Nikolskoe cemeteries. The necropolis was created during an ongoing anti-religious campaign, therefore monuments with religious symbols were often replaced by monuments made by the museum.

The cemetery reconstruction project concentrated the representatives of each type of art together, with even monuments that had been in the Tikhvin originally being moved to fit the new organisational scheme. Composers and musicians were reburied mainly on the &quot;Composer&#x27;s path&quot;, near the northern boundary of the cemetery. Painters and sculptors were placed in the western part, while those who in their lifetimes had been associated with Pushkin were placed close to the eastern section, near the cemetery entrance. Some of the older monuments from the removed graves were retained to serve as decorative ornaments, such as columns placed at the intersection of avenues. The decoration of the park-necropolis was to be enhanced by the construction of one large and four small fountains, and the installation of granite benches. The Tikhvin Church was slated for demolition to improve the access direct from Alexander Nevsky Square. The organisers were faced with the problem that despite designating the cemetery to be the artists&#x27; necropolis, historically the Tikhvin had primarily been the burial ground of statesmen, military leaders, scientists, and composers. There were relatively few graves of writers, who had tended to prefer the Smolensky Cemetery; or artists, who had traditionally chosen the Nikolskoe or Novodevichy Cemetery. This necessitated the transfer of a large number of burials and monuments, which took place in two main periods, from 1936 to 1941 and from 1948 to 1952.

During the Second World War and the siege of Leningrad, the museum worked to provide protection and shelter for monuments. Only a single gravestone was damaged, that of the actress Varvara Asenkova. The monument, designed by , consisted of a granite canopy over a pedestal with a verse epitaph and bronze bust of the actress by Ivan Vitali and had been transferred along with the actress&#x27;s remains from the Smolensky Cemetery in 1936. It was destroyed by a direct hit from a bomb in 1943. In 1955 the museum installed a marble replica of the bust made by D.A. Sprishinym. Other monuments were stored in the Lavra&#x27;s Annunciation Church.

Restoration work began immediately after the end of the war, with the necropolis-museum opening in August 1947. The programme of moving and installing monuments resumed after the war and continued until the mid-1950s. There were also several burials of prominent Soviet citizens, as the cemetery gained the status of an urban . Those buried here included the scientist Sergey Lebedev in 1934, artist Mikhail Avilov in 1954, and actor Nikolay Cherkasov in 1966. In 1972 the remains of the composer Alexander Glazunov were transferred from Paris. In 1968 Fyodor Dostoevsky&#x27;s wife Anna Dostoevskaya was reburied next to her husband, while theatre director Georgy Tovstonogov was interred in the cemetery in 1989. So far Tovstonogov&#x27;s has been the last burial to take place in the cemetery.

==See also==
* List of burial places of classical musicians

==References==
==External links==
* Guide to the Tikhvinskoye Cemetery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2272835" start="0" end="16" title="Tikhvin Cemetery" label="Tikhvin Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="60" end="76" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q946428" start="96" end="118" title="Alexander Nevsky Lavra" label="Alexander Nevsky Lavra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272835" start="229" end="261" title="Tikhvin Cemetery" label="Necropolis of the Masters of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972463" start="329" end="340" title="Lazarevskoe Cemetery" label="Lazarevskoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="515" end="519" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q649059" start="527" end="548" title="Theotokos of Tikhvin" label="Tikhvin Mother of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q191598" start="673" end="689" title="Nikolay Karamzin" label="Nikolay Karamzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q665996" start="747" end="762" title="Nikolay Gnedich" label="Nikolay Gnedich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="780" end="797" title="Alexander Pushkin" label="Alexander Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181885" start="924" end="938" title="Mikhail Glinka" label="Mikhail Glinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="948" end="965" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="975" end="992" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q164004" start="997" end="1014" title="Alexander Borodin" label="Alexander Borodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="1033" end="1057" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q462252" start="1079" end="1092" title="History of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4365490" start="2020" end="2043" title="Alexander Nevsky Square" label="Alexander Nevsky Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972463" start="2230" end="2250" title="Lazarevskoe Cemetery" label="Lazarevskoe Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="3122" end="3126" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q649059" start="3134" end="3155" title="Theotokos of Tikhvin" label="Tikhvin Mother of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q980251" start="3237" end="3260" title="Dimitry of Rostov" label="Saint Dimitry of Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q237583" start="3273" end="3292" title="Mary of Egypt" label="Saint Mary of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364973" start="3310" end="3325" title="Pavel Pleshanov" label="Pavel Pleshanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="3390" end="3409" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Emperor Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170513" start="3435" end="3443" title="Taganrog" label="Taganrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q64054068" start="3603" end="3614" title="Gate Church" label="Gate Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="3676" end="3686" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q35054" start="3858" end="3869" title="post office" label="post office"/>
<link wikidata="Q255779" start="4388" end="4397" title="holy fool" label="holy fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q191598" start="4450" end="4466" title="Nikolay Karamzin" label="Nikolay Karamzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q665996" start="4515" end="4530" title="Nikolay Gnedich" label="Nikolay Gnedich"/>
<link wikidata="Q191480" start="4676" end="4687" title="Ivan Krylov" label="Ivan Krylov"/>
<link wikidata="Q19425" start="4689" end="4704" title="Pyotr Vyazemsky" label="Pyotr Vyazemsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993843" start="4706" end="4720" title="Pyotr Pletnyov" label="Pyotr Pletnyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q742253" start="4722" end="4736" title="Fyodor Petrovich Tolstoy" label="Fyodor Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4333578" start="4741" end="4754" title="Alexey Olenin" label="Alexey Olenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q364252" start="4990" end="5008" title="Yevgeny Baratynsky" label="Yevgeny Baratynsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971193" start="5343" end="5356" title="Pavel Nikolaievich Demidov" label="Pavel Demidov"/>
<link wikidata="Q181885" start="5421" end="5435" title="Mikhail Glinka" label="Mikhail Glinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251993" start="5601" end="5619" title="Nikolay Laveretsky" label="Nikolay Laveretsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="5651" end="5668" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="5757" end="5774" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q164004" start="5779" end="5796" title="Alexander Borodin" label="Alexander Borodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="5851" end="5875" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q190390" start="5961" end="5969" title="The Five (composers)" label="The Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q185040" start="6044" end="6058" title="Mily Balakirev" label="Mily Balakirev"/>
<link wikidata="Q208546" start="6060" end="6069" title="César Cui" label="César Cui"/>
<link wikidata="Q93227" start="6074" end="6097" title="Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov" label="Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="6301" end="6306" title="stele" label="stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="6800" end="6817" title="Alexander Pushkin" label="Alexander Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4258599" start="6927" end="6935" title="Lensovet" label="Lensovet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199575" start="7133" end="7143" title="Lev Ilyin" label="L.A. Ilyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848616" start="7917" end="7933" title="Volkovo Cemetery" label="Volkovo Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147421" start="9012" end="9031" title="Aleksandr Gradovsky" label="Aleksandr Gradovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4230805" start="9033" end="9045" title="Anatoly Koni" label="Anatoly Koni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347670" start="9050" end="9065" title="Viktor Pashutin" label="Viktor Pashutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848616" start="9140" end="9155" title="Volkov Cemetery" label="Volkov Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q473613" start="9323" end="9340" title="Konstantin Danzas" label="Konstantin Danzas"/>
<link wikidata="Q327015" start="9342" end="9354" title="Anton Delvig" label="Anton Delvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655843" start="9360" end="9377" title="Fyodor Matyushkin" label="Fyodor Matyushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444377" start="9531" end="9540" title="Smolensky Cemetery" label="Smolensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848616" start="9542" end="9549" title="Volkovo Cemetery" label="Volkovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495191" start="9551" end="9562" title="Novodevichy Cemetery (Saint Petersburg)" label="Novodevichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972475" start="9568" end="9588" title="Nikolskoe Cemetery" label="Nikolskoe cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394333" start="9624" end="9658" title="USSR anti-religious campaign (1928–1941)" label="an ongoing anti-religious campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444377" start="11018" end="11036" title="Smolensky Cemetery" label="Smolensky Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972475" start="11083" end="11092" title="Nikolskoe Cemetery" label="Nikolskoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495191" start="11096" end="11116" title="Novodevichy Cemetery (Saint Petersburg)" label="Novodevichy Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11284" end="11300" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="11309" end="11327" title="siege of Leningrad" label="siege of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554869" start="11454" end="11470" title="Varvara Asenkova" label="Varvara Asenkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558490" start="11601" end="11612" title="Ivan Vitali" label="Ivan Vitali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444377" start="11685" end="11703" title="Smolensky Cemetery" label="Smolensky Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17540189" start="11898" end="11917" title="Annunciation Church of the Alexander Nevsky Lavra" label="Annunciation Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q289805" start="12289" end="12303" title="Sergey Lebedev (chemist)" label="Sergey Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055907" start="12320" end="12334" title="Mikhail Avilov" label="Mikhail Avilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q713014" start="12354" end="12371" title="Nikolay Cherkasov" label="Nikolay Cherkasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q25872" start="12417" end="12435" title="Alexander Glazunov" label="Alexander Glazunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="12473" end="12490" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q872246" start="12503" end="12520" title="Anna Dostoevskaya" label="Anna Dostoevskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q862244" start="12578" end="12596" title="Georgy Tovstonogov" label="Georgy Tovstonogov"/>
<link wikidata="Q120400259" start="12733" end="12777" title="List of burial places of classical musicians" label="List of burial places of classical musicians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162275" wikidata="Q133008" url="?curid=162275" title="Chlamydomonas">
<text>Chlamydomonas ( ) is a genus of green algae consisting of about 150 species of unicellular flagellates, found in stagnant water and on damp soil, in freshwater, seawater, and even in snow as &quot;snow algae&quot;. &quot;Chlamydomonas&quot; is used as a model organism for molecular biology, especially studies of flagellar motility and chloroplast dynamics, biogenesis, and genetics. One of the many striking features of &quot;Chlamydomonas&quot; is that it contains ion channels (channelrhodopsins) that are directly activated by light. Some regulatory systems of &quot;Chlamydomonas&quot; are more complex than their homologs in Gymnosperms, with evolutionarily related regulatory proteins being larger and containing additional domains.

Molecular phylogeny studies indicated that the traditional genus &quot;Chlamydomonas&quot; as defined using morphological data, was polyphyletic within Volvocales. Many species were subsequently reclassified (e.g., &quot;Oogamochlamys, Lobochlamys&quot;), and many other &quot;Chlamydomonas&quot; s.l. lineages are still to be reclassified.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Chlamydomonas&quot; comes from the Greek roots &quot;chlamys&quot;, meaning cloak or mantle, and &quot;monas&quot;, meaning solitary, now used conventionally for unicellular flagellates.

==Description==

=== Morphology===
All &quot;Chlamydomonas&quot; are motile, unicellular organisms. Cells are generally spherical to cylindrical in shape, but may be elongately spindle-shaped, and a papilla may be present or absent. Chloroplasts are green and usually cup-shaped. A key feature of the genus is its two anterior flagella, each as long as the other. The flagellar microtubules may each be disassembled by the cell to provide spare material to rebuild the other&#x27;s microtubules if they are damaged.

* Cell wall is made up of a glycoprotein and non-cellulosic polysaccharides instead of cellulose.
* Two anteriorly inserted whiplash flagella. Each flagellum originates from a basal granule in the anterior papillate or non-papillate region of the cytoplasm. Each flagellum shows a typical 9+2 arrangement of the component fibrils.
* Contractile vacuoles are near the bases of flagella.
* Prominent cup or bowl-shaped chloroplast is present. The chloroplast contains bands composed of a variable number of the photosynthetic thylakoids which are not organised into grana-like structures.
* The nucleus is enclosed in a cup-shaped chloroplast, which has a single large pyrenoid where starch is formed from photosynthetic products. Pyrenoid with starch sheath is present in the posterior end of the chloroplast.
* Eye spot present in the anterior portion of the chloroplast. It consists of two or three, more or less parallel rows of linearly arranged fat droplets.

== Species ==
About 500 species of &quot;Chlamydomonas&quot; have been described.
*&quot;Chlamydomonas acidophila&quot;
* &quot;Chlamydomonas caudata&quot; 
* &quot;Chlamydomonas ehrenbergii&quot; 
* &quot;Chlamydomonas elegans&quot; 
* &quot;Chlamydomonas moewusii&quot;
* &quot;Chlamydomonas muriella&quot; 
* &quot;Chlamydomonas nivalis&quot;
* &quot;Chlamydomonas ovoidae&quot;
* &quot;Chlamydomonas priscuii&quot;
* &quot;Chlamydomonas smithii&quot;
* &quot;Chlamydomonas reinhardtii&quot;

== Ecology ==
&quot;Chlamydomonas&quot; is widely distributed in freshwater or damp soil. It is generally found in a habitat rich in ammonium salt. It possesses red eye spots for photosensitivity and reproduces both asexually and sexually.

&quot;Chlamydomonas&quot;&#x27;s asexual reproduction occurs by zoospores, aplanospores, hypnospores, or a palmella stage, while its sexual reproduction is through isogamy, anisogamy or oogamy.

==Nutrition==
Most species are obligate phototrophs but &quot;C. reinhardtii&quot; and &quot;C. dysostosis&quot; are facultative heterotrophs that can grow in the dark in the presence of acetate as a carbon source.

==Uses==
Some &quot;Chlamydomonas&quot; are edible.

==See also==
*Intraflagellar transport
*Chlamydomonas moewusii

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Chlamydomonas&quot; Center
* &quot;Chlamydomonas reinhardtii&quot; Transcription Factor Database 
* 3D electron microscopy structures of Chlamydomonas-related proteins at the EM Data Bank(EMDB)
* The Seaweed Site
* Ancient gene family protects algae from salt and cold in an Antarctic lake, on: EurekAlert!, 20-Aug-2020, on species UWO241 and in Lake Bonney (Antarctica)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="23" end="28" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q271844" start="32" end="43" title="green algae" label="green algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="68" end="75" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q36468" start="79" end="90" title="unicellular organism" label="unicellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q240433" start="91" end="101" title="flagellate" label="flagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q111700916" start="197" end="207" title="snow algae" label="snow algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q213907" start="254" end="268" title="model organism" label="model organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="273" end="290" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="314" end="323" title="flagellum" label="flagellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="337" end="348" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q62536" start="468" end="479" title="ion channel" label="ion channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q905325" start="482" end="499" title="channelrhodopsins" label="channelrhodopsins"/>
<link wikidata="Q211118" start="544" end="562" title="FLU (plant gene)" label="regulatory systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="620" end="627" title="Homology (biology)" label="homolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="632" end="643" title="Gymnosperms" label="Gymnosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q411391" start="673" end="683" title="Regulation of gene expression" label="regulatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q898273" start="732" end="739" title="Protein domain" label="domains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="742" end="761" title="Molecular phylogeny" label="Molecular phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="874" end="886" title="polyphyletic" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8345469" start="894" end="904" title="Volvocales" label="Volvocales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095272" start="963" end="976" title="Oogamochlamys" label="Oogamochlamys"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984764" start="978" end="989" title="Lobochlamys" label="Lobochlamys"/>
<link wikidata="Q189933" start="1679" end="1690" title="microtubule" label="microtubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049965" start="2024" end="2033" title="papillate" label="papillate"/>
<link wikidata="Q574470" start="2485" end="2493" title="pyrenoid" label="pyrenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28432042" start="2988" end="3009" title="Chlamydomonas elegans" label="Chlamydomonas elegans"/>
<link wikidata="Q69631200" start="3025" end="3047" title="Chlamydomonas moewusii" label="Chlamydomonas moewusii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583205" start="3100" end="3121" title="Chlamydomonas nivalis" label="Chlamydomonas nivalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q291827" start="3245" end="3270" title="Chlamydomonas reinhardtii" label="Chlamydomonas reinhardtii"/>
<link wikidata="Q220341" start="3583" end="3591" title="zoospore" label="zoospore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3594" end="3605" title="aplanospore" label="aplanospore"/>
<link wikidata="Q739943" start="3683" end="3690" title="isogamy" label="isogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q770370" start="3692" end="3701" title="anisogamy" label="anisogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q847710" start="3705" end="3711" title="oogamy" label="oogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q335183" start="3754" end="3764" title="phototroph" label="phototroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q291827" start="3776" end="3790" title="Chlamydomonas reinhardtii" label="C. reinhardtii"/>
<link wikidata="Q978456" start="3997" end="4021" title="Intraflagellar transport" label="Intraflagellar transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q69631200" start="4023" end="4045" title="Chlamydomonas moewusii" label="Chlamydomonas moewusii"/>
<link wikidata="Q892808" start="4435" end="4459" title="Lake Bonney (Antarctica)" label="Lake Bonney (Antarctica)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162276" wikidata="Q5588" url="?curid=162276" title="Frida Kahlo">
<text>Magdalena Carmen Frida Kahlo y Calderón (; 6 July 1907 – 13 July 1954) was a Mexican painter known for her many portraits, self-portraits, and works inspired by the nature and artifacts of Mexico. Inspired by the country&#x27;s popular culture, she employed a naïve folk art style to explore questions of identity, postcolonialism, gender, class, and race in Mexican society. Her paintings often had strong autobiographical elements and mixed realism with fantasy. In addition to belonging to the post-revolutionary &quot;Mexicayotl&quot; movement, which sought to define a Mexican identity, Kahlo has been described as a surrealist or magical realist. She is also known for painting about her experience of chronic pain.

Born to a German father and a &quot;mestiza&quot; mother (of Purépecha descent), Kahlo spent most of her childhood and adult life at La Casa Azul, her family home in Coyoacán – now publicly accessible as the Frida Kahlo Museum. Although she was disabled by polio as a child, Kahlo had been a promising student headed for medical school until being injured in a bus accident at the age of 18, which caused her lifelong pain and medical problems. During her recovery, she returned to her childhood interest in art with the idea of becoming an artist.

Kahlo&#x27;s interests in politics and art led her to join the Mexican Communist Party in 1927, through which she met fellow Mexican artist Diego Rivera. The couple married in 1929 and spent the late 1920s and early 1930s travelling in Mexico and the United States together. During this time, she developed her artistic style, drawing her main inspiration from Mexican folk culture, and painted mostly small self-portraits that mixed elements from pre-Columbian and Catholic beliefs. Her paintings raised the interest of surrealist artist André Breton, who arranged for Kahlo&#x27;s first solo exhibition at the Julien Levy Gallery in New York in 1938; the exhibition was a success and was followed by another in Paris in 1939. While the French exhibition was less successful, the Louvre purchased a painting from Kahlo, &quot;The Frame&quot;, making her the first Mexican artist to be featured in their collection. Throughout the 1940s, Kahlo participated in exhibitions in Mexico and the United States and worked as an art teacher. She taught at the Escuela Nacional de Pintura, Escultura y Grabado (&quot;La Esmeralda&quot;) and was a founding member of the &quot;Seminario de Cultura Mexicana&quot;. Kahlo&#x27;s always-fragile health began to decline in the same decade. While she had had solo exhibitions elsewhere, she had her first solo exhibition in Mexico in 1953, shortly before her death in 1954 at the age of 47.

Kahlo&#x27;s work as an artist remained relatively unknown until the late 1970s, when her work was rediscovered by art historians and political activists. By the early 1990s, not only had she become a recognized figure in art history, but she was also regarded as an icon for Chicanos, the feminism movement, and the LGBTQ+ community. Kahlo&#x27;s work has been celebrated internationally as emblematic of Mexican national and Indigenous traditions and by feminists for what is seen as its uncompromising depiction of the female experience and form.

== Artistic career ==
=== Early career ===

Kahlo enjoyed art from an early age, receiving drawing instruction from printmaker Fernando Fernández (who was her father&#x27;s friend) and filling notebooks with sketches. In 1925, she began to work outside of school to help her family. After briefly working as a stenographer, she became a paid engraving apprentice for Fernández. He was impressed by her talent, although she did not consider art as a career at this time.

A severe bus accident at the age of 18 left Kahlo in lifelong pain. Confined to bed for three months following the accident, Kahlo began to paint. She started to consider a career as a medical illustrator, as well, which would combine her interests in science and art. Her mother provided her with a specially-made easel, which enabled her to paint in bed, and her father lent her some of his oil paints. She had a mirror placed above the easel, so that she could see herself. Painting became a way for Kahlo to explore questions of identity and existence. She explained, &quot;I paint myself because I am often alone and I am the subject I know best.&quot; She later stated that the accident and the isolating recovery period made her desire &quot;to begin again, painting things just as [she] saw them with [her] own eyes and nothing more.&quot;

Most of the paintings Kahlo made during this time were portraits of herself, her sisters, and her schoolfriends. Her early paintings and correspondence show that she drew inspiration especially from European artists, in particular Renaissance masters such as Sandro Botticelli and Bronzino and from &quot;avant-garde&quot; movements such as Neue Sachlichkeit and Cubism.
On moving to Morelos in 1929 with her husband Diego Rivera, Kahlo was inspired by the city of Cuernavaca where they lived. She changed her artistic style and increasingly drew inspiration from Mexican folk art. Art historian Andrea Kettenmann states that she may have been influenced by Adolfo Best Maugard&#x27;s treatise on the subject, for she incorporated many of the characteristics that he outlined – for example, the lack of perspective and the combining of elements from pre-Columbian and colonial periods of Mexican art. Her identification with &quot;La Raza&quot;, the people of Mexico, and her profound interest in its culture remained important facets of her art throughout the rest of her life.

=== Work in the United States ===

When Kahlo and Rivera moved to San Francisco in 1930, Kahlo was introduced to American artists such as Edward Weston, Ralph Stackpole, Timothy L. Pflueger, and Nickolas Muray. The six months spent in San Francisco were a productive period for Kahlo, who further developed the folk art style she had adopted in Cuernavaca. In addition to painting portraits of several new acquaintances, she made &quot;Frieda and Diego Rivera&quot; (1931), a double portrait based on their wedding photograph, and &quot;The Portrait of Luther Burbank&quot; (1931), which depicted the eponymous horticulturist as a hybrid between a human and a plant. Although she still publicly presented herself as simply Rivera&#x27;s spouse rather than as an artist, she participated for the first time in an exhibition, when &quot;Frieda and Diego Rivera&quot; was included in the Sixth Annual Exhibition of the San Francisco Society of Women Artists in the Palace of the Legion of Honor.

On moving to Detroit with Rivera, Kahlo experienced numerous health problems related to a failed pregnancy. Despite these health problems, as well as her dislike for the capitalist culture of the United States, Kahlo&#x27;s time in the city was beneficial for her artistic expression. She experimented with different techniques, such as etching and frescos, and her paintings began to show a stronger narrative style. She also began placing emphasis on the themes of &quot;terror, suffering, wounds, and pain&quot;. Despite the popularity of the mural in Mexican art at the time, she adopted a diametrically opposed medium, votive images or &quot;retablos&quot;, religious paintings made on small metal sheets by amateur artists to thank saints for their blessings during a calamity. Amongst the works she made in the &quot;retablo&quot; manner in Detroit are &quot;Henry Ford Hospital&quot; (1932), &quot;My Birth&quot; (1932), and &quot;Self-Portrait on the Border of Mexico and the United States&quot; (1932). While none of Kahlo&#x27;s works were featured in exhibitions in Detroit, she gave an interview to the &quot;Detroit News&quot; on her art; the article was condescendingly titled &quot;Wife of the Master Mural Painter Gleefully Dabbles in Works of Art&quot;.

=== Return to Mexico City and international recognition ===
Upon returning to Mexico City in 1934 Kahlo made no new paintings, and only two in the following year, due to health complications. In 1937 and 1938, however, Kahlo&#x27;s artistic career was extremely productive, following her divorce and then reconciliation with Rivera. She painted more &quot;than she had done in all her eight previous years of marriage&quot;, creating such works as &quot;My Nurse and I&quot; (1937), &quot;Memory, the Heart&quot; (1937), &quot;Four Inhabitants of Mexico&quot; (1938), and &quot;What the Water Gave Me&quot; (1938). Although she was still unsure about her work, the National Autonomous University of Mexico exhibited some of her paintings in early 1938. She made her first significant sale in the summer of 1938 when film star and art collector Edward G. Robinson purchased four paintings at $200 each. Even greater recognition followed when French Surrealist André Breton visited Rivera in April 1938. He was impressed by Kahlo, immediately claiming her as a surrealist and describing her work as &quot;a ribbon around a bomb&quot;. He not only promised to arrange for her paintings to be exhibited in Paris but also wrote to his friend and art dealer, Julien Levy, who invited her to hold her first solo exhibition at his gallery on the East 57th Street in Manhattan.
In October, Kahlo traveled alone to New York, where her colorful Mexican dress &quot;caused a sensation&quot; and made her seen as &quot;the height of exotica&quot;. The exhibition opening in November was attended by famous figures such as Georgia O&#x27;Keeffe and Clare Boothe Luce and received much positive attention in the press, although many critics adopted a condescending tone in their reviews. For example, &quot;Time&quot; wrote that &quot;Little Frida&#x27;s pictures ... had the daintiness of miniatures, the vivid reds, and yellows of Mexican tradition and the playfully bloody fancy of an unsentimental child&quot;. Despite the Great Depression, Kahlo sold half of the 25 paintings presented in the exhibition. She also received commissions from A. Conger Goodyear, then the president of the MoMA, and Clare Boothe Luce, for whom she painted a portrait of Luce&#x27;s friend, socialite Dorothy Hale, who had committed suicide by jumping from her apartment building. During the three months she spent in New York, Kahlo painted very little, instead focusing on enjoying the city to the extent that her fragile health allowed. She also had several affairs, continuing the one with Nickolas Muray and engaging in ones with Levy and Edgar Kaufmann, Jr.

In January 1939, Kahlo sailed to Paris to follow up on André Breton&#x27;s invitation to stage an exhibition of her work. When she arrived, she found that he had not cleared her paintings from the customs and no longer even owned a gallery. With the aid of Marcel Duchamp, she was able to arrange for an exhibition at the Renou et Colle Gallery. Further problems arose when the gallery refused to show all but two of Kahlo&#x27;s paintings, considering them too shocking for audiences, and Breton insisted that they be shown alongside photographs by Manuel Alvarez Bravo, pre-Columbian sculptures, 18th- and 19th-century Mexican portraits, and what she considered &quot;junk&quot;: sugar skulls, toys, and other items he had bought from Mexican markets.

The exhibition opened in March, but received much less attention than she had received in the United States, partly due to the looming Second World War, and made a loss financially, which led Kahlo to cancel a planned exhibition in London. Regardless, the Louvre purchased &quot;The Frame&quot;, making her the first Mexican artist to be featured in their collection. She was also warmly received by other Parisian artists, such as Pablo Picasso and Joan Miró, as well as the fashion world, with designer Elsa Schiaparelli designing a dress inspired by her and &quot;Vogue Paris&quot; featuring her on its pages. However, her overall opinion of Paris and the Surrealists remained negative; in a letter to Muray, she called them &quot;this bunch of coocoo lunatics and very stupid surrealists&quot; who &quot;are so crazy &#x27;intellectual&#x27; and rotten that I can&#x27;t even stand them anymore&quot;.

In the United States, Kahlo&#x27;s paintings continued to raise interest. In 1941, her works were featured at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Boston, and, in the following year, she participated in two high-profile exhibitions in New York, the &quot;Twentieth-Century Portraits&quot; exhibition at the MoMA and the Surrealists&#x27; &quot;First Papers of Surrealism&quot; exhibition. In 1943, she was included in the &quot;Mexican Art Today&quot; exhibition at the Philadelphia Museum of Art and &quot;Women Artists&quot; at Peggy Guggenheim&#x27;s The Art of This Century gallery in New York.

Kahlo gained more appreciation for her art in Mexico as well. She became a founding member of the Seminario de Cultura Mexicana, a group of twenty-five artists commissioned by the Ministry of Public Education in 1942 to spread public knowledge of Mexican culture. As a member, she took part in planning exhibitions and attended a conference on art. In Mexico City, her paintings were featured in two exhibitions on Mexican art that were staged at the English-language Benjamin Franklin Library in 1943 and 1944. She was invited to participate in &quot;Salon de la Flor&quot;, an exhibition presented at the annual flower exposition. An article by Rivera on Kahlo&#x27;s art was also published in the journal published by the Seminario de Cultura Mexicana.

In 1943, Kahlo accepted a teaching position at the recently reformed, nationalistic Escuela Nacional de Pintura, Escultura y Grabado &quot;La Esmeralda&quot;. She encouraged her students to treat her in an informal and non-hierarchical way and taught them to appreciate Mexican popular culture and folk art and to derive their subjects from the street. When her health problems made it difficult for her to commute to the school in Mexico City, she began to hold her lessons at La Casa Azul. Four of her students – Fanny Rabel, Arturo García Bustos, Guillermo Monroy, and Arturo Estrada – became devotees, and were referred to as &quot;Los Fridos&quot; for their enthusiasm. Kahlo secured three mural commissions for herself and her students.

Kahlo struggled to make a living from her art until the mid to late 1940s, as she refused to adapt her style to suit her clients&#x27; wishes. She received two commissions from the Mexican government in the early 1940s. She did not complete the first one, possibly due to her dislike of the subject, and the second commission was rejected by the commissioning body. Nevertheless, she had regular private clients, such as engineer Eduardo Morillo Safa, who ordered more than thirty portraits of family members over the decade. Her financial situation improved when she received a 5000-peso national prize for her painting &quot;Moses&quot; (1945) in 1946 and when &quot;The Two Fridas&quot; was purchased by the Museo de Arte Moderno in 1947. According to art historian Andrea Kettenmann, by the mid-1940s, her paintings were &quot;featured in the majority of group exhibitions in Mexico&quot;. Further, Martha Zamora wrote that she could &quot;sell whatever she was currently painting; sometimes incomplete pictures were purchased right off the easel&quot;.

=== Later years ===

Even as Kahlo was gaining recognition in Mexico, her health was declining rapidly, and an attempted surgery to support her spine failed. Her paintings from this period include &quot;Broken Column&quot; (1944), &quot;Without Hope&quot; (1945), &quot;Tree of Hope, Stand Fast&quot; (1946), and &quot;The Wounded Deer&quot; (1946), reflecting her poor physical state. During her last years, Kahlo was mostly confined to the Casa Azul. She painted mostly still lifes, portraying fruit and flowers with political symbols such as flags or doves. She was concerned about being able to portray her political convictions, stating that &quot;I have a great restlessness about my paintings. Mainly because I want to make it useful to the revolutionary communist movement... until now I have managed simply an honest expression of my own self ... I must struggle with all my strength to ensure that the little positive my health allows me to do also benefits the Revolution, the only real reason to live.&quot; She also altered her painting style: her brushstrokes, previously delicate and careful, were now hastier, her use of color more brash, and the overall style more intense and feverish.

Photographer Lola Alvarez Bravo understood that Kahlo did not have much longer to live, and thus staged her first solo exhibition in Mexico at the Galería Arte Contemporaneo in April 1953. Though Kahlo was initially not due to attend the opening, as her doctors had prescribed bed rest for her, she ordered her four-poster bed to be moved from her home to the gallery. To the surprise of the guests, she arrived in an ambulance and was carried on a stretcher to the bed, where she stayed for the duration of the party. The exhibition was a notable cultural event in Mexico and also received attention in mainstream press around the world. The same year, the Tate Gallery&#x27;s exhibition on Mexican art in London featured five of her paintings.

In 1954, Kahlo was again hospitalized in April and May. That spring, she resumed painting after a one-year interval. Her last paintings include the political &quot;Marxism Will Give Health to the Sick&quot; (c. 1954) and &quot;Frida and Stalin&quot; (c. 1954) and the still-life &quot;Viva La Vida&quot; (1954).

=== Self-portraits ===
* Self-portraiture
* &quot;Self-portrait on the Border of Mexico and the United States&quot; (1932)
* &quot;Henry Ford Hospital&quot; (1932)
* &quot;Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky&quot; (1937)
* &quot;The Two Fridas&quot; (1939)
* &quot;Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird&quot; (1940)
* &quot;Self-Portrait with Cropped Hair&quot;

== Style and influences ==
Estimates vary on how many paintings Kahlo made during her life, with figures ranging from fewer than 150 to around 200. Her earliest paintings, which she made in the mid-1920s, show influence from Renaissance masters and European avant-garde artists such as Amedeo Modigliani. Towards the end of the decade, Kahlo derived more inspiration from Mexican folk art, drawn to its elements of &quot;fantasy, naivety, and fascination with violence and death&quot;. The style she developed mixed reality with surrealistic elements and often depicted pain and death.

One of Kahlo&#x27;s earliest champions was Surrealist artist André Breton, who claimed her as part of the movement as an artist who had supposedly developed her style &quot;in &quot;total ignorance&quot; of the ideas that motivated the activities of my friends and myself&quot;. This was echoed by Bertram D. Wolfe, who wrote that Kahlo&#x27;s was a &quot;sort of &#x27;naïve&#x27; Surrealism, which she invented for herself&quot;. Although Breton regarded her as mostly a feminine force within the Surrealist movement, Kahlo brought postcolonial questions and themes to the forefront of her brand of Surrealism. Breton also described Kahlo&#x27;s work as &quot;wonderfully situated at the point of intersection between the political (philosophical) line and the artistic line&quot;. While she subsequently participated in Surrealist exhibitions, she stated that she &quot;detest[ed] Surrealism&quot;, which to her was &quot;bourgeois art&quot; and not &quot;true art that the people hope from the artist&quot;. Some art historians have disagreed whether her work should be classified as belonging to the movement at all. According to Andrea Kettenmann, Kahlo was a symbolist concerned more in portraying her inner experiences. Emma Dexter has argued that, as Kahlo derived her mix of fantasy and reality mainly from Aztec mythology and Mexican culture instead of Surrealism, it is more appropriate to consider her paintings as having more in common with magical realism, also known as New Objectivity. It combined reality and fantasy and employed similar style to Kahlo&#x27;s, such as flattened perspective, clearly outlined characters and bright colours.

=== &quot;Mexicanidad&quot; ===
Similarly to many other contemporary Mexican artists, Kahlo was heavily influenced by &quot;Mexicanidad&quot;, a romantic nationalism that had developed in the aftermath of the revolution. The &quot;Mexicanidad&quot; movement claimed to resist the &quot;mindset of cultural inferiority&quot; created by colonialism, and placed special importance on Indigenous cultures. Before the revolution, Mexican folk culture – a mixture of Indigenous and European elements – was disparaged by the elite, who claimed to have purely European ancestry and regarded Europe as the definition of civilization which Mexico should imitate. Kahlo&#x27;s artistic ambition was to paint for the Mexican people, and she stated that she wished &quot;to be worthy, with my paintings, of the people to whom I belong and to the ideas which strengthen me&quot;. To enforce this image, she preferred to conceal the education she had received in art from her father and Ferdinand Fernandez and at the preparatory school. Instead, she cultivated an image of herself as a &quot;self-taught and naive artist&quot;.

When Kahlo began her career as an artist in the 1920s, muralists dominated the Mexican art scene. They created large public pieces in the vein of Renaissance masters and Russian socialist realists: they usually depicted masses of people, and their political messages were easy to decipher. Although she was close to muralists such as Rivera, José Clemente Orozco and David Alfaro Siquieros and shared their commitment to socialism and Mexican nationalism, the majority of Kahlo&#x27;s paintings were self-portraits of relatively small size. Particularly in the 1930s, her style was especially indebted to votive paintings or &quot;retablos&quot;, which were postcard-sized religious images made by amateur artists. Their purpose was to thank saints for their protection during a calamity, and they normally depicted an event, such as an illness or an accident, from which its commissioner had been saved. The focus was on the figures depicted, and they seldom featured a realistic perspective or detailed background, thus distilling the event to its essentials. Kahlo had an extensive collection of approximately 2,000 &quot;retablos&quot;, which she displayed on the walls of La Casa Azul. According to Laura Mulvey and Peter Wollen, the &quot;retablo&quot; format enabled Kahlo to &quot;develop the limits of the purely iconic and allowed her to use narrative and allegory&quot;.

Many of Kahlo&#x27;s self-portraits mimic the classic bust-length portraits that were fashionable during the colonial era, but they subverted the format by depicting their subject as less attractive than in reality. She concentrated more frequently on this format towards the end of the 1930s, thus reflecting changes in Mexican society. Increasingly disillusioned by the legacy of the revolution and struggling to cope with the effects of the Great Depression, Mexicans were abandoning the ethos of socialism for individualism. This was reflected by the &quot;personality cults&quot;, which developed around Mexican film stars such as Dolores del Río. According to Schaefer, Kahlo&#x27;s &quot;mask-like self-portraits echo the contemporaneous fascination with the cinematic close-up of feminine beauty, as well as the mystique of female otherness expressed in film noir.&quot; By always repeating the same facial features, Kahlo drew from the depiction of goddesses and saints in Indigenous and Catholic cultures.

Out of specific Mexican folk artists, Kahlo was especially influenced by Hermenegildo Bustos, whose works portrayed Mexican culture and peasant life, and José Guadalupe Posada, who depicted accidents and crime in satiric manner. She also derived inspiration from the works of Hieronymus Bosch, whom she called a &quot;man of genius&quot;, and Pieter Bruegel the Elder, whose focus on peasant life was similar to her own interest in the Mexican people. Another influence was the poet Rosario Castellanos, whose poems often chronicle a woman&#x27;s lot in the patriarchal Mexican society, a concern with the female body, and tell stories of immense physical and emotional pain.

=== Symbolism and iconography ===

Kahlo&#x27;s paintings often feature root imagery, with roots growing out of her body to tie her to the ground. This reflects in a positive sense the theme of personal growth; in a negative sense of being trapped in a particular place, time and situation; and in an ambiguous sense of how memories of the past influence the present for good and/or ill. In &quot;My Grandparents and I&quot;, Kahlo painted herself as a ten-year old, holding a ribbon that grows from an ancient tree that bears the portraits of her grandparents and other ancestors while her left foot is a tree trunk growing out of the ground, reflecting Kahlo&#x27;s view of humanity&#x27;s unity with the earth and her own sense of unity with Mexico. In Kahlo&#x27;s paintings, trees serve as symbols of hope, of strength and of a continuity that transcends generations. Additionally, hair features as a symbol of growth and of the feminine in Kahlo&#x27;s paintings and in &quot;Self-Portrait with Cropped Hair&quot;, Kahlo painted herself wearing a man&#x27;s suit and shorn of her long hair, which she had just cut off. Kahlo holds the scissors with one hand menacingly close to her genitals, which can be interpreted as a threat to Rivera – whose frequent unfaithfulness infuriated her – and/or a threat to harm her own body like she has attacked her own hair, a sign of the way that women often project their fury against others onto themselves. Moreover, the picture reflects Kahlo&#x27;s frustration not only with Rivera, but also her unease with the patriarchal values of Mexico as the scissors symbolize a malevolent sense of masculinity that threatens to &quot;cut up&quot; women, both metaphorically and literally. In Mexico, the traditional Spanish values of &quot;machismo&quot; were widely embraced, but Kahlo was always uncomfortable with &quot;machismo&quot;.

As she suffered for the rest of her life from the bus accident in her youth, Kahlo spent much of her life in hospitals and undergoing surgery, much of it performed by quacks who Kahlo believed could restore her back to where she had been before the accident. Many of Kahlo&#x27;s paintings are concerned with medical imagery, which is presented in terms of pain and hurt, featuring Kahlo bleeding and displaying her open wounds. Many of Kahlo&#x27;s medical paintings, especially dealing with childbirth and miscarriage, have a strong sense of guilt, of a sense of living one&#x27;s life at the expense of another who has died so one might live.

Although Kahlo featured herself and events from her life in her paintings, they were often ambiguous in meaning. She did not use them only to show her subjective experience but to raise questions about Mexican society and the construction of identity within it, particularly gender, race, and social class. Historian Liza Bakewell has stated that Kahlo &quot;recognized the conflicts brought on by revolutionary ideology&quot;:

To explore these questions through her art, Kahlo developed a complex iconography, extensively employing pre-Columbian and Christian symbols and mythology in her paintings. In most of her self-portraits, she depicts her face as mask-like, but surrounded by visual cues which allow the viewer to decipher deeper meanings for it. Aztec mythology features heavily in Kahlo&#x27;s paintings in symbols including monkeys, skeletons, skulls, blood, and hearts; often, these symbols referred to the myths of Coatlicue, Quetzalcoatl, and Xolotl. Other central elements that Kahlo derived from Aztec mythology were hybridity and dualism. Many of her paintings depict opposites: life and death, pre-modernity and modernity, Mexican and European, male and female.

In addition to Aztec legends, Kahlo frequently depicted two central female figures from Mexican folklore in her paintings: La Llorona and La Malinche as interlinked to the hard situations, the suffering, misfortune or judgement, as being calamitous, wretched or being &quot;de la chingada&quot;. For example, when she painted herself following her miscarriage in Detroit in &quot;Henry Ford Hospital&quot; (1932), she shows herself as weeping, with dishevelled hair and an exposed heart, which are all considered part of the appearance of La Llorona, a woman who murdered her children. The painting was traditionally interpreted as simply a depiction of Kahlo&#x27;s grief and pain over her failed pregnancies. But with the interpretation of the symbols in the painting and the information of Kahlo&#x27;s actual views towards motherhood from her correspondence, the painting has been seen as depicting the unconventional and taboo choice of a woman remaining childless in Mexican society.

Kahlo often featured her own body in her paintings, presenting it in varying states and disguises: as wounded, broken, as a child, or clothed in different outfits, such as the Tehuana costume, a man&#x27;s suit, or a European dress. She used her body as a metaphor to explore questions on societal roles. Her paintings often depicted the female body in an unconventional manner, such as during miscarriages, and childbirth or cross-dressing. In depicting the female body in graphic manner, Kahlo positioned the viewer in the role of the voyeur, &quot;making it virtually impossible for a viewer not to assume a consciously held position in response&quot;.

According to Nancy Cooey, Kahlo made herself through her paintings into &quot;the main character of her own mythology, as a woman, as a Mexican, and as a suffering person ... She knew how to convert each into a symbol or sign capable of expressing the enormous spiritual resistance of humanity and its splendid sexuality&quot;. Similarly, Nancy Deffebach has stated that Kahlo &quot;created herself as a subject who was female, Mexican, modern, and powerful&quot;, and who diverged from the usual dichotomy of roles of mother/whore allowed to women in Mexican society. Due to her gender and divergence from the muralist tradition, Kahlo&#x27;s paintings were treated as less political and more naïve and subjective than those of her male counterparts up until the late 1980s. According to art historian Joan Borsa,the critical reception of her exploration of subjectivity and personal history has all too frequently denied or de-emphasized the politics involved in examining one&#x27;s own location, inheritances and social conditions ... Critical responses continue to gloss over Kahlo&#x27;s reworking of the personal, ignoring or minimizing her interrogation of sexuality, sexual difference, marginality, cultural identity, female subjectivity, politics and power.

== Personal life ==

=== 1907–1924: Family and childhood ===

Magdalena Carmen Frida Kahlo y Calderón was born on 6 July 1907 in Coyoacán, a village on the outskirts of Mexico City. Kahlo stated that she was born at the family home, La Casa Azul (The Blue House), but according to the official birth registry, the birth took place at the nearby home of her maternal grandmother. Kahlo&#x27;s parents were photographer Guillermo Kahlo (1871–1941) and Matilde Calderón y González (1876–1932), and they were thirty-six and thirty, respectively, when they had her. Originally from Germany, Guillermo had immigrated to Mexico in 1891, after epilepsy caused by an accident ended his university studies. Although Kahlo said her father was Jewish and her paternal grandparents were Jews from the city of Arad, this claim was challenged in 2006 by a pair of German genealogists who found he was instead a Lutheran. Matilde was born in Oaxaca to an Indigenous father and a mother of Spanish descent. In addition to Kahlo, the marriage produced daughters Matilde (&quot;c.&quot; 1898–1951), Adriana (&quot;c.&quot; 1902–1968), and Cristina (&quot;c.&quot; 1908–1964). She had two half-sisters from Guillermo&#x27;s first marriage, María Luisa and Margarita, but they were raised in a convent.

Kahlo later described the atmosphere in her childhood home as often &quot;very, very sad&quot;. Both parents were often sick, and their marriage was devoid of love. Her relationship with her mother, Matilde, was extremely tense. Kahlo described her mother as &quot;kind, active and intelligent, but also calculating, cruel and fanatically religious&quot;. Her father Guillermo&#x27;s photography business suffered greatly during the Mexican Revolution, as the overthrown government had commissioned works from him, and the long civil war limited the number of private clients.

When Kahlo was six years old, she contracted polio, which eventually made her right leg grow shorter and thinner than the left. The illness forced her to be isolated from her peers for months, and she was bullied. While the experience made her reclusive, it made her Guillermo&#x27;s favorite due to their shared experience of living with disability. Kahlo credited him for making her childhood &quot;marvelous ... he was an immense example to me of tenderness, of work (photographer and also painter), and above all in understanding for all my problems.&quot; He taught her about literature, nature, and philosophy, and encouraged her to play sports to regain her strength, despite the fact that most physical exercise was seen as unsuitable for girls. He also taught her photography, and she began to help him retouch, develop, and color photographs.

Due to polio, Kahlo began school later than her peers. Along with her younger sister Cristina, she attended the local kindergarten and primary school in Coyoacán and was homeschooled for the fifth and sixth grades. While Cristina followed their sisters into a convent school, Kahlo was enrolled in a German school due to their father&#x27;s wishes. She was soon expelled for disobedience and was sent to a vocational teachers school. Her stay at the school was brief, as she was sexually abused by a female teacher.

In 1922, Kahlo was accepted to the elite National Preparatory School, where she focused on natural sciences with the aim of becoming a physician. The institution had only recently begun admitting women, with only 35 girls out of 2,000 students. She performed well academically, was a voracious reader, and became &quot;deeply immersed and seriously committed to Mexican culture, political activism and issues of social justice&quot;. The school promoted &quot;indigenismo&quot;, a new sense of Mexican identity that took pride in the country&#x27;s Indigenous heritage and sought to rid itself of the colonial mindset of Europe as superior to Mexico. Particularly influential to Kahlo at this time were nine of her schoolmates, with whom she formed an informal group called the &quot;Cachuchas&quot; – many of them would become leading figures of the Mexican intellectual elite. They were rebellious and against everything conservative and pulled pranks, staged plays, and debated philosophy and Russian classics. To mask the fact that she was older and to declare herself a &quot;daughter of the revolution&quot;, she began saying that she had been born on 7 July 1910, the year the Mexican Revolution began, which she continued throughout her life. She fell in love with Alejandro Gomez Arias, the leader of the group and her first love. Her parents did not approve of the relationship. Arias and Kahlo were often separated from each other, due to the political instability and violence of the period, so they exchanged passionate love letters.

=== 1925–1930: Bus accident and marriage to Diego Rivera ===
On 17 September 1925, Kahlo and her boyfriend, Arias, were on their way home from school. They boarded one bus, but they got off the bus to look for an umbrella that Kahlo had left behind. They then boarded a second bus, which was crowded, and they sat in the back. The driver attempted to pass an oncoming electric streetcar. The streetcar crashed into the side of the wooden bus, dragging it a few feet. Several passengers were killed in the accident. While Arias only suffered minor injuries, Frida was impaled by an iron handrail that went through her pelvis. She later described the injury as &quot;the way a sword pierces a bull&quot;. The handrail was removed by Arias and others, which was incredibly painful for Kahlo.

Kahlo suffered many injuries: her pelvic bone had been fractured, her abdomen and uterus had been punctured by the rail, her spine was broken in three places, her right leg was broken in eleven places, her right foot was crushed and dislocated, her collarbone was broken, and her shoulder was dislocated. She spent a month in hospital and two months recovering at home before being able to return to work. As she continued to experience fatigue and back pain, her doctors ordered X-rays, which revealed that the accident had also displaced three vertebrae. As treatment she had to wear a plaster corset which confined her to bed rest for the better part of three months.

The accident ended Kahlo&#x27;s dreams of becoming a physician and caused her pain and illness for the rest of her life; her friend Andrés Henestrosa stated that Kahlo &quot;lived dying&quot;. Kahlo&#x27;s bed rest was over by late 1927, and she began socializing with her old schoolfriends, who were now at university and involved in student politics. She joined the Mexican Communist Party (PCM) and was introduced to a circle of political activists and artists, including the exiled Cuban communist Julio Antonio Mella and the Italian-American photographer Tina Modotti.

At one of Modotti&#x27;s parties in June 1928, Kahlo was introduced to Diego Rivera. They had met briefly in 1922 when he was painting a mural at her school. Shortly after their introduction in 1928, Kahlo asked him to judge whether her paintings showed enough talent for her to pursue a career as an artist. Rivera recalled being impressed by her works, stating that they showed &quot;an unusual energy of expression, precise delineation of character, and true severity ... They had a fundamental plastic honesty, and an artistic personality of their own ... It was obvious to me that this girl was an authentic artist&quot;.

Kahlo soon began a relationship with Rivera, who was 21 years her senior and had two common-law wives. Kahlo and Rivera were married in a civil ceremony at the town hall of Coyoacán on 21 August 1929. Her mother opposed the marriage, and both parents referred to it as a &quot;marriage between an elephant and a dove&quot;, referring to the couple&#x27;s differences in size; Rivera was tall and overweight while Kahlo was petite and fragile. Regardless, her father approved of Rivera, who was wealthy and therefore able to support Kahlo, who could not work and had to receive expensive medical treatment. The wedding was reported by the Mexican and international press, and the marriage was subject to constant media attention in Mexico in the following years, with articles referring to the couple as simply &quot;Diego and Frida&quot;.

Soon after the marriage, in late 1929, Kahlo and Rivera moved to Cuernavaca in the rural state of Morelos, where he had been commissioned to paint murals for the Palace of Cortés. Around the same time, she resigned her membership of the PCM in support of Rivera, who had been expelled shortly before the marriage for his support of the leftist opposition movement within the Third International.

During the civil war Morelos had seen some of the heaviest fighting, and life in the Spanish-style city of Cuernavaca sharpened Kahlo&#x27;s sense of a Mexican identity and history. Similar to many other Mexican women artists and intellectuals at the time, Kahlo began wearing traditional Indigenous Mexican peasant clothing to emphasize her &quot;mestiza&quot; ancestry: long and colorful skirts, &quot;huipils&quot; and &quot;rebozos&quot;, elaborate headdresses and masses of jewelry. She especially favored the dress of women from the allegedly matriarchal society of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, who had come to represent &quot;an authentic and indigenous Mexican cultural heritage&quot; in post-revolutionary Mexico. The Tehuana outfit allowed Kahlo to express her feminist and anti-colonialist ideals.

=== 1931–1933: Travels in the United States ===

After Rivera had completed the commission in Cuernavaca in late 1930, he and Kahlo moved to San Francisco, where he painted murals for the Luncheon Club of the San Francisco Stock Exchange and the California School of Fine Arts. The couple was &quot;feted, lionized, [and] spoiled&quot; by influential collectors and clients during their stay in the city. Her long love affair with Hungarian-American photographer Nickolas Muray most likely began around this time.

Kahlo and Rivera returned to Mexico for the summer of 1931, and in the fall traveled to New York City for the opening of Rivera&#x27;s retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA). In April 1932, they headed to Detroit, where Rivera had been commissioned to paint murals for the Detroit Institute of Arts. By this time, Kahlo had become bolder in her interactions with the press, impressing journalists with her fluency in English and stating on her arrival to the city that she was the greater artist of the two of them.

The year spent in Detroit was a difficult time for Kahlo. Although she had enjoyed visiting San Francisco and New York City, she disliked aspects of American society, which she regarded as colonialist, as well as most Americans, whom she found &quot;boring&quot;. She disliked having to socialize with capitalists such as Henry and Edsel Ford, and was angered that many of the hotels in Detroit refused to accept Jewish guests. In a letter to a friend, she wrote that &quot;although I am very interested in all the industrial and mechanical development of the United States&quot;, she felt &quot;a bit of a rage against all the rich guys here, since I have seen thousands of people in the most terrible misery without anything to eat and with no place to sleep, that is what has most impressed me here, it is terrifying to see the rich having parties day and night while thousands and thousands of people are dying of hunger.&quot; Kahlo&#x27;s time in Detroit was also complicated by a pregnancy. Her doctor agreed to perform an abortion, but the medication used was ineffective. Kahlo was deeply ambivalent about having a child and had already undergone an abortion earlier in her marriage to Rivera. Following the failed abortion, she reluctantly agreed to continue with the pregnancy, but miscarried in July, which caused a serious hemorrhage that required her being hospitalized for two weeks. Less than three months later, her mother died from complications of surgery in Mexico.
Kahlo and Rivera returned to New York in March 1933, for he had been commissioned to paint a mural for the Rockefeller Center. During this time, she only worked on one painting, &quot;My Dress Hangs There&quot; (1933). She also gave further interviews to the American press. In May, Rivera was fired from the Rockefeller Center project and was instead hired to paint a mural for the New Workers School. Although Rivera wished to continue their stay in the United States, Kahlo was homesick, and they returned to Mexico soon after the mural&#x27;s unveiling in December 1933.

=== 1934–1949: La Casa Azul and declining health ===

Back in Mexico City, Kahlo and Rivera moved into a new house in the wealthy neighborhood of San Ángel. Commissioned from Le Corbusier&#x27;s student Juan O&#x27;Gorman, it consisted of two sections joined by a bridge; Kahlo&#x27;s was painted blue and Rivera&#x27;s pink and white. The bohemian residence became an important meeting place for artists and political activists from Mexico and abroad.

Kahlo once again experienced health problems – undergoing an appendectomy, two abortions, and the amputation of gangrenous toes – and her marriage to Rivera had become strained. He was not happy to be back in Mexico and blamed Kahlo for their return. While he had been unfaithful to her before, he now embarked on an affair with her younger sister Cristina, which deeply hurt Kahlo&#x27;s feelings. After discovering the affair in early 1935, she moved to an apartment in central Mexico City and considered divorcing him. She also had an affair of her own with American artist Isamu Noguchi.

Kahlo was reconciled with Rivera and Cristina later in 1935 and moved back to San Ángel. She became a loving aunt to Cristina&#x27;s children, Isolda and Antonio. Despite the reconciliation, both Rivera and Kahlo continued their infidelities. She also resumed her political activities in 1936, joining the Fourth International and becoming a founding member of a solidarity committee to provide aid to the Republicans in the Spanish Civil War. She and Rivera successfully petitioned the Mexican government to grant asylum to former Soviet leader Leon Trotsky and offered La Casa Azul for him and his wife Natalia Sedova as a residence. The couple lived there from January 1937 until April 1939, with Kahlo and Trotsky not only becoming good friends but also having a brief affair. Kahlo painted &quot;Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky&quot; in 1937 during their time together in Mexico City, including a written inscription to Trotsky in the painting on a letter that Kahlo&#x27;s figure holds.

After opening an exhibition in Paris, Kahlo sailed back to New York. She was eager to be reunited with Muray, but he decided to end their affair, as he had met another woman whom he was planning to marry. Kahlo traveled back to Mexico City, where Rivera requested a divorce from her. The exact reasons for his decision are unknown, but he stated publicly that it was merely a &quot;matter of legal convenience in the style of modern times ... there are no sentimental, artistic, or economic reasons&quot;. According to their friends, the divorce was mainly caused by their mutual infidelities. He and Kahlo were granted a divorce in November 1939, but remained friendly; she continued to manage his finances and correspondence.
Following her separation from Rivera, Kahlo moved back to La Casa Azul and, determined to earn her own living, began another productive period as an artist, inspired by her experiences abroad. Encouraged by the recognition she was gaining, she moved from using the small and more intimate tin sheets she had used since 1932 to large canvases, as they were easier to exhibit. She also adopted a more sophisticated technique, limited the graphic details, and began to produce more quarter-length portraits, which were easier to sell. She painted several of her most famous pieces during this period, such as &quot;The Two Fridas&quot; (1939), &quot;Self-portrait with Cropped Hair&quot; (1940), &quot;The Wounded Table&quot; (1940), and &quot;Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird&quot; (1940). Three exhibitions featured her works in 1940: the fourth International Surrealist Exhibition in Mexico City, the Golden Gate International Exposition in San Francisco, and &quot;Twenty Centuries of Mexican Art&quot; in MoMA in New York.

On 21 August 1940, Trotsky was assassinated in Coyoacán, where he had continued to live after leaving La Casa Azul. Kahlo was briefly suspected of being involved, as she knew the murderer, and was arrested and held for two days with her sister Cristina. The following month, Kahlo traveled to San Francisco for medical treatment for back pain and a fungal infection on her hand. Her continuously fragile health had increasingly declined since her divorce and was exacerbated by her heavy consumption of alcohol.

Rivera was also in San Francisco after he fled Mexico City following Trotsky&#x27;s murder and accepted a commission. Although Kahlo had a relationship with art dealer Heinz Berggruen during her visit to San Francisco, she and Rivera were reconciled. They remarried in a simple civil ceremony on 8 December 1940. Kahlo and Rivera returned to Mexico soon after their wedding. The union was less turbulent than before for its first five years. Both were more independent, and while La Casa Azul was their primary residence, Rivera retained the San Ángel house for use as his studio and second apartment. Both continued having extramarital affairs; Kahlo had affairs with both men and women, with evidence suggesting her male lovers were more important to Kahlo than her female lovers.

Despite the medical treatment she had received in San Francisco, Kahlo&#x27;s health problems continued throughout the 1940s. Due to her spinal problems, she wore twenty-eight separate supportive corsets, varying from steel and leather to plaster, between 1940 and 1954. She experienced pain in her legs, the infection on her hand had become chronic, and she was also treated for syphilis. The death of her father in April 1941 plunged her into a depression. Her ill health made her increasingly confined to La Casa Azul, which became the center of her world. She enjoyed taking care of the house and its garden, and was kept company by friends, servants, and various pets, including spider monkeys, Xoloitzcuintlis, and parrots.

While Kahlo was gaining recognition in her home country, her health continued to decline. By the mid-1940s, her back had worsened to the point that she could no longer sit or stand continuously. In June 1945, she traveled to New York for an operation which fused a bone graft and a steel support to her spine to straighten it. The difficult operation was a failure. According to biographer Hayden Herrera, Kahlo also sabotaged her recovery by not resting as required and by once physically re-opening her wounds in a fit of anger. Her paintings from this period, such as &quot;The Broken Column&quot; (1944), &quot;Without Hope&quot; (1945), &quot;Tree of Hope, Stand Fast&quot; (1946), and &quot;The Wounded Deer&quot; (1946), reflect her declining health.

=== 1950–1954: Last years and death ===
In 1950, Kahlo spent most of the year in Hospital ABC in Mexico City, where she underwent a new bone graft surgery on her spine. It caused a difficult infection and necessitated several follow-up surgeries. After being discharged, she was mostly confined to La Casa Azul, using a wheelchair and crutches to be ambulatory. During these final years of her life, Kahlo dedicated her time to political causes to the extent that her health allowed. She had rejoined the Mexican Communist Party in 1948 and campaigned for peace, for example, by collecting signatures for the Stockholm Appeal.

Kahlo&#x27;s right leg was amputated at the knee due to gangrene in August 1953. She became severely depressed and anxious, and her dependence on painkillers escalated. When Rivera began yet another affair, she attempted suicide by overdose. She wrote in her diary in February 1954, &quot;They amputated my leg six months ago, they have given me centuries of torture and at moments I almost lost my reason. I keep on wanting to kill myself. Diego is what keeps me from it, through my vain idea that he would miss me. ... But never in my life have I suffered more. I will wait a while...&quot; 
In her last days, Kahlo was mostly bedridden with bronchopneumonia, though she made a public appearance on 2 July 1954, participating with Rivera in a demonstration against the CIA invasion of Guatemala. She seemed to anticipate her death, as she spoke about it to visitors and drew skeletons and angels in her diary. The last drawing was a black angel, which biographer Hayden Herrera interprets as the Angel of Death. It was accompanied by the last words she wrote, &quot;I joyfully await the exit – and I hope never to return – Frida&quot; (&quot;Espero Alegre la Salida – y Espero no Volver jamás&quot;).

The demonstration worsened her illness, and on the night of 12 July 1954, Kahlo had a high fever and was in extreme pain. At approximately 6 a.m. on 13 July 1954, her nurse found her dead in her bed. Kahlo was 47 years old. The official cause of death was pulmonary embolism, although no autopsy was performed. Herrera has argued that Kahlo, in fact, committed suicide. The nurse, who counted Kahlo&#x27;s painkillers to monitor her drug use, stated that Kahlo had taken an overdose the night she died. She had been prescribed a maximum dose of seven pills but had taken eleven. She had also given Rivera a wedding anniversary present that evening, over a month in advance.

On the evening of 13 July, Kahlo&#x27;s body was taken to the Palacio de Bellas Artes, where it lay in state under a Communist flag. The following day, it was carried to the Panteón Civil de Dolores, where friends and family attended an informal funeral ceremony. Hundreds of admirers stood outside. In accordance with her wishes, Kahlo was cremated in a fittingly spectacular fashion that, according to legend, saw the mourners witness her hair catching fire, her corpse sitting up, and her face forming one last seductive grin. Rivera, who stated that her death was &quot;the most tragic day of my life&quot;, died three years later, in 1957. Kahlo&#x27;s ashes are displayed in a pre-Columbian urn at La Casa Azul, which opened as a museum in 1958.

== Posthumous recognition and &quot;Fridamania&quot; ==
The Tate Modern considers Kahlo &quot;one of the most significant artists of the twentieth century&quot;. Art historian Elizabeth Bakewell, has stated that Kahlo is &quot;one of Mexico&#x27;s most important twentieth-century figures&quot;. Kahlo&#x27;s reputation as an artist developed late in her life and grew even further posthumously, as during her lifetime she was primarily known as the wife of Diego Rivera and as an eccentric personality among the international cultural elite. She gradually gained more recognition in the late 1970s when feminist scholars began to question the exclusion of female and non-Western artists from the art historical canon and the Chicano Movement lifted her as one of their icons. The first two books about Kahlo were published in Mexico by Teresa del Conde and Raquel Tibol in 1976 and 1977, respectively, and, in 1977, &quot;The Tree of Hope Stands Firm&quot; (1944) became the first Kahlo painting to be sold in an auction, netting $19,000 at Sotheby&#x27;s. These milestones were followed by the first two retrospectives staged on Kahlo&#x27;s &quot;oeuvre&quot; in 1978, one at the Palacio de Bellas Artes in Mexico City and another at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago.

Two events were instrumental in raising interest in her life and art for the general public outside Mexico. The first was a joint retrospective of her paintings and Tina Modotti&#x27;s photographs at the Whitechapel Gallery in London, which was curated and organized by Peter Wollen and Laura Mulvey. It opened in May 1982, and later traveled to Sweden, Germany, the United States, and Mexico. The second was the publication of art historian Hayden Herrera&#x27;s international bestseller &quot;&quot; in 1983.

By 1984, Kahlo&#x27;s reputation as an artist had grown to such extent that Mexico declared her works part of the national cultural heritage, prohibiting their export from the country. As a result, her paintings seldom appear in international auctions, and comprehensive retrospectives are rare. Regardless, her paintings have still broken records for Latin American art in the 1990s and 2000s. In 1990, she became the first Latin American artist to break the one-million-dollar threshold when &quot;Diego and I&quot; was auctioned by Sotheby&#x27;s for $1,430,000. In 2006, &quot;Roots&quot; (1943) reached US$5.6 million, and in 2016, &quot;Two Nudes in a Forest&quot; (1939) sold for $8 million.

Kahlo has attracted popular interest to the extent that the term &quot;Fridamania&quot; has been coined to describe the phenomenon. She is considered &quot;one of the most instantly recognizable artists&quot;, whose face has been &quot;used with the same regularity, and often with a shared symbolism, as images of Che Guevara or Bob Marley&quot;. Her life and art have inspired a variety of merchandise, and her distinctive look has been appropriated by the fashion world. A Hollywood biopic, Julie Taymor&#x27;s &quot;Frida&quot;, was released in 2002. Based on Herrera&#x27;s biography and starring Salma Hayek (who co-produced the film) as Kahlo, it grossed US$56 million worldwide and earned six Academy Award nominations, winning for Best Makeup and Best Original Score. The 2017 Disney-Pixar animation &quot;Coco&quot; also features a fictionalized Kahlo as a supporting character, voiced by Natalia Cordova-Buckley.
Kahlo&#x27;s popular appeal is seen to stem first and foremost from a fascination with her life story, especially its painful and tragic aspects. She has become an icon for several minority groups and political movements, such as feminists, the LGBTQ community, and Chicanos. Oriana Baddeley has written that Kahlo has become a signifier of non-conformity and &quot;the archetype of a cultural minority&quot;, who is regarded simultaneously as &quot;a victim, crippled and abused&quot; and as &quot;a survivor who fights back&quot;. Edward Sullivan stated that Kahlo is hailed as a hero by so many because she is &quot;someone to validate their own struggle to find their own voice and their own public personalities&quot;. According to John Berger, Kahlo&#x27;s popularity is partly due to the fact that &quot;the sharing of pain is one of the essential preconditions for a refinding of dignity and hope&quot; in twenty-first century society. Kirk Varnedoe, the former chief curator of MoMA, has stated that Kahlo&#x27;s posthumous success is linked to the way in which &quot;she clicks with today&#x27;s sensibilities – her psycho-obsessive concern with herself, her creation of a personal alternative world carries a voltage. Her constant remaking of her identity, her construction of a theater of the self are exactly what preoccupy such contemporary artists as Cindy Sherman or Kiki Smith and, on a more popular level, Madonna... She fits well with the odd, androgynous hormonal chemistry of our particular epoch.&quot;

Kahlo&#x27;s posthumous popularity and the commercialization of her image have drawn criticism from many scholars and cultural commenters, who think that, not only have many facets of her life been mythologized, but the dramatic aspects of her biography have also overshadowed her art, producing a simplistic reading of her works in which they are reduced to literal descriptions of events in her life. According to journalist Stephanie Mencimer, Kahlo &quot;has been embraced as a poster child for every possible politically correct cause&quot; and 
Baddeley has compared the interest in Kahlo&#x27;s life to the interest in the troubled life of Vincent van Gogh but has also stated that a crucial difference between the two is that most people associate Van Gogh with his paintings, whereas Kahlo is usually signified by an image of herself – an intriguing commentary on the way male and female artists are regarded. Similarly, Peter Wollen has compared Kahlo&#x27;s cult-like following to that of Sylvia Plath, whose &quot;unusually complex and contradictory art&quot; has been overshadowed by simplified focus on her life.

=== Commemorations and characterizations ===

Kahlo&#x27;s legacy has been commemorated in several ways. La Casa Azul, her home in Coyoacán, was opened as a museum in 1958, and has become one of the most popular museums in Mexico City, with approximately 25,000 visitors monthly. The city dedicated a park, Parque Frida Kahlo, to her in Coyoacán in 1985. The park features a bronze statue of Kahlo. In the United States, she became the first Hispanic woman to be honored with a U.S. postage stamp in 2001, and was inducted into the Legacy Walk, an outdoor public display in Chicago that celebrates LGBT history and people, in 2012.

Kahlo received several commemorations on the centenary of her birth in 2007, and some on the centenary of the birthyear she attested to, 2010. These included the Bank of Mexico releasing a new MXN$ 500-peso note, featuring Kahlo&#x27;s painting titled &quot;Love&#x27;s Embrace of the Universe, Earth, (Mexico), I, Diego, and Mr. Xólotl&quot; (1949) on the reverse of the note and Diego Rivera on the front. The largest retrospective of her works at Mexico City&#x27;s Palacio de Bellas Artes attracted approximately 75,000 visitors.

In addition to other tributes, Kahlo&#x27;s life and art have inspired artists in various fields. In 1984, Paul Leduc released a biopic titled &quot;Frida, naturaleza viva,&quot; starring Ofelia Medina as Kahlo. She is the protagonist of three fictional novels, Barbara Mujica&#x27;s &quot;Frida&quot; (2001), Slavenka Drakulic&#x27;s &quot;Frida&#x27;s Bed&quot; (2008), and Barbara Kingsolver&#x27;s &quot;The Lacuna&quot; (2009). In 1994, American jazz flautist and composer James Newton released an album titled &quot;Suite for Frida Kahlo&quot;. Scottish singer/songwriter, Michael Marra, wrote a song in homage to Kahlo entitled &quot;Frida Kahlo&#x27;s Visit to the Taybridge Bar&quot;. In 2017, author Monica Brown and illustrator John Parra published a children&#x27;s book on Kahlo, &quot;Frida Kahlo and her Animalitos&quot;, which focuses primarily on the animals and pets in Kahlo&#x27;s life and art. In the visual arts, Kahlo&#x27;s influence has reached wide and far: In 1996, and again in 2005, the Mexican Cultural Institute in Washington, DC coordinated an &quot;Homage to Frida Kahlo&quot; exhibition which showcased Kahlo-related artwork by artists from all over the world in Washington&#x27;s Fraser Gallery. Additionally, notable artists such as Marina Abramovic, Alana Archer, Gabriela Gonzalez Dellosso, Yasumasa Morimura, Cris Melo, Rupert Garcia, and others have used or appropriated Kahlo&#x27;s imagery into their own works.

Kahlo has also been the subject of several stage performances. Annabelle Lopez Ochoa choreographed a one-act ballet titled &quot;Broken Wings&quot; for the English National Ballet, which debuted in 2016, Tamara Rojo originated Kahlo in the ballet. Dutch National Ballet then commissioned Lopez Ochoa to create a full-length version of the ballet, &quot;Frida&quot;, which premiered in 2020, with Maia Makhateli as Kahlo. She also inspired three operas: Robert Xavier Rodriguez&#x27;s &quot;Frida&quot;, which premiered at the American Music Theater Festival in Philadelphia in 1991; Kalevi Aho&#x27;s &quot;Frida y Diego&quot;, which premiered at the Helsinki Music Centre in Helsinki, Finland in 2014; and Gabriela Lena Frank&#x27;s &quot;El último sueño de Frida y Diego&quot;, which premiered at the San Diego Opera in 2022. 

Kahlo was the main character in several plays, including Dolores C. Sendler&#x27;s &quot;Goodbye, My Friduchita&quot; (1999), Robert Lepage and Sophie Faucher&#x27;s &quot;La Casa Azul&quot; (2002), Humberto Robles&#x27; &quot;Frida Kahlo: Viva la vida!&quot; (2009), and Rita Ortez Provost&#x27;s &quot;Tree of Hope&quot; (2014). 

In 2018, Mattel unveiled seventeen new Barbie dolls in celebration of International Women&#x27;s Day, including one of Kahlo. Critics objected to the doll&#x27;s slim waist and noticeably missing unibrow.

In 2014 Kahlo was one of the inaugural honorees in the Rainbow Honor Walk, a walk of fame in San Francisco&#x27;s Castro neighborhood noting LGBTQ people who have &quot;made significant contributions in their fields&quot;.

In 2018, San Francisco Board of Supervisors unanimously voted to rename Phelan Avenue to Frida Kahlo Way. Frida Kahlo Way is the home of City College of San Francisco and Archbishop Riordan High School.

In 2019, Frida was featured on a mural painted by Rafael Blanco in downtown Reno, Nevada.

In 2019, Frida&#x27;s “Fantasmones Siniestros” (“Sinister Ghosts”) was burned to ashes, publicizing an Ethereum NFT.&lt;ref name=&quot;nytimes/kahlo-nft&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

In 2022, as part of a collaboration with Centre Pompidou, Swatch released a watch based on &quot;The Frame&quot;.

== Solo exhibitions ==
*4 January 2022–present: &quot;Frida Kahlo: The Life of an Icon&quot; at Barangaroo Reserve, Sydney. Audio visual exhibition created by the Frida Kahlo Corporation.
*8 February–12 May 2019: &quot;Frida Kahlo: Appearances Can Be Deceiving&quot; at the Brooklyn Museum. This was the largest U.S. exhibition in a decade devoted solely to the painter and the only U.S. show to feature her Tehuana clothing, hand-painted corsets and other never-before-seen items that had been locked away after the artist&#x27;s death and rediscovered in 2004.
*16 June–18 November 2018: &quot;Frida Kahlo: Making Her Self Up&quot; at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. The basis for the later Brooklyn Museum exhibit.
*3 February–30 April 2016: &quot;Frida Kahlo: Paintings and Graphic Art From Mexican Collections&quot; at the Faberge Museum, St. Petersburg. Russia&#x27;s first retrospective of Kahlo&#x27;s work.
*27 October 2007–20 January 2008: Frida Kahlo an exhibition at the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, Philadelphia Museum of Art, 20 February–18 May 2008; and the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, 16 June–28 September 2008.
*1–15 November 1938: Frida&#x27;s first solo exhibit and New York debut at the Museum of Modern Art. Georgia O&#x27;Keeffe, Isamu Noguchi, and other prominent American artists attended the opening; approximately half of the paintings were sold.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Anahuacalli Museum
* List of paintings by Frida Kahlo

==Notes==
== References ==
Informational notes
Citations
Bibliography
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
== External links ==

*Frida Kahlo in the collection of The Museum of Modern Art
*
*Kahlo at the National Museum of Women in the Arts
*Kahlo&#x27;s paintings at the Art History Archive
*Kahlo&#x27;s painting at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art
*This could be Kahlo&#x27;s voice according to the Department of Culture in Mexico
*The Frida Kahlo papers at the National Museum of Women in the Arts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5588" start="0" end="39" title="Frida Kahlo" label="Magdalena Carmen Frida Kahlo y Calderón"/>
<link wikidata="Q192110" start="123" end="136" title="self-portrait" label="self-portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317008" start="209" end="243" title="Culture of Mexico" label="the country&amp;#x27;s popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q281108" start="260" end="265" title="Naïve art" label="naïve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153484" start="266" end="274" title="folk art" label="folk art"/>
<link wikidata="Q265425" start="315" end="330" title="postcolonialism" label="postcolonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933503" start="522" end="532" title="Mexicayotl" label="Mexicayotl"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="622" end="632" title="surrealist" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q147516" start="636" end="651" title="magical realist" label="magical realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088113" start="708" end="720" title="chronic pain" label="chronic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="759" end="766" title="mestizo" label="mestiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q45009" start="784" end="793" title="Purépecha" label="Purépecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q661315" start="889" end="897" title="Coyoacán" label="Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663377" start="931" end="949" title="Frida Kahlo Museum" label="Frida Kahlo Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="980" end="985" title="polio" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054610" start="1336" end="1359" title="Mexican Communist Party" label="Mexican Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="1413" end="1425" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826048" start="1634" end="1654" title="Mexican handcrafts and folk art" label="Mexican folk culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773231" start="1721" end="1734" title="Pre-Columbian Mexico" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1739" end="1747" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="1812" end="1824" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189569" start="1885" end="1904" title="Julien Levy Gallery" label="Julien Levy Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="2054" end="2060" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q45895679" start="2100" end="2109" title="The Frame (painting)" label="The Frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q690187" start="2325" end="2373" title="Escuela Nacional de Pintura, Escultura y Grabado" label="Escuela Nacional de Pintura, Escultura y Grabado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963346" start="2976" end="2984" title="Chicano Movement" label="Chicanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="2990" end="2998" title="feminism" label="feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="3017" end="3023" title="LGBTQ+" label="LGBTQ+"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314452" start="3127" end="3137" title="Indigenous peoples of Mexico" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="3561" end="3573" title="stenographer" label="stenographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806548" start="3907" end="3926" title="Medical illustration" label="medical illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q939611" start="4037" end="4042" title="easel" label="easel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="4830" end="4847" title="Sandro Botticelli" label="Sandro Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803" start="4852" end="4860" title="Bronzino" label="Bronzino"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="4876" end="4887" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q160218" start="4912" end="4929" title="Neue Sachlichkeit" label="Neue Sachlichkeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="4934" end="4940" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="4988" end="5000" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q204245" start="5036" end="5046" title="Cuernavaca" label="Cuernavaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q365008" start="5229" end="5248" title="Adolfo Best Maugard" label="Adolfo Best Maugard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212165" start="5502" end="5509" title="La Raza" label="La Raza"/>
<link wikidata="Q346988" start="5789" end="5802" title="Edward Weston" label="Edward Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288111" start="5804" end="5819" title="Ralph Stackpole" label="Ralph Stackpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807335" start="5821" end="5840" title="Timothy L. Pflueger" label="Timothy L. Pflueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q752987" start="5846" end="5860" title="Nickolas Muray" label="Nickolas Muray"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281370" start="6087" end="6110" title="Frieda and Diego Rivera (painting)" label="Frieda and Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q333419" start="6204" end="6218" title="Luther Burbank" label="Luther Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468251" start="6613" end="6642" title="Legion of Honor (museum)" label="Palace of the Legion of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="6982" end="6989" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="6994" end="7000" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q131345052" start="7292" end="7299" title="retablo" label="retablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q118190557" start="7511" end="7530" title="Henry Ford Hospital (painting)" label="Henry Ford Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703792" start="7767" end="7779" title="Detroit News" label="Detroit News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941128" start="8407" end="8424" title="Memory, the Heart" label="Memory, the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q19898216" start="8496" end="8518" title="What the Water Gave Me (painting)" label="What the Water Gave Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="8583" end="8623" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q83812" start="8762" end="8780" title="Edward G. Robinson" label="Edward G. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="8877" end="8889" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189569" start="9171" end="9182" title="Julien Levy" label="Julien Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46408" start="9527" end="9548" title="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keeffe" label="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keeffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q456413" start="9553" end="9570" title="Clare Boothe Luce" label="Clare Boothe Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="9710" end="9714" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="9930" end="9946" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770723" start="10048" end="10066" title="A. Conger Goodyear" label="A. Conger Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608280" start="10188" end="10200" title="Dorothy Hale" label="Dorothy Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337325" start="10531" end="10550" title="Edgar Kaufmann, Jr." label="Edgar Kaufmann, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="10809" end="10823" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q712262" start="11102" end="11122" title="Manuel Alvarez Bravo" label="Manuel Alvarez Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11442" end="11458" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="11563" end="11569" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q45895679" start="11586" end="11595" title="The Frame (painting)" label="The Frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="11739" end="11752" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q152384" start="11757" end="11766" title="Joan Miró" label="Joan Miró"/>
<link wikidata="Q464023" start="11812" end="11829" title="Elsa Schiaparelli" label="Elsa Schiaparelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562080" start="11874" end="11885" title="Vogue Paris" label="Vogue Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152226" start="12328" end="12357" title="Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston" label="Institute of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="12361" end="12367" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q510324" start="12684" end="12710" title="Philadelphia Museum of Art" label="Philadelphia Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q233806" start="12744" end="12760" title="Peggy Guggenheim" label="Peggy Guggenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q705846" start="12768" end="12799" title="The Art of This Century gallery" label="The Art of This Century gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q690187" start="13655" end="13728" title="Escuela Nacional de Pintura, Escultura y Grabado &amp;quot;La Esmeralda&amp;quot;" label="Escuela Nacional de Pintura, Escultura y Grabado &amp;quot;La Esmeralda&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q528028" start="14086" end="14097" title="Fanny Rabel" label="Fanny Rabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q715258" start="14099" end="14119" title="Arturo García Bustos" label="Arturo García Bustos"/>
<link wikidata="Q715219" start="14143" end="14157" title="Arturo Estrada" label="Arturo Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232010" start="14984" end="14998" title="The Two Fridas" label="The Two Fridas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032842" start="15026" end="15047" title="Museo de Arte Moderno" label="Museo de Arte Moderno"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010270" start="15693" end="15709" title="The Wounded Deer" label="The Wounded Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170571" start="15846" end="15857" title="still lifes" label="still lifes"/>
<link wikidata="Q454705" start="16592" end="16610" title="Lola Alvarez Bravo" label="Lola Alvarez Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q195436" start="17237" end="17249" title="Tate Britain" label="Tate Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="17490" end="17497" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="17563" end="17569" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734790" start="17664" end="17680" title="Self-portraiture" label="Self-portraiture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17689" end="17748" title="Self-portrait on the Border of Mexico and the United States" label="Self-portrait on the Border of Mexico and the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q118190557" start="17770" end="17789" title="Henry Ford Hospital (painting)" label="Henry Ford Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q97164416" start="17811" end="17850" title="Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky" label="Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232010" start="17872" end="17886" title="The Two Fridas" label="The Two Fridas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880026" start="17908" end="17957" title="Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird" label="Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17979" end="18010" title="Self-Portrait with Cropped Hair" label="Self-Portrait with Cropped Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q120993" start="18304" end="18321" title="Amedeo Modigliani" label="Amedeo Modigliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895833" start="18903" end="18919" title="Bertram D. Wolfe" label="Bertram D. Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="19771" end="19780" title="symbolism (arts)" label="symbolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q147516" start="20060" end="20075" title="magical realism" label="magical realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160218" start="20091" end="20106" title="New Objectivity" label="New Objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933503" start="20388" end="20399" title="Mexicayotl" label="Mexicanidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q938864" start="21434" end="21443" title="Mexican muralism" label="muralists"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="21557" end="21575" title="socialist realism" label="socialist realists"/>
<link wikidata="Q332041" start="21721" end="21741" title="José Clemente Orozco" label="José Clemente Orozco"/>
<link wikidata="Q315647" start="21746" end="21768" title="David Alfaro Siquieros" label="David Alfaro Siquieros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942197" start="21984" end="22000" title="votive paintings of Mexico" label="votive paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="23206" end="23222" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q124057" start="23398" end="23413" title="Dolores del Río" label="Dolores del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="23624" end="23633" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574734" start="23852" end="23871" title="Hermenegildo Bustos" label="Hermenegildo Bustos"/>
<link wikidata="Q732526" start="23933" end="23954" title="José Guadalupe Posada" label="José Guadalupe Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q130531" start="24055" end="24071" title="Hieronymus Bosch" label="Hieronymus Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43270" start="24122" end="24146" title="Pieter Bruegel the Elder" label="Pieter Bruegel the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q260862" start="24262" end="24281" title="Rosario Castellanos" label="Rosario Castellanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q829508" start="27912" end="27921" title="Coatlicue" label="Coatlicue"/>
<link wikidata="Q179818" start="27923" end="27935" title="Quetzalcoatl" label="Quetzalcoatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q279639" start="27941" end="27947" title="Xolotl" label="Xolotl"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="27996" end="28001" title="Aztecs" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866923" start="28288" end="28298" title="La Llorona" label="La Llorona"/>
<link wikidata="Q230314" start="28303" end="28314" title="La Malinche" label="La Malinche"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630838" start="28439" end="28453" title="La Chingada" label="de la chingada"/>
<link wikidata="Q661315" start="31211" end="31219" title="Coyoacán" label="Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="31251" end="31262" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663377" start="31315" end="31327" title="Frida Kahlo Museum" label="La Casa Azul"/>
<link wikidata="Q573125" start="31500" end="31515" title="Guillermo Kahlo" label="Guillermo Kahlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="31659" end="31666" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q322621" start="31682" end="31702" title="German immigration to Mexico" label="immigrated to Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="31718" end="31726" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="31814" end="31820" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q173591" start="31878" end="31882" title="Arad, Romania" label="Arad"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="31978" end="31986" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="32008" end="32014" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314452" start="32021" end="32031" title="Indigenous peoples of Mexico" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q928333" start="32055" end="32062" title="Spaniards in Mexico" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q47541637" start="32202" end="32210" title="Cristina Kahlo" label="Cristina"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="32798" end="32816" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="32988" end="32993" title="polio" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367381" start="34355" end="34382" title="Escuela Nacional Preparatoria (Mexico)" label="National Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010090" start="34774" end="34785" title="Indigenismo in Mexico" label="indigenismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984484" start="34915" end="34931" title="colonial mindset" label="colonial mindset"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="35498" end="35516" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="36239" end="36248" title="Tram" label="streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356933" start="36686" end="36697" title="Hip bone" label="pelvic bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9597" start="36722" end="36729" title="abdomen" label="abdomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="36734" end="36740" title="uterus" label="uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="36777" end="36782" title="Vertebral column" label="spine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16343" start="36901" end="36911" title="Clavicle" label="collarbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q180323" start="37198" end="37207" title="vertebrae" label="vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q524296" start="37456" end="37473" title="Andrés Henestrosa" label="Andrés Henestrosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054610" start="37692" end="37715" title="Mexican Communist Party" label="Mexican Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712338" start="37826" end="37845" title="Julio Antonio Mella" label="Julio Antonio Mella"/>
<link wikidata="Q466946" start="37884" end="37896" title="Tina Modotti" label="Tina Modotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="37970" end="37982" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q204245" start="39432" end="39442" title="Cuernavaca" label="Cuernavaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="39465" end="39472" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126230" start="39529" end="39545" title="Palace of Cortés, Cuernavaca" label="Palace of Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="39742" end="39761" title="Third International" label="Third International"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="40112" end="40119" title="mestiza" label="mestiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269820" start="40168" end="40174" title="huipil" label="huipil"/>
<link wikidata="Q655245" start="40192" end="40198" title="rebozo" label="rebozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q185681" start="40313" end="40324" title="matriarchy" label="matriarchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q392250" start="40340" end="40362" title="Isthmus of Tehuantepec" label="Isthmus of Tehuantepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="40714" end="40727" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922439" start="40782" end="40810" title="San Francisco Stock Exchange" label="San Francisco Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q586735" start="40819" end="40849" title="California School of Fine Arts" label="California School of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q752987" start="41036" end="41050" title="Nickolas Muray" label="Nickolas Muray"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="41176" end="41189" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="41244" end="41264" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="41303" end="41310" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201549" start="41371" end="41396" title="Detroit Institute of Arts" label="Detroit Institute of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="41937" end="41942" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q552844" start="41947" end="41957" title="Edsel Ford" label="Edsel Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="42951" end="42961" title="hemorrhage" label="hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11277" start="43208" end="43226" title="Rockefeller Center" label="Rockefeller Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16488383" start="43285" end="43305" title="My Dress Hangs There" label="My Dress Hangs There"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692507" start="43484" end="43502" title="New Workers School" label="New Workers School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067789" start="43823" end="43832" title="San Ángel" label="San Ángel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724" start="43852" end="43864" title="Le Corbusier" label="Le Corbusier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378325" start="43880" end="43898" title="Juan O&amp;#x27;Gorman" label="Juan O&amp;#x27;Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q620840" start="44192" end="44204" title="appendectomy" label="appendectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="44243" end="44253" title="gangrene" label="gangrenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q47541637" start="44479" end="44487" title="Cristina Kahlo" label="Cristina"/>
<link wikidata="Q442628" start="44708" end="44721" title="Isamu Noguchi" label="Isamu Noguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q206682" start="45030" end="45050" title="Fourth International" label="Fourth International"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="45130" end="45141" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="45149" end="45166" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="45270" end="45282" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q262376" start="45329" end="45343" title="Natalia Sedova" label="Natalia Sedova"/>
<link wikidata="Q97164416" start="45525" end="45564" title="Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky" label="Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232010" start="47066" end="47080" title="The Two Fridas" label="The Two Fridas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19897995" start="47153" end="47170" title="The Wounded Table" label="The Wounded Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880026" start="47195" end="47244" title="Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird" label="Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062247" start="47372" end="47408" title="Golden Gate International Exposition" label="Golden Gate International Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151016" start="47516" end="47540" title="Assassination of Leon Trotsky" label="Trotsky was assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q66992" start="48178" end="48193" title="Heinz Berggruen" label="Heinz Berggruen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="49174" end="49182" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q258244" start="49478" end="49491" title="spider monkey" label="spider monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38856" start="49494" end="49509" title="Mexican hairless dog" label="Xoloitzcuintlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21056477" start="50102" end="50119" title="The Broken Column" label="The Broken Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010270" start="50222" end="50238" title="The Wounded Deer" label="The Wounded Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q957868" start="50893" end="50909" title="Stockholm Appeal" label="Stockholm Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q734512" start="51556" end="51572" title="bronchopneumonia" label="bronchopneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51683" end="51708" title="1954 Guatemalan coup d&amp;#x27;état#Operation PBSuccess" label="CIA invasion of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q56305697" start="51877" end="51891" title="Hayden Herrera" label="Hayden Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="52372" end="52390" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139081" start="52853" end="52876" title="Palacio de Bellas Artes" label="Palacio de Bellas Artes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193375" start="53604" end="53615" title="Tate Modern" label="Tate Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963346" start="54270" end="54286" title="Chicano Movement" label="Chicano Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279765" start="54381" end="54397" title="Teresa del Conde" label="Teresa del Conde"/>
<link wikidata="Q654762" start="54586" end="54600" title="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s" label="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q118142" start="54785" end="54811" title="Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago" label="Museum of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="54815" end="54822" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814654" start="55029" end="55048" title="Whitechapel Gallery" label="Whitechapel Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q997312" start="55095" end="55107" title="Peter Wollen" label="Peter Wollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q440887" start="55112" end="55124" title="Laura Mulvey" label="Laura Mulvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="56352" end="56363" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="56367" end="56377" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q240490" start="56531" end="56543" title="Julie Taymor" label="Julie Taymor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35738" start="56557" end="56562" title="Frida (2002 film)" label="Frida"/>
<link wikidata="Q125106" start="56639" end="56650" title="Salma Hayek" label="Salma Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="56738" end="56751" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q487136" start="56777" end="56788" title="Academy Award for Best Makeup" label="Best Makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q488651" start="56793" end="56812" title="Academy Award for Best Original Score" label="Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="56823" end="56829" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="56830" end="56835" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5815826" start="56852" end="56856" title="Coco (2017 film)" label="Coco"/>
<link wikidata="Q24239730" start="56936" end="56959" title="Natalia Cordova-Buckley" label="Natalia Cordova-Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="57206" end="57211" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307911" start="57227" end="57235" title="Chicanos" label="Chicanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q104716259" start="57237" end="57252" title="Oriana Baddeley" label="Oriana Baddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q382604" start="57698" end="57709" title="John Berger" label="John Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415540" start="57905" end="57918" title="Kirk Varnedoe" label="Kirk Varnedoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q229455" start="58327" end="58340" title="Cindy Sherman" label="Cindy Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q447300" start="58344" end="58354" title="Kiki Smith" label="Kiki Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="58385" end="58392" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="59134" end="59150" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q133054" start="59487" end="59499" title="Sylvia Plath" label="Sylvia Plath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663377" start="59720" end="59732" title="Frida Kahlo Museum" label="La Casa Azul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885391" start="60093" end="60111" title="U.S. postage stamp" label="U.S. postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031265" start="60147" end="60158" title="Legacy Walk" label="Legacy Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="60213" end="60217" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q806208" start="60410" end="60424" title="Bank of Mexico" label="Bank of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730" start="60441" end="60445" title="Mexican peso" label="MXN$"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746540" start="60890" end="60900" title="Paul Leduc (film director)" label="Paul Leduc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753159" start="60932" end="60954" title="Frida, naturaleza viva" label="Frida, naturaleza viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986025" start="60971" end="60984" title="Ofelia Medina" label="Ofelia Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q134898" start="61093" end="61110" title="Slavenka Drakulic" label="Slavenka Drakulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264643" start="61159" end="61177" title="Barbara Kingsolver" label="Barbara Kingsolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745081" start="61191" end="61201" title="The Lacuna" label="The Lacuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q611264" start="61261" end="61273" title="James Newton" label="James Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406284" start="61362" end="61375" title="Michael Marra" label="Michael Marra"/>
<link wikidata="Q32945188" start="61522" end="61532" title="John Parra (illustrator)" label="John Parra"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064449" start="61998" end="62012" title="Fraser Gallery" label="Fraser Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="62052" end="62068" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q595342" start="62112" end="62129" title="Yasumasa Morimura" label="Yasumasa Morimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850655" start="62301" end="62322" title="Annabelle Lopez Ochoa" label="Annabelle Lopez Ochoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q97495433" start="62367" end="62379" title="Broken Wings (ballet)" label="Broken Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342859" start="62394" end="62417" title="English National Ballet" label="English National Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914944" start="62442" end="62453" title="Tamara Rojo" label="Tamara Rojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075518" start="62486" end="62507" title="Dutch National Ballet" label="Dutch National Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q97495433" start="62591" end="62596" title="Frida (ballet)" label="Frida"/>
<link wikidata="Q16752928" start="62634" end="62648" title="Maia Makhateli" label="Maia Makhateli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355601" start="62691" end="62714" title="Robert Xavier Rodriguez" label="Robert Xavier Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503442" start="62728" end="62733" title="Frida (opera)" label="Frida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244171" start="62764" end="62795" title="American Music Theater Festival" label="American Music Theater Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="62799" end="62811" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q521079" start="62821" end="62831" title="Kalevi Aho" label="Kalevi Aho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888459" start="62889" end="62910" title="Helsinki Music Centre" label="Helsinki Music Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="62914" end="62922" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489991" start="62945" end="62964" title="Gabriela Lena Frank" label="Gabriela Lena Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354562" start="63041" end="63056" title="San Diego Opera" label="San Diego Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341481" start="63194" end="63207" title="Robert Lepage" label="Robert Lepage"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="63410" end="63416" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="63440" end="63446" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q38964" start="63471" end="63501" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438099" start="63597" end="63604" title="unibrow" label="unibrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q71842610" start="63662" end="63680" title="Rainbow Honor Walk" label="Rainbow Honor Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621997" start="63684" end="63696" title="List of halls and walks of fame" label="walk of fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q956169" start="63721" end="63740" title="Castro District, San Francisco" label="Castro neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="63748" end="63753" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974556" start="63968" end="63997" title="City College of San Francisco" label="City College of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785636" start="64002" end="64032" title="Archbishop Riordan High School" label="Archbishop Riordan High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q106920546" start="64085" end="64098" title="Rafael Blanco (artist)" label="Rafael Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16783523" start="64229" end="64237" title="Ethereum" label="Ethereum"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648452" start="64238" end="64241" title="NFT" label="NFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="64343" end="64358" title="Centre Pompidou" label="Centre Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q573422" start="64360" end="64366" title="Swatch" label="Swatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427156" start="64513" end="64531" title="Barangaroo Reserve" label="Barangaroo Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="64533" end="64539" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q632682" start="64691" end="64706" title="Brooklyn Museum" label="Brooklyn Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="65058" end="65084" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q561944" start="65255" end="65269" title="Faberge Museum" label="Faberge Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851516" start="65410" end="65427" title="Walker Art Center" label="Walker Art Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q510324" start="65442" end="65468" title="Philadelphia Museum of Art" label="Philadelphia Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q913672" start="65503" end="65537" title="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art" label="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="65645" end="65665" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q675877" start="65839" end="65857" title="Anahuacalli Museum" label="Anahuacalli Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242529" start="65860" end="65892" title="List of paintings by Frida Kahlo" label="List of paintings by Frida Kahlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q861608" start="66368" end="66404" title="National Museum of Women in the Arts" label="National Museum of Women in the Arts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162277" wikidata="Q116363" url="?curid=162277" title="Oswald Myconius">
<text>Oswald Myconius (1488 – 14 October 1552) was a Swiss Protestant theologian and Protestant reformer. He was a follower of Huldrych Zwingli.

==Life==
He was born at Lucerne, Switzerland. His family name was Geisshüsler, and his father was a miller; hence he was also called Molitoris (Latin &quot;molitor&quot;, &quot;miller&quot;). The name Myconius is said to have been given him by Erasmus; it alludes to the proverbial expression &quot;bald-headed Myconian&quot;. From the school at Lucerne he went to the University of Basel to study classics. From 1514 he obtained teaching posts at Basel, where he married, and made the acquaintance of Erasmus and of Hans Holbein, the painter. In 1516 he was called, as schoolmaster, to Zürich, where (1518) he attached himself to the reforming party of Zwingli. This led to his being transferred to Lucerne and again, in 1523, reinstated at Zürich.

On the death of Zwingli (1531) he moved to Basel, where he held the office of town&#x27;s preacher, and (till 1541) the chair of New Testament exegesis. In 1534 he authored the Confession of Basel. In confessional matters he was for a union of all Protestants. Although a Zwinglian, his readiness to compromise with the advocates of consubstantiation gave him trouble with the hard-line Zwinglians. He had, however, a distinguished follower in Theodore Bibliander. He died in Basel.

==Works==
Among his several tractates, the most important is &quot;De H Zwinglii vita et obitu&quot; (1536), translated into English by Henry Bennet (1561).

==References==
==Further reading==
*Melchior Adam, &quot;Vita theologorum&quot; (1620) 
*M. Kirchhofer, &quot;O. Myconius&quot; (1813) 
*Karl Rudolf Hagenbach, &quot;J. Oekolampad und O. Myconius&quot; (1859) 
*F. M. Ledderhose, in &quot;Allgemeine deutsche Biog&quot; (1886) 
*B. Riggenbach and Egli, in Hauck&#x27;s &quot;Realencyklopadie&quot; (1903)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q116363" start="0" end="15" title="Oswald Myconius" label="Oswald Myconius"/>
<link wikidata="Q763779" start="79" end="98" title="Protestant reformer" label="Protestant reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="121" end="137" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Huldrych Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="173" end="184" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="384" end="391" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q372608" start="509" end="528" title="University of Basel" label="University of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48319" start="657" end="669" title="Hans Holbein the Younger" label="Hans Holbein"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="727" end="733" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="934" end="939" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="1020" end="1033" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="1034" end="1042" title="exegesis" label="exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159989" start="1068" end="1087" title="Confession of Basel" label="Confession of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1139" end="1150" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q115851" start="1335" end="1354" title="Theodore Bibliander" label="Theodore Bibliander"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198775" start="1511" end="1523" title="Henry Bennet (translator)" label="Henry Bennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q67082" start="1569" end="1582" title="Melchior Adam" label="Melchior Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q118030" start="1670" end="1691" title="Karl Rudolf Hagenbach" label="Karl Rudolf Hagenbach"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162279" wikidata="Q228579" url="?curid=162279" title="Samantha Smith">
<text>Samantha Reed Smith (June 29, 1972 – August 25, 1985) was an American peace activist and child actress from Manchester, Maine, who became famous for her anti-war outreaches during the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union. In 1982, Smith wrote a letter to the newly appointed General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Yuri Andropov, and received a personal reply with an invitation to visit the Soviet Union, which she accepted.

Smith attracted extensive media attention in both countries as a &quot;Goodwill Ambassador&quot;, becoming known as America&#x27;s Youngest Ambassador and subsequently participating in peacemaking activities in Japan. With the assistance of her father, Arthur (an academic), she wrote a book titled &quot;Journey to the Soviet Union&quot;, which chronicled her visit to the country. She later became a child actress, hosting a child-oriented special on the 1984 United States presidential election for The Disney Channel and playing a co-starring role in the television series &quot;Lime Street&quot;. Smith died at the age of 13 in 1985, onboard Bar Harbor Airlines Flight 1808, which crashed short of the runway on final approach to the Auburn/Lewiston Municipal Airport in Maine.

==Historical context==
When Yuri Andropov succeeded Leonid Brezhnev as leader of the Soviet Union in November 1982, the mainstream Western newspapers and magazines ran numerous front-page photographs and articles about him. Most coverage was negative and tended to give a perception of a new threat to the stability of the Western World. Andropov had been the Soviet Ambassador to Hungary during the 1956 Hungarian Revolution, which was put down by the Soviet Army, and the Chairman of the KGB from 1967 to 1982; during his tenure, he was known in the West for crushing the Prague Spring and the brutal suppression of dissidents, such as Andrei Sakharov and Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. He began his tenure as Soviet leader by strengthening the powers of the KGB, and by suppressing dissidents. According to Vasili Mitrokhin, Andropov saw the struggle for human rights as a part of a wide-ranging imperialist plot to undermine the foundation of the Soviet state. Much international tension surrounded both Soviet and American efforts to develop weapons capable of being launched from satellites in orbit. Both governments had extensive research and development programs to develop such technology. However, both nations were coming under increasing pressure to disband the project. In the United States, President Ronald Reagan came under pressure from a lobby of US scientists and arms experts, while in the Soviet Union the government issued a statement that read, &quot;To prevent the militarization of space is one of the most urgent tasks facing mankind&quot;.

At the time, large anti-nuclear protests were taking place across both Europe and North America, in the midst of which the November 20, 1983, screening of ABC&#x27;s post-nuclear war dramatization &quot;The Day After&quot; became one of the most anticipated media events of the decade.

The two superpowers had by this point abandoned their strategy of &quot;détente&quot; and in response to the deployment of the Soviet Union&#x27;s new SS-20, NATO deployed cruise and Pershing II missiles in Europe. The 1979–1989 Soviet–Afghan War was also into its third year. In this atmosphere, on November 22, 1982, &quot;Time&quot; magazine published an issue with Andropov on the cover. When Smith viewed the edition, she asked her mother: &quot;If people are so afraid of him, why doesn&#x27;t someone write a letter asking whether he wants to have a war or not?&quot; Her mother replied, &quot;Why don&#x27;t you?&quot;

==Life==
Samantha Smith was born on June 29, 1972, in the small town of Houlton, Maine, on the Canada–United States border, to Jane Goshorn and Arthur Smith. At the age of five, she wrote a letter to Queen Elizabeth II in order to express her admiration to the British monarch. When Smith had finished second grade in spring 1980, the family settled in Manchester, Maine, where she attended Manchester Elementary School. Her father served as an instructor at Ricker College in Houlton before teaching literature and writing at the University of Maine at Augusta while her mother worked as a social worker with the Maine Department of Human Services.

In November 1982, when Smith was 10 years old, she wrote to Soviet leader Yuri Andropov, seeking to understand why Soviet Union–United States relations were so tense:

Her letter was published in the Soviet state-run newspaper &quot;Pravda&quot;. Smith was happy to discover that her letter had been published; however, she had not received a reply. She then sent a letter to Soviet ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin asking if Andropov intended to respond. On April 26, 1983, she received a response from Andropov:

A media circus ensued, with Smith being interviewed by Ted Koppel and Johnny Carson, among others, and with nightly reports by the major American networks. On July 7, 1983, she flew to Moscow with her parents, and spent two weeks as Andropov&#x27;s guest. During the trip she visited Moscow and Leningrad and spent time in Artek, the main Soviet pioneer camp, in the town of Gurzuf on the Crimean Peninsula. Smith wrote in her book that in Leningrad she and her parents were amazed by the friendliness of the people and by the presents many people made for them. Speaking at a Moscow press conference, she declared that the Russians were &quot;just like us&quot;. In Artek, Smith chose to stay with the Soviet children rather than accept the privileged accommodations offered to her. For ease of communication, teachers and children who spoke fluent English were chosen to stay in the building where she was lodged. Smith shared a dormitory with nine other girls, and spent her time there swimming, talking and learning Russian songs and dances. While there, she made many friends, including Natasha Kashirina from Leningrad, a fluent English speaker.

Samantha spontaneously participated in the documentary film &quot;The Capital of Childhood&quot; dedicated to the 60th anniversary of Artek. Together with Natasha, she performed the song &quot;May There Always Be Sunshine!&quot;. Cinematographer Nikolai Zherekhov recalled: &quot;An ordinary child, she was no different from our boys and girls, maybe she was more liberated, our guys were a little restrained at first. I remember her extraordinary, kind, sunny, lively and sincere smile, there was no stardom in it.&quot;

Andropov, however, was unable to meet with her during her visit, although they did speak by telephone. It was later discovered that Andropov had become seriously ill and had withdrawn from the public eye during this time. Smith also met with Russian cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova, the first woman to orbit the Earth, and visited an experimental fruit station in Malen&#x27;koe village. Media followed her every step—photographs and articles about her were published by the main Soviet newspapers and magazines throughout her trip and after it. Smith became widely known to Soviet citizens and was well regarded by many of them. In the United States, the event drew suspicion and some regarded it as an &quot;American-style public relations stunt&quot;.

Smith&#x27;s return to the US on July 22, 1983, was celebrated by the people of Maine with roses, a red carpet, and a limousine and her popularity continued to grow in her native country. Some critics at the time remained skeptical, believing Smith was unwittingly serving as an instrument of Soviet propaganda. In December 1983, continuing in her role as &quot;America&#x27;s Youngest Ambassador&quot;, she was invited to Japan, where she met with the Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone and attended the Children&#x27;s International Symposium in Kobe. In her speech at the symposium, she suggested that Soviet and American leaders exchange granddaughters for two weeks every year, arguing that a president &quot;wouldn&#x27;t want to send a bomb to a country his granddaughter would be visiting&quot;. Her trip inspired other exchanges of child goodwill ambassadors, including a visit by the eleven-year-old Russian child Katya Lycheva to the United States. Later, Smith wrote a book called &quot;Journey to the Soviet Union&quot; whose cover shows her at Artek, her favorite part of the Soviet trip.

Smith pursued her role as a media celebrity when in 1984, billed as a &quot;Special Correspondent&quot;, she hosted a children&#x27;s special for The Disney Channel entitled &quot;Samantha Smith Goes To Washington... Campaign &#x27;84&quot;. The show covered politics, where Smith interviewed several candidates for the 1984 Democratic Party presidential primaries, including George McGovern, John Glenn and Jesse Jackson. That same year, she guest starred in &quot;Charles in Charge&quot; as Kim, alongside another celebrity guest star, Julianne McNamara. Her fame resulted in Smith becoming the subject of stalker Robert John Bardo, the man who would later go on to stalk and ultimately murder &quot;My Sister Sam&quot; actress Rebecca Schaeffer. Bardo traveled to Maine in an attempt to meet Smith, however he aborted his attempt when being given a citation by police. Concerned that he was drawing too much attention to himself, Bardo returned home. He later confessed to finding new ways to stalk Smith, but her later death terminated his master plan.

In 1985, she played the co-starring role of the elder daughter to Robert Wagner&#x27;s character in the television series &quot;Lime Street&quot;.

==Death==

On August 25, 1985, Smith and her father were returning home aboard Bar Harbor Airlines Flight 1808 after filming a segment for &quot;Lime Street&quot;. While attempting to land at Lewiston-Auburn Regional Airport in Auburn, Maine, the Beechcraft 99 commuter plane struck some trees short of the runway and crashed, killing all six passengers and two crew on board. Much speculation regarding the cause of the accident circulated afterwards. Accusations of foul play circulated widely in the Soviet Union. A CIA report written in 1985 reads: “Although no direct allegations of foul play have appeared in the Soviet media, people from ordinary citizens to intellectuals seem to believe that Samantha was silenced so that she could not continue her efforts to build goodwill toward the Soviet Union”. An investigation was undertaken in the United States and the official report—which did not show evidence of foul play—was made public. The report said the plane crashed one mile (1.6 km) south-west of the airport at 22:05 EDT, and concluded that &quot;the relatively steep flight path angle and the attitude (the orientation of the aircraft relative to the horizon, direction of motion etc.) and speed of the airplane at ground impact precluded the occupants from surviving the accident&quot;. The report also went on to say that it was a rainy night, that the pilots operating the aircraft were inexperienced, and an accidental, but not uncommon and not usually critical, ground radar failure occurred.

About 1,000 people attended Smith&#x27;s funeral in Augusta, Maine, and she was eulogized in Moscow as a champion of peace. Attendees included Robert Wagner and Vladimir Kulagin of the Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C., who read a personal message of condolence from Mikhail Gorbachev.

Everyone in the Soviet Union who has known Samantha Smith will forever remember the image of the American girl who, like millions of Soviet young men and women, dreamt about peace, and about friendship between the peoples of the United States and the Soviet Union. 

President Ronald Reagan sent his condolences to Smith&#x27;s mother, in writing:

Perhaps you can take some measure of comfort in the knowledge that millions of Americans, indeed millions of people, share the burdens of your grief. They also will cherish and remember Samantha, her smile, her idealism and unaffected sweetness of spirit.

The remains of Samantha and her father were cremated, and their ashes were buried at Estabrook Cemetery, Amity, Maine.

==Legacy==
Smith&#x27;s contributions have been honored with a number of tributes by Russians and by the people of her home state of Maine. A monument to her was built in Moscow; &quot;Samantha Smith Alley&quot; in the Artek Young Pioneer camp was named after her in 1986. The monument built to Smith was stolen by metal thieves in 2003 following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. In 2003, Voronezh retiree Valentin Vaulin built a monument to her after raising funds from private donations. The Soviet Union issued a commemorative stamp with her likeness. In 1976, Russian astronomer Lyudmila Chernykh discovered asteroid 3147, which she in 1986 named 3147 Samantha. Danish composer Per Nørgård wrote his 1985 viola concerto &quot;Remembering Child&quot; in memory of Smith. A diamond found in Siberia, a mountain in the former Soviet Union, a cultivar of tulips and of dahlias, and an ocean vessel have been named in Smith&#x27;s honor. In 1985, a peace garden was established in Michigan along the St. Clair River to commemorate her achievements. In Maine, the first Monday in June of each year is officially designated as Samantha Smith Day by state law. There is a bronze statue of Smith near the Maine State Museum in Augusta, which portrays Smith releasing a dove with a bear cub resting at her feet. The bear cub represents both Maine and Russia. There are streets named after Samantha Smith in the settlements of Buryatia and the Bryansk region (Russia), as well as in Kazakhstan. Elementary schools in Sammamish, Washington, and in Jamaica, Queens, New York City, have been named after Samantha. In October 1985, Smith&#x27;s mother founded The Samantha Smith Foundation, which fostered student exchanges between the United States and the Soviet Union (and, after December 1991, the ex-Soviet successor states) until it became dormant in the mid-1990s. The Foundation was formally dissolved in 2014 after two decades of dormancy.

A 1987 episode of the US sitcom &quot;The Golden Girls&quot; entitled &quot;Letter to Gorbachev&quot; draws inspiration from Smith&#x27;s story. In addition, the 1987 film &quot;Superman IV: The Quest for Peace&quot; included a scene where a boy writes Superman a letter to control the nuclear arms race; according to Christopher Reeve, this scene was also inspired by Smith&#x27;s story.

In the mid-1980s, after Smith&#x27;s death, a script was written for a television movie titled &quot;The Samantha Smith Story&quot; with Robert Wagner as producer. Columbia Pictures Television and R. J. Wagner Productions were reported to have agreed to produce the film for NBC, with Soviet company Sovin Film interested in co-producing it. Ultimately, Columbia Pictures Television decided not to film it due to lack of interest from any network.

Speculation as to what a surviving Samantha might have done in adulthood was dismissed by her mother Jane as unanswerable in 2003, given Samantha was only thirteen when she died and her ambitions had varied from a veterinarian to a ballerina. The notion, which had been put to Samantha herself in the eighties, that she could be President of the United States in adulthood, was dismissed by her in the Disney Channel special that she hosted, with the words &quot;being President is not a job I would like to have&quot;.
In 2008, Smith posthumously received the Peace Abbey Courage of Conscience Award for &quot;helping to bring about better understanding between the peoples of the [USA and the USSR], and as a result, reduce the tension between the superpowers that were poised to engage in nuclear war&quot;. The Peace Abbey has also proposed The Peace Literature Project in Honor of Samantha Smith &quot;to educate students about peace and promote peace literature for school-age children in 50 selected pilot schools across the United States&quot;.

Elliott Holt&#x27;s 2013 novel &quot;You Are One of Them&quot;, uses the story of Smith as inspiration for a fictional character, Jennifer Jones.

On the 30th anniversary of the plane crash in 2015, the Maine State Museum opened a new exhibit of materials related to Smith, including photographs of her time at the Artek camp, traditional Russian clothing she was given, and an issue of &quot;Soviet Life&quot; magazine with her on the cover.

Pioneer shift No. 7 at Artek — from June 20 to July 11 — is called &quot;Samantha&#x27;s Smile&quot;. During this shift, the center &quot;becomes a Young Diplomacy School, each camp turns into a kind of peacekeeping corps.&quot; There is also a &quot;Samantha&#x27;s Place&quot; in the Artek Museum.

In July 2023, a bronze monument to Samantha Smith was unveiled in Artek. The inscription is stamped on the pedestal: &quot;May There Always Be Sunshine&quot;.

==See also==
* List of peace activists
* Sarah York, another American girl who wrote to a foreign political leader, in this case Manuel Noriega

==References==
==Further reading==
* Nelson, Lena (2023). &quot;America&#x27;s Youngest Ambassador: The Cold War Story of Samantha Smith&#x27;s Lasting Message of Peace&quot; Down East Books. 
* Neumann, Matthias (April 2019). &quot;Children Diplomacy During the Late Cold War: Samantha Smith&#x27;s Visit of the &#x27;Evil Empire. &quot;History&quot;. 104 (360); pp. 275–308. .
* Peacock, Margaret (2018). &quot;Samantha Smith in the Land of the Bolsheviks: Peace and the Politics of Childhood in the Late Cold War&quot;. &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; 43 (3); pp. 418–444. .

==External links==
* SamanthaSmith.info – Official site
* &quot;A &quot;Nightline&quot; Moment from 1983&quot; – ABC News, December 2004
* Samantha Smith, This Day in History: August 25
* Contemporary news article pertaining to the death of Samantha Smith from UPI
* &quot;This plucky Maine girl tried to unite US and Russia before nuclear bombs consumed the world&quot;Article from the &quot;Bangor Daily News&quot;
* &quot;Samantha Smith&#x27;s peace-seeking letter to Soviet Union endures as lesson for children to ask questions about world events&quot;article from the &quot;Kennebec Journal&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q228579" start="0" end="19" title="Samantha Smith" label="Samantha Reed Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q708312" start="70" end="84" title="peace activist" label="peace activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q588282" start="108" end="125" title="Manchester, Maine" label="Manchester, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="184" end="192" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="227" end="239" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="294" end="354" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q44071" start="356" end="369" title="Yuri Andropov" label="Yuri Andropov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583669" start="539" end="558" title="Goodwill ambassador" label="Goodwill Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q228579" start="584" end="618" title="Samantha Smith" label="America&amp;#x27;s Youngest Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157606" start="653" end="664" title="peacemaking" label="peacemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="925" end="965" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="1984 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="970" end="988" title="Disney Channel" label="The Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549147" start="1051" end="1062" title="Lime Street (TV series)" label="Lime Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857928" start="1115" end="1146" title="Bar Harbor Airlines Flight 1808" label="Bar Harbor Airlines Flight 1808"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901783" start="1207" end="1240" title="Auburn/Lewiston Municipal Airport" label="Auburn/Lewiston Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q44071" start="1280" end="1293" title="Yuri Andropov" label="Yuri Andropov"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="1304" end="1319" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q839920" start="1323" end="1349" title="leader of the Soviet Union" label="leader of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="1383" end="1390" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="1652" end="1677" title="1956 Hungarian Revolution" label="1956 Hungarian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="1705" end="1716" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="1742" end="1745" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="1813" end="1839" title="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="crushing the Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q997" start="1890" end="1905" title="Andrei Sakharov" label="Andrei Sakharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q34474" start="1910" end="1932" title="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn" label="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="2006" end="2009" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q463328" start="2055" end="2071" title="Vasili Mitrokhin" label="Vasili Mitrokhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="2561" end="2574" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15466187" start="2833" end="2854" title="anti-nuclear protests" label="anti-nuclear protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="2969" end="2972" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="2980" end="2996" title="post-nuclear war" label="post-nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q738462" start="3017" end="3030" title="The Day After" label="The Day After"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="3109" end="3119" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="3173" end="3180" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q54287" start="3252" end="3257" title="RSD-10 Pioneer" label="SS-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="3273" end="3279" title="cruise missile" label="cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203109" start="3284" end="3295" title="Pershing II" label="Pershing II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="3330" end="3347" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="3426" end="3430" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q913153" start="3801" end="3815" title="Houlton, Maine" label="Houlton, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="3824" end="3851" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canada–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="3929" end="3947" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="3990" end="4005" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="British monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q588282" start="4082" end="4099" title="Manchester, Maine" label="Manchester, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331910" start="4188" end="4202" title="Ricker College" label="Ricker College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895654" start="4260" end="4290" title="University of Maine at Augusta" label="University of Maine at Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="4320" end="4333" title="Social work" label="social worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44071" start="4454" end="4467" title="Yuri Andropov" label="Yuri Andropov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424262" start="4495" end="4531" title="Soviet Union–United States relations" label="Soviet Union–United States relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q183644" start="4613" end="4619" title="Pravda" label="Pravda"/>
<link wikidata="Q487723" start="4795" end="4811" title="Anatoly Dobrynin" label="Anatoly Dobrynin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270674" start="4913" end="4925" title="media circus" label="media circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096683" start="4966" end="4976" title="Ted Koppel" label="Ted Koppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="4981" end="4994" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="5195" end="5201" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="5206" end="5215" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q706474" start="5234" end="5239" title="Artek (camp)" label="Artek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897721" start="5257" end="5264" title="Young Pioneer organization of the Soviet Union" label="pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026062" start="5286" end="5292" title="Gurzuf" label="Gurzuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="5300" end="5317" title="Crimea" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296089" start="6257" end="6286" title="May There Always Be Sunshine!" label="May There Always Be Sunshine!"/>
<link wikidata="Q44371" start="6847" end="6867" title="Valentina Tereshkova" label="Valentina Tereshkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999003" start="7311" end="7333" title="public relations stunt" label="public relations stunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="7422" end="7427" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628560" start="7635" end="7652" title="Soviet propaganda" label="Soviet propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q250828" start="7810" end="7827" title="Yasuhiro Nakasone" label="Yasuhiro Nakasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="7888" end="7892" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895545" start="8264" end="8277" title="Katya Lycheva" label="Katya Lycheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="8590" end="8608" title="Disney Channel" label="The Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255748" start="8764" end="8808" title="1984 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1984 Democratic Party presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="8820" end="8835" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q182642" start="8837" end="8847" title="John Glenn" label="John Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q310586" start="8852" end="8865" title="Jesse Jackson" label="Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529189" start="8910" end="8927" title="Charles in Charge" label="Charles in Charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q455811" start="8982" end="8999" title="Julianne McNamara" label="Julianne McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q163942" start="9052" end="9059" title="Stalking" label="stalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356770" start="9060" end="9077" title="Robert John Bardo" label="Robert John Bardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855996" start="9146" end="9159" title="My Sister Sam" label="My Sister Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q266789" start="9174" end="9191" title="Rebecca Schaeffer" label="Rebecca Schaeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q310493" start="9568" end="9581" title="Robert Wagner" label="Robert Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549147" start="9630" end="9641" title="Lime Street (TV series)" label="Lime Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857928" start="9729" end="9760" title="Bar Harbor Airlines Flight 1808" label="Bar Harbor Airlines Flight 1808"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901783" start="9842" end="9874" title="Auburn/Lewiston Municipal Airport" label="Lewiston-Auburn Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q758545" start="9878" end="9891" title="Auburn, Maine" label="Auburn, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q120323" start="9897" end="9910" title="Beechcraft Model 99" label="Beechcraft 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="10682" end="10685" title="Eastern Daylight Time" label="EDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q639090" start="10759" end="10767" title="Yaw, pitch, and roll" label="attitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="11140" end="11145" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206" start="11217" end="11231" title="Augusta, Maine" label="Augusta, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q249697" start="11245" end="11254" title="Eulogy" label="eulogized"/>
<link wikidata="Q310493" start="11308" end="11321" title="Robert Wagner" label="Robert Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="11368" end="11384" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="11433" end="11450" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="11730" end="11743" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q840396" start="12013" end="12021" title="Ideal (ethics)" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q472494" start="12164" end="12176" title="Amity, Maine" label="Amity, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336585" start="12494" end="12507" title="Metal theft" label="metal thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="12530" end="12561" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426" start="12580" end="12588" title="Voronezh" label="Voronezh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="12707" end="12726" title="commemorative stamp" label="commemorative stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q234878" start="12774" end="12791" title="Lyudmila Chernykh" label="Lyudmila Chernykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="12803" end="12811" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q685045" start="12842" end="12855" title="3147 Samantha" label="3147 Samantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q434392" start="12873" end="12884" title="Per Nørgård" label="Per Nørgård"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="12967" end="12974" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="13034" end="13042" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q93201" start="13046" end="13051" title="tulip" label="tulip"/>
<link wikidata="Q130918" start="13060" end="13066" title="dahlia" label="dahlia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055880" start="13076" end="13088" title="passenger ship" label="ocean vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054325" start="13190" end="13205" title="St. Clair River" label="St. Clair River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603706" start="13337" end="13346" title="State law (United States)" label="state law"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="13455" end="13459" title="dove" label="dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809" start="13611" end="13619" title="Buryatia" label="Buryatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2810" start="13628" end="13642" title="Bryansk region" label="Bryansk region"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="13667" end="13677" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q988209" start="13701" end="13722" title="Sammamish, Washington" label="Sammamish, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320403" start="13731" end="13746" title="Jamaica, Queens" label="Jamaica, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="13748" end="13761" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q912467" start="14168" end="14184" title="The Golden Girls" label="The Golden Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157272" start="14206" end="14225" title="The Golden Girls (season 3)" label="Letter to Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14308" end="14340" title="Superman IV: The Quest for Peace" label="Superman IV: The Quest for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q550452" start="14416" end="14433" title="nuclear arms race" label="nuclear arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q174311" start="14448" end="14465" title="Christopher Reeve" label="Christopher Reeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="14591" end="14607" title="television movie" label="television movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q310493" start="14657" end="14670" title="Robert Wagner" label="Robert Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149791" start="14684" end="14712" title="Columbia Pictures Television" label="Columbia Pictures Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="14795" end="14798" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q202883" start="15183" end="15195" title="veterinarian" label="veterinarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="15201" end="15210" title="ballet" label="ballerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="15298" end="15328" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365668" start="16023" end="16035" title="Elliott Holt" label="Elliott Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210285" start="16060" end="16079" title="You Are One of Them" label="You Are One of Them"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736479" start="16226" end="16244" title="Maine State Museum" label="Maine State Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382070" start="16416" end="16427" title="Soviet Life" label="Soviet Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296089" start="16891" end="16919" title="May There Always Be Sunshine" label="May There Always Be Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921049" start="16943" end="16966" title="List of peace activists" label="List of peace activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422925" start="16969" end="16979" title="Sarah York" label="Sarah York"/>
<link wikidata="Q192667" start="17057" end="17071" title="Manuel Noriega" label="Manuel Noriega"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="17764" end="17772" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855555" start="18044" end="18061" title="Bangor Daily News" label="Bangor Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389544" start="18230" end="18246" title="Kennebec Journal" label="Kennebec Journal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162281" wikidata="Q747865" url="?curid=162281" title="Caller ID">
<text>Caller identification (Caller ID) is a telephone service, available in analog and digital telephone systems, including voice over IP (VoIP), that transmits a caller&#x27;s telephone number to the called party&#x27;s telephone equipment when the call is being set up. The caller ID service may include the transmission of a name associated with the calling telephone number, in a service called Calling Name Presentation (CNAM). The service was first defined in 1993 in International Telecommunication UnionTelecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) Recommendation Q.731.3.

The information received from the service is displayed on a telephone display screen, on a separately attached device, or on other displays, such as cable television sets when telephone and television service is provided by the same vendor. Value to society includes allowing suicide-prevention hotlines to quickly identify a caller, and enabling businesses (for an example, restaurants and florists)
 to quickly have confidence in telephoned orders. The customer has control as to whether one&#x27;s full name or merely first initial appears, a choice that to avoid a fee must be selected when the initial listing is generated.

Caller ID service, which is also known by similar terms such as CID, calling line identification (CLI, CLID), calling number delivery (CND), calling number identification (CNID), calling line identification presentation (CLIP), and call display, does not work with Centrex, a phone system widely used by corporations that allows outside callers to dial an extension without going through an operator.

==Calling-line identification==

In some countries, the terms caller display, calling line identification presentation (CLIP), call capture, or just calling line identity are used; call display is the predominant marketing name used in Canada (although some customers still refer to it colloquially as &quot;caller ID&quot;). The concept of calling number identification as a service for POTS subscribers originated from automatic number identification (ANI) as a part of toll free number service in the United States.

Caller ID and ANI are different and distinct services. ANI was originally a service in a non-electronic central office that identified the telephone number of the line from which a call was originated. In addition to the caller&#x27;s telephone number, caller ID may also transmit the subscriber&#x27;s name, when available. The name can be passed on by the originating central office, or it is obtained from a line information database by the terminating switch. If no name is available, the city, State, Province, or other designation may be sent. Some of these databases may be shared among several companies, each paying every time a name is &quot;extracted&quot;. It is for this reason that mobile telephone callers may appear as &quot;WIRELESS CALLER&quot;, or the central office location of the number.

If the call originates on a POTS line (a standard loop-start line), then caller ID is provided by the service provider&#x27;s local switch. Since the network does not connect the caller to the callee until the phone is answered, generally the caller ID signal cannot be altered by the caller. Most service providers, however, allow the caller to block caller ID presentation through the vertical service code &quot;*67&quot;.

A call placed behind a private branch exchange (PBX) has more options. In the typical telephony environment, a PBX connects to the local service provider through Primary Rate Interface (PRI) trunks. Generally, although not absolutely, the service provider simply passes whatever calling line ID appears on those PRI access trunks transparently across the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN). This opens up the opportunity for the PBX administrator to program whatever number they choose in their external phone number fields.

Some IP phone services (ITSPs, or Internet Telephony Service Providers) support PSTN gateway installations throughout the world. These gateways egress calls to the local calling area, thus avoiding long distance toll charges. ITSPs also allow a local user to have a number located in &quot;foreign&quot; exchange; the New York caller could have a Los Angeles number, for example. When that user places a call, the calling line ID would be that of a Los Angeles number, although they are actually located in New York. This allows a call return without having to incur long distance calling charges.

With cellphones, the biggest issue appears to be in the passing of calling line ID information through the network. Cellphone companies must support interconnecting trunks to a significant number of wireline and PSTN access carriers.

==CLI localisation==
Calling line identity (CLI) localisation is the process of presenting a localised calling line identity to the recipient of a telephone call. CLI localisation is used by various organisations, including call centres, debt collectors and insurance companies. CLI localisation allows companies to increase their contact rate by increasing the chance that a called party will answer a phone call. Because a localised CLI is displayed on the called party&#x27;s device, the call is perceived as local and recognisable to the caller rather than a withheld, unknown or premium rate number. The presented telephone number is adjusted depending on the area code of the dialed number.

In 2020, the Eastern District of Texas found a single missed call using a localized number was enough to trigger Article III standing under Telephone Consumer Protection Act (TCPA). The court reasoned, &quot;At issue in this case is a missed call, not a single, unsolicited text message. It only takes one glance at a text message to recognize it is for an extended warranty for a car you have never owned or a cruise you have won from a raffle you never entered. A missed call with a familiar area code, on the other hand, is more difficult to immediately dismiss as an automated message.&quot;

==History==
In 1968, Theodore George &quot;Ted&quot; Paraskevakos, while working in as a communications engineer for SITA in Athens, Greece, began developing a system to automatically identify a telephone caller to a call recipient. After several attempts and experiments, he developed the method in which the caller&#x27;s number was transmitted to the receiver&#x27;s device. This method was the basis for modern-day Caller ID technology. From 1969 through 1975, Paraskevakos was issued twenty separate patents related to automatic telephone line identification, and since they significantly predated all other similar patents, they appear as prior art in later United States patents issued to Kazuo Hashimoto and Carolyn A. Doughty. In 1971, Paraskevakos, working with Boeing in Huntsville, Alabama, constructed and reduced to practice a transmitter and receiver, representing the world&#x27;s first prototypes of caller-identification devices. They were installed at Peoples&#x27; Telephone Company in Leesburg, Alabama, and were demonstrated to several telephone companies. These original and historic working models are still in the possession of Paraskevakos. In the patents related to these devices, Paraskevakos also proposed to send alphanumeric information, such as the caller&#x27;s name, to the receiving apparatus and to make banking by telephone feasible. He also proposed to identify the calling telephone by special code; e.g., &quot;PF&quot; for public phone, &quot;HO&quot; for home phone, &quot;OF&quot; for office phone, &quot;PL&quot; for police.

In May 1976, Kazuo Hashimoto, a prolific Japanese inventor with over one thousand patents worldwide, first built a prototype of a caller ID display device that could receive caller ID information. His work on caller ID devices and early prototypes was received in the Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of American History in 2000. U.S. patent 4,242,539, filed originally on May 8, 1976, and a resulting patent re-examined at the patent office by AT&amp;T, was successfully licensed to most of the major telecommunications and computer companies in the world.

Initially, the operating telephone companies wanted to have the caller ID function performed by the central office as a voice announcement and charged on a per-call basis. John Harris, an employee of Northern Telecom&#x27;s telephone set manufacturing division in London, Ontario, promoted the idea of displaying caller ID on a telephone. The telephone was coded ECCS for &quot;Enhanced Custom Calling Services&quot;. A video of his prototype was used to leverage the feature from the central office to the telephone set.

In 1977, the Brazilian inventor Valdir Bravo Salinas filed a patent application for a caller ID device at the Brazilian Patent and Trademarks Office (INPI). The patent was issued in 1982 as patent PI7704466 and is the first patent issued for a caller ID equipment in Brazil. Later in 1980, two other Brazilian inventors, João da Cunha Doya and Nélio José Nicolai, filed patent applications for other caller ID devices. Doya’s application was filed on May 2, 1980 and issued as patent PI8003077. Nicolai’s application was filed on July 2, 1980 and rejected for being a copy of Salinas&#x27; invention. In 1981 another application for a caller ID equipment was filed at the INPI by José Daniel Martin Catoira and Afonso Feijó da Costa Ribeiro Neto. This application was granted and the patent issued as patent PI8106464.

The first market trial for Caller ID and other &quot;Custom Local Area Signaling Services&quot; (CLASS) was conducted by BellSouth in January 1984 in Orlando, FL after having been approached by Bell Labs (prior to AT&amp;T&#x27;s Divestiture on January 1, 1984) to conduct a trial. A press conference with ABC, NBC, CBS, and CNN was conducted announcing the event. The name Caller ID was decided by the BellSouth Product Team, purposely not trademarking the name so that other Telcos would be free to adopt the name for ubiquity. The other regional Bell operating companies later adopted the name and eventually became the generally accepted name in the United States. Planning for the trial was initiated by a team in Bell Laboratories, AT&amp;T, and Western Electric before the Bell System divestiture, with the participation of Bell Atlantic. The purpose of these trials was to assess the revenue potential of services that depend on deployment of the common channel signaling network needed to transmit the calling number between originating and terminating central offices. Trial results were analyzed by Bellcore members of the original team.

In 1987, Bell Atlantic (now Verizon Communications) conducted another market trial in Hudson County, New Jersey, which was followed by limited deployment. BellSouth was the first company to deploy Caller ID commercially in December 1988 in Memphis, Tennessee, with a full deployment to its nine-state region over the next four years. Bell Atlantic was the second local telephone company to deploy Caller ID in New Jersey&#x27;s Hudson County, followed by US West Communications (now Lumen Technologies) in 1989.

===Type II caller ID===
In 1995, Bellcore released another type of modulation, similar to Bell 202, with which it became possible to transmit caller ID information and even provide call-disposition options while the user was already on the telephone. This not-for-free service became known in some markets as call waiting ID, or (when it was combined with call-disposition options) Call Waiting Deluxe; it is technically referred to as Analog Display Services Interface. &quot;Call Waiting Deluxe&quot; is the Bellcore (now Telcordia Technologies) term for Type II caller ID with Disposition Options.

This class-based POTS-telephone calling feature works by combining the services of call waiting with caller ID but also introduces an &quot;options&quot; feature that, in conjunction with certain screen-based telephones, or other capable equipment, gives a telephone user the option to

* Switch: Place the current call on hold to take the second call (not a new feature)
* Hang-up: Disconnect the current call and take the second call (not a new feature)
* Please Hold: Send the caller either a custom or telephone-company-generated voice message asking the caller to hold
* Forward to Voice Mail: Send the incoming caller to the recipient’s voice mail service.
* Join: Add the incoming caller to the existing conversation.

 data checksum
 digit d1 d2 d3 d4 s1 s2 s3 s4
 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1
 2 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1
 3 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1
 4 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1
 5 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1
 6 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1
 7 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1
 8 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1
 9 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 0
 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0
 * 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0
 # 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0
 A 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0
 B 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0
 C 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0
 D 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

 FSK mark= 1200 Hz space= 2200 Hz 1200 bpsk

The above flexibility requires the immediate presence of both a phone and a display screen, not one &quot;several rooms away&quot; from the other. By 2007, Verizon and AT&amp;T had bundled these services with still others, including speed dialling, &quot;free&quot; inside wiring maintenance, and unlimited minutes. The result was increased monthly spending for those customers adding features, but reduced individual charges
for those options they already had.

==Operation==
In the United States and Canada, caller ID information is sent to the called party by the telephone switch as an analog data stream (similar to data passed between two modems), using Bell 202 modulation between the first and second rings, while the telephone unit is still on hook. If the telephone call is answered too quickly after the first ring, caller ID information may not be transmitted to the recipient. Also, in the United States and Canada a caller may block the display of the number they are calling from by dialling *67 before dialling the phone number. This will not work when dialling a toll-free number, where the receiver of the call pays for the call, or when 911 emergency calls are made. Dialling this code does not stop your number from being sent to the terminating central office, only from being displayed. The number can still be &quot;collected&quot; in the case of harassing phone calls.

There are two types of caller ID: number-only and name+number. Number-only caller ID is called Single Data Message Format (SDMF), which provides the caller&#x27;s telephone number, the date and time of the call. Name+number caller ID is called Multiple Data Message Format (MDMF), which in addition to the information provided by SDMF format, can also provide the directory listed name for the particular number. Caller ID readers which are compatible with MDMF can also read the simpler SDMF format, but an SDMF caller ID reader will not recognize an MDMF data stream, and will act as if there is no caller ID information present, e.g. as if the line is not equipped for caller ID.

In general, CID as transmitted from the origin of the call is only the calling party&#x27;s full phone number (including area code, and including international access code and country code if it&#x27;s an international call). The calling party name is added by the consumer&#x27;s terminating central office if the consumer has subscribed to that service. Calling name delivery is not automatic. A query (dip) with Signalling System 7 (SS7) query may be initiated by the called party&#x27;s central office to retrieve the information for Calling Name delivery to the caller ID equipment at the subscriber&#x27;s location, if the caller&#x27;s name has not already been associated with the calling party&#x27;s line at the originating central office. Canadian systems (depending on the provider) using CCS7 automatically (but not in all cases) send the calling name with the call set-up and routing information at the time of the call.

To look up the name associated with a phone number, the carrier, in some instances, has to access that information from a third-party database, and some database providers charge a small fee for each access to such databases. This CNAM dip fee is very small – less than a penny per call. AT&amp;T starts their negotiations for CNAM dip fees at about $.004 per lookup. OpenCNAM fees are a bit more expensive, up to $.0048 per lookup. To avoid such charges, some carriers will report the name as &quot;unavailable&quot;, or will report the name as &quot;(city), (state)&quot; based on the phone number, particularly for wireless callers. For toll-free numbers, they may report a string such as if the name is not available in a database.

Smartphones can use a third-party mobile app to do the name lookup in a third-party database.

=== Other signaling methods ===
Not all types of caller identification use 202-type modulation, nor do all systems send the information between the first and second ring. As a result, not all caller ID devices are compatible from country to country or within the same country, even though the basic phone system is the same.

Besides Bell, the most common on-hook caller ID standard is European standard ETSI EN 300 659-1, which defines three caller ID (&quot;PSTN display&quot;) protocols:
* V.23 mode 2 (a different FSK protocol; without using the 75-baud reverse channel), after a normal ring.
* V.23 mode 2, before the ring, but after a special alerting signal (a dual-tone, a short ring &quot;pulse&quot;, or a line reversal followed by a dual-tone).
* A DTMF signalling using the 16 standard dialing tones.

EN 300 659-2 expands the standard to &quot;on-hook&quot; (call-waiting) situations, still using V.23.

The Chinese caller ID standard of 1997 is largely similar to Bellcore (with the &quot;type II&quot; extension).

==Uses==
===Telemarketing===
Telemarketing organisations often spoof caller ID. In some instances, this is done to provide a &quot;central number&quot; for consumers to call back, such as a toll-free number, rather than having consumers call back the outbound call center where the call actually originated. However, some telemarketers block or fraudulently spoof caller ID to prevent being traced. It is against United States federal law for telemarketers to block or to send misleading caller ID. Individuals may file civil suits and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) can fine companies or individuals for illegally spoofing or blocking caller ID.

===Mobile providers===
Most mobile phone providers used the caller ID to automatically connect to voice mail when a call to the voice mail number was made from the associated mobile phone number, bypassing the need to enter a password. While this was convenient for many users, because of spoofing, this practice has been replaced by more secure authentication by many carriers.

==Regional differences==
Caller ID transmission is implemented using different technologies and standards in some countries. In the United States the Bellcore FSK standard is prevalent, whereas Taiwan uses ETSI FSK. Sometimes individual service providers within a country use different standards. Caller ID converters can be used to translate from one standard to another.

===UK===
Telephone equipment usually displays CLID information with no difficulty. Modems are notoriously problematic; very few modems support the British Telecom standard in hardware; drivers for those that do often have errors that prevent CLID information from being recognised. Other UK telephone companies use slight variations on the Bellcore standard, and CLID support is &quot;hit and miss&quot;.

=== Australia ===
CND is currently available in Australia to subscribers to the Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN). 
There is a legislation under section 276 of the Australia Industry Code - Calling Number Display (ACIF C522: February 2003).

==Legal issues==

===United States===
In the United States, telemarketers are required to transmit caller ID. This requirement went into effect on January 29, 2004. It is generally illegal to spoof Caller ID if done &quot;with the intent to defraud, cause harm, or wrongfully obtain anything of value&quot;. The acts are prohibited under Truth in Caller ID Act of 2009.

Courts have ruled that caller ID is admissible. Providers are required by FCC rules to offer &quot;per-call&quot; blocking of caller ID to their customers. Legislation in the United States in made caller ID spoofing illegal for fraudulent purposes.

In March 2017, the FCC approved a new rule that would allow telecommunication companies to block robocallers that use fake caller ID numbers to conceal their true location and identity. The rule means telecommunication companies can block robocallers at the network level, long before a call passes through a carrier&#x27;s network and arrives at a subscriber&#x27;s house or business. T-Mobile was the first major US carrier to announce plans to implement blocking technologies based on the new rule.

Starting in mid-2017, and with intended culmination in 2019, the FCC pushed forward Caller ID certification implemented via a methodology of SHAKEN/STIR.
This initiative was further strengthened by the TRACED Act, enacted in December 2019.

==Blocking and unblocking caller ID==


Caller ID blocking is the common term for a service by which a caller can prevent the display of the calling number on the recipient&#x27;s telephone. Blocking the number is formally referred to as &quot;calling line identification restriction&quot; (CLIR). This customer option was part of the legal authorization for New York State&#x27;s 1992 authorization of Caller ID.

Telecommunications regulators vary in their requirements for the use and effectiveness of assorted technologies to prevent numbers from being displayed. Generally, unlisted numbers are always blocked. Non-published and regular listed numbers are not usually blocked. But there is varying treatment for the determination of call display blocking because of many factors. If desired, customers should inquire carefully to make sure their number will not be displayed. The telephone service provider may also have vertical service codes which can be dialed to configure blocking as active for all calls or on a call-by-call basis. In some locations in the United States, regulations allow (or require) blocking to be automatic and transparent to the caller.

Where blocking is applied on a call-by-call basis (that is, at the time a call is made), subscribers can block their caller ID by dialing a special code (a vertical service code, or VSC) before making a call. In North America and some other regions, the code is *67 (1167 on rotary phones), while in the United Kingdom and Ireland, it is 141. This special code does not block the information from companies using call capture technology. This means that equipment with caller ID will simply display the word &quot;PRIVATE&quot; or &quot;WITHHELD&quot;. When CNID is blocked at the caller&#x27;s request, the number is actually transmitted through the entire telephone network, with the &quot;presentation withheld&quot; flag set; the destination CO is expected to honor this flag, but sometimes does notespecially when the destination phone number is served by an ISDN PRI. 

Alternatively, in cases where caller ID is being blocked automatically, it can only be released on a call-by-call basis by dialing a special code (*82 in North America; 1470 in the UK). See &quot;Enabling&quot;, below.

Similarly, some countries offer anonymous caller rejection, which rejects all calls when the subscriber&#x27;s name, number (or both) is blocked. Some telephone companies protect their clients from receiving calls with blocked information by routing anonymous calls to a service (such as AT&amp;T Privacy Manager), where the caller is required to announce themself. The service then asks the called party if they want to accept or reject the call. Other telephone companies play a recording to the caller advising them of the called party&#x27;s rejection configuration, and often offer advice (such as prefixing their dialing with *82) on how to get their call to the intended called party. Emergency services will most likely be able to show the restricted number using a service called &quot;calling line identification restriction override&quot; (CLIRO), or by using general ANI services. These features create a cat-and-mouse game situation, whereby subscribers must purchase additional services in order to cancel out other services.

===Disabling caller ID delivery===
Depending on the operator and country, there are a number of prefix codes that can block or disable Caller ID transmission by the caller. Prefixing a telephone number with the following codes disables Caller ID on a per-call basis:

Other countries and networks vary; however, on GSM mobile networks, callers may dial #31# before the number they wish to call to disable it.

Some countries and network providers do not allow Caller ID blocking based on the domestic telecommunications regulations, or CLIR is only available as an external app or value-added service.

===Enabling caller ID delivery===
Depending on the operator and country, there are a number of prefix codes that can unblock or enable Caller ID transmission by the caller.

On GSM mobile networks, callers may dial *31# to enable caller ID on all subsequent calls.

==Caller ID spoofing==

Caller ID spoofing is the practice of causing the telephone network to display a number on the recipient&#x27;s caller ID display that is different than that of the actual originating station. Many telephone services, such as ISDN PRI based PBX installations, and voice over IP services, permit the caller to configure customized caller ID information. In corporate settings this permits the announcement of switchboard number or customer service numbers. Caller ID spoofing may be illegal in some countries or in certain situations.

== Dip fee fraud ==

A consumer&#x27;s telephone company must pay a small fee for the Caller ID text that is transmitted during a call. The fee is called a CNAM dip fee. It is named a dip fee because the called party&#x27;s carrier pays a fee to dip into the originating telephone company&#x27;s database to get the Caller ID information.

Several companies engage in generating dip fees by catering to companies that make a large number of outbound calls. CallerId4U and Pacific Telecom Communications Group cater to telemarketers and generate revenue on fees from Caller ID information. The telemarketers enter into an agreement with companies like CallerId4U and Pacific Telecom Communications Group and share the revenue produced during the telemarketing call.

Dip fees vary wildly. According to Doug McIntyre, the wholesale rates are on the order of $0.002 to $0.006 per database dip. And according to Aaron Woolfson, president of TelSwitch Inc, the fee structure for dip fee fraud can include:

* the carriers pay a fee of $0.003 per call or $300 per 100,000 calls to the database owner
* the database owner pays the number dealers $0.0024 per call or $240 per 100,000 calls
* the number dealers share revenue with the robocaller $0.00096 or $96 per 100,000 calls

Consumers face significant barriers to exiting a call list and often cannot have themselves removed from the list. Calling the opt-out numbers often results in a fast-busy so the call never completes and the consumer remains on the list.

According to reports companies like CallerId4U have thousands of phone numbers and thousands of FTC complaints filed against them each month for violating Do Not Call registration. The large number of phone numbers dilute the number of complaints against the company and phone number.

==Trivia==
* The inverse feature, giving the number originally dialed, is known as direct inward dialing, direct dialing inward, or Dialed Number Identification Service. This tells the PBX where to route an incoming call, when there are more internal lines with external phone numbers than there are actual incoming lines in a large company or other organisation.

==See also==

* Calling Name Presentation
* Local number portability
* Location Routing Number
* Truth in Caller ID Act of 2009

==References==
==External links==

* Report and Order from the FCC on Implementing the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991, including rules and discussion of caller ID issues. 
* &quot;Caller ID Information&quot; at Privacy Corps
* Technical details of Caller ID
* Additional MDMF details</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="0" end="21" title="Caller ID" label="Caller identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="23" end="32" title="Caller ID" label="Caller ID"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="39" end="48" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="119" end="132" title="voice over IP" label="voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5022190" start="158" end="164" title="caller (telecommunications)" label="caller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021881" start="196" end="208" title="called party" label="called party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5022168" start="394" end="419" title="Calling Name Presentation" label="Calling Name Presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="469" end="506" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="1274" end="1277" title="Caller ID" label="CID"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="1279" end="1306" title="Caller ID" label="calling line identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="1308" end="1311" title="Caller ID" label="CLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="1313" end="1317" title="Caller ID" label="CLID"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="1320" end="1343" title="Caller ID" label="calling number delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="1345" end="1348" title="Caller ID" label="CND"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="1351" end="1380" title="Caller ID" label="calling number identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="1382" end="1386" title="Caller ID" label="CNID"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="1389" end="1429" title="Caller ID" label="calling line identification presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="1431" end="1435" title="Caller ID" label="CLIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="1442" end="1454" title="Caller ID" label="call display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054238" start="1475" end="1482" title="Centrex" label="Centrex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021610" start="1739" end="1751" title="call capture" label="call capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q787179" start="2033" end="2064" title="automatic number identification" label="automatic number identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889809" start="5447" end="5472" title="Eastern District of Texas" label="Eastern District of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q48429" start="5547" end="5567" title="Article_Three_of_the_United_States_Constitution" label="Article III standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696463" start="5574" end="5607" title="Telephone Consumer Protection Act" label="Telephone Consumer Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781943" start="6052" end="6096" title="Theodore Paraskevakos" label="Theodore George &amp;quot;Ted&amp;quot; Paraskevakos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061219" start="6120" end="6143" title="communications engineer" label="communications engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q690702" start="6148" end="6152" title="SITA (IT company)" label="SITA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="6156" end="6170" title="Athens, Greece" label="Athens, Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q12139145" start="6676" end="6685" title="prior art" label="prior art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="6695" end="6716" title="USPTO" label="United States patents"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961604" start="6727" end="6742" title="Kazuo Hashimoto" label="Kazuo Hashimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="6803" end="6809" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q79860" start="6813" end="6832" title="Huntsville, Alabama" label="Huntsville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q66420" start="7037" end="7054" title="Leesburg, Alabama" label="Leesburg, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q737372" start="7274" end="7286" title="alphanumeric" label="alphanumeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941439" start="7371" end="7391" title="mobile banking" label="banking by telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="7642" end="7647" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="7869" end="7892" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="7894" end="7929" title="National Museum of American History" label="National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q464996" start="8368" end="8384" title="Northern Telecom" label="Northern Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="8432" end="8447" title="London, Ontario" label="London, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="8601" end="8610" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="8958" end="8964" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q10338430" start="9035" end="9053" title="Nélio José Nicolai" label="Nélio José Nicolai"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112830" start="9564" end="9600" title="Custom Local Area Signaling Services" label="Custom Local Area Signaling Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="10230" end="10247" title="Bell Laboratories" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="10249" end="10257" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="10263" end="10279" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959692" start="10291" end="10314" title="Bell System divestiture" label="Bell System divestiture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695688" start="10621" end="10629" title="Bellcore" label="Bellcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="10689" end="10711" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q490505" start="10747" end="10772" title="Hudson County, New Jersey" label="Hudson County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="10901" end="10919" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273147" start="11116" end="11138" title="US West Communications" label="US West Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063092" start="11144" end="11162" title="Lumen Technologies" label="Lumen Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170474" start="11241" end="11251" title="modulation" label="modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q815673" start="11264" end="11272" title="Bell 202" label="Bell 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751042" start="11610" end="11643" title="Analog Display Services Interface" label="Analog Display Services Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695688" start="11698" end="11720" title="Telcordia Technologies" label="Telcordia Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478261" start="11859" end="11871" title="call waiting" label="call waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734312" start="12419" end="12429" title="voice mail" label="voice mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="13465" end="13481" title="telephone switch" label="telephone switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="13543" end="13548" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139465" start="15391" end="15410" title="Signalling System 7" label="Signalling System 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="16649" end="16659" title="Smartphone" label="Smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="16683" end="16693" title="mobile app" label="mobile app"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975019" start="17237" end="17241" title="ITU-T V.23" label="V.23"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17460" end="17473" title="line reversal" label="line reversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q941685" start="17504" end="17508" title="DTMF" label="DTMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021688" start="18165" end="18171" title="call tracing" label="traced"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="18294" end="18304" title="civil suit" label="civil suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="18314" end="18347" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243001" start="18358" end="18362" title="Fine (penalty)" label="fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="19336" end="19351" title="British Telecom" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="19411" end="19417" title="Software bug" label="errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134459" start="20184" end="20214" title="Truth in Caller ID Act of 2009" label="Truth in Caller ID Act of 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q304126" start="20414" end="20432" title="caller ID spoofing" label="caller ID spoofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353270" start="20564" end="20572" title="robocall" label="robocall"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851841" start="21111" end="21122" title="SHAKEN/STIR" label="SHAKEN/STIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256467" start="21790" end="21805" title="unlisted number" label="unlisted number"/>
<link wikidata="Q668733" start="22512" end="22516" title="Dial (of telephone)" label="dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="22594" end="22607" title="NANP" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q668733" start="22657" end="22670" title="Rotary dial" label="rotary phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="22686" end="22700" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="22705" end="22712" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q519361" start="23251" end="23254" title="primary rate interface" label="PRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q308859" start="23510" end="23519" title="Anonymity" label="anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="23629" end="23648" title="telephone company" label="telephone companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q814610" start="24170" end="24187" title="Emergency service" label="Emergency service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051089" start="24395" end="24413" title="cat-and-mouse game" label="cat-and-mouse game"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="24834" end="24837" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="25676" end="25689" title="voice over IP" label="voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25894" end="25901" title="Caller ID spoofing#Legal considerations" label="illegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5022168" start="26103" end="26115" title="Calling Name Presentation" label="CNAM dip fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972335" start="27613" end="27624" title="National Do Not Call Registry" label="Do Not Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049026" start="27827" end="27848" title="direct inward dialing" label="direct inward dialing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270545" start="27876" end="27912" title="Dialed Number Identification Service" label="Dialed Number Identification Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5022168" start="28125" end="28150" title="Calling Name Presentation" label="Calling Name Presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664461" start="28153" end="28177" title="Local number portability" label="Local number portability"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664242" start="28180" end="28203" title="Location Routing Number" label="Location Routing Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134459" start="28206" end="28236" title="Truth in Caller ID Act of 2009" label="Truth in Caller ID Act of 2009"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162282" wikidata="Q171969" url="?curid=162282" title="Georges Cuvier">
<text>Jean Léopold Nicolas Frédéric, baron Cuvier (23 August 1769 – 13 May 1832), known as Georges Cuvier (; ), was a French naturalist and zoologist, sometimes referred to as the &quot;founding father of paleontology&quot;. Cuvier was a major figure in natural sciences research in the early 19th century and was instrumental in establishing the fields of comparative anatomy and paleontology through his work in comparing living animals with fossils.

Cuvier&#x27;s work is considered the foundation of vertebrate paleontology, and he expanded Linnaean taxonomy by grouping classes into phyla and incorporating both fossils and living species into the classification. Cuvier is also known for establishing extinction as a fact—at the time, extinction was considered by many of Cuvier&#x27;s contemporaries to be merely controversial speculation. In his &quot;Essay on the Theory of the Earth&quot; (1813) Cuvier proposed that now-extinct species had been wiped out by periodic catastrophic flooding events. In this way, Cuvier became the most influential proponent of catastrophism in geology in the early 19th century. His study of the strata of the Paris basin with Alexandre Brongniart established the basic principles of biostratigraphy.

Among his other accomplishments, Cuvier established that elephant-like bones found in North America belonged to an extinct animal he later would name as a &quot;mastodon&quot;, and that a large skeleton dug up in present-day Argentina was of a giant, prehistoric ground sloth, which he named &quot;Megatherium&quot;. He also established two ungulate genera from the Paris Basin named &quot;Palaeotherium&quot; and &quot;Anoplotherium&quot; based on fragmentary remains alone, although more complete remains were later uncovered. He named the pterosaur &quot;Pterodactylus&quot;, described (but did not discover or name) the aquatic reptile &quot;Mosasaurus&quot;, and was one of the first people to suggest the earth had been dominated by reptiles, rather than mammals, in prehistoric times.

Cuvier is also remembered for strongly opposing theories of evolution, which at the time (before Darwin&#x27;s theory) were mainly proposed by Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck and Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire. Cuvier believed there was no evidence for evolution, but rather evidence for cyclical creations and destructions of life forms by global extinction events such as deluges. In 1830, Cuvier and Geoffroy engaged in a famous debate, which is said to exemplify the two major deviations in biological thinking at the time – whether animal structure was due to function or (evolutionary) morphology. Cuvier supported function and rejected Lamarck&#x27;s thinking.

Cuvier also conducted racial studies which provided part of the foundation for scientific racism, and published work on the supposed differences between racial groups&#x27; physical properties and mental abilities. Cuvier subjected Sarah Baartman to examinations alongside other French naturalists during a period in which she was held captive in a state of neglect. Cuvier examined Baartman shortly before her death, and conducted a dissection following her death that disparagingly compared her physical features to those of monkeys.

Cuvier&#x27;s most famous work is &quot;Le Règne Animal&quot; (1817; English: &quot;The Animal Kingdom&quot;). In 1819, he was created a peer for life in honour of his scientific contributions. Thereafter, he was known as Baron Cuvier. He died in Paris during an epidemic of cholera. Some of Cuvier&#x27;s most influential followers were Louis Agassiz on the continent and in the United States, and Richard Owen in Britain. His name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower.

== Biography ==
Jean Léopold Nicolas Frédéric Cuvier was born in Montbéliard, where his Protestant ancestors had lived since the time of the Reformation. His mother was Anne Clémence Chatel; his father, Jean-Georges Cuvier, was a lieutenant in the Swiss Guards and a bourgeois of the town of Montbéliard. At the time, the town, which would be annexed to France on 10 October 1793, belonged to the Duchy of Württemberg. His mother, who was much younger than his father, tutored him diligently throughout his early years, so he easily surpassed the other children at school. During his gymnasium years, he had little trouble acquiring Latin and Greek, and was always at the head of his class in mathematics, history, and geography. According to Lee, &quot;The history of mankind was, from the earliest period of his life, a subject of the most indefatigable application; and long lists of sovereigns, princes, and the driest chronological facts, once arranged in his memory, were never forgotten.&quot;
At the age of 10, soon after entering the gymnasium, he encountered a copy of Conrad Gessner&#x27;s &quot;Historiae Animalium&quot;, the work that first sparked his interest in natural history. He then began frequent visits to the home of a relative, where he could borrow volumes of the Comte de Buffon&#x27;s massive &quot;Histoire Naturelle.&quot; All of these he read and reread, retaining so much of the information, that by the age of 12, &quot;he was as familiar with quadrupeds and birds as a first-rate naturalist.&quot; He remained at the gymnasium for four years.

Cuvier spent an additional four years at the Caroline Academy in Stuttgart, where he excelled in all of his coursework. Although he knew no German on his arrival, after only nine months of study, he managed to win the school prize for that language. Cuvier&#x27;s German education exposed him to the work of the geologist Abraham Gottlob Werner (1750–1817), whose Neptunism and emphasis on the importance of rigorous, direct observation of three-dimensional, structural relationships of rock formations to geological understanding provided models for Cuvier&#x27;s scientific theories and methods.

Upon graduation, he had no money on which to live as he awaited an appointment to an academic office. So in July 1788, he took a job at Fiquainville chateau in Normandy as tutor to the only son of the Comte d&#x27;Héricy, a Protestant noble. There, during the early 1790s, he began his comparisons of fossils with extant forms. Cuvier regularly attended meetings held at the nearby town of Valmont for the discussion of agricultural topics. There, he became acquainted with Henri Alexandre Tessier (1741–1837), who had assumed a false identity. Previously, he had been a physician and well-known agronomist, who had fled the Terror in Paris. After hearing Tessier speak on agricultural matters, Cuvier recognized him as the author of certain articles on agriculture in the &quot;Encyclopédie Méthodique&quot; and addressed him as M. Tessier.

Tessier replied in dismay, &quot;I am known, then, and consequently lost.&quot;—&quot;Lost!&quot; replied M. Cuvier, &quot;no; you are henceforth the object of our most anxious care.&quot; They soon became intimate and Tessier introduced Cuvier to his colleagues in Paris&quot;I have just found a pearl in the dunghill of Normandy&quot;, he wrote his friend Antoine-Augustin Parmentier. As a result, Cuvier entered into correspondence with several leading naturalists of the day and was invited to Paris. Arriving in the spring of 1795, at the age of 26, he soon became the assistant of Jean-Claude Mertrud (1728–1802), who had been appointed to the chair of Animal Anatomy at the Jardin des Plantes. When Mertrud died in 1802, Cuvier replaced him in office and the Chair changed its name to Chair of Comparative Anatomy.

The Institut de France was founded in the same year, and he was elected a member of its Academy of Sciences. On 4 April 1796 he began to lecture at the École Centrale du Pantheon and, at the opening of the National Institute in April, he read his first paleontological paper, which subsequently was published in 1800 under the title &quot;Mémoires sur les espèces d&#x27;éléphants vivants et fossiles&quot;. In this paper, he analyzed skeletal remains of Indian and African elephants, as well as mammoth fossils, and a fossil skeleton known at that time as the &quot;Ohio animal&quot;. In his second paper in 1796, he described and analyzed a large skeleton found in Paraguay, which he would name &quot;Megatherium&quot;. He concluded this skeleton represented yet another extinct animal and, by comparing its skull with living species of tree-dwelling sloths, that it was a kind of ground-dwelling giant sloth.

Together, these two 1796 papers were a seminal or landmark event, becoming a turning point in the history of paleontology, and in the development of comparative anatomy, as well. They also greatly enhanced Cuvier&#x27;s personal reputation and they essentially ended what had been a long-running debate about the reality of extinction.

In 1799, he succeeded Daubenton as professor of natural history in the &quot;Collège de France&quot;. In 1802, he became titular professor at the &quot;Jardin des Plantes&quot;; and in the same year, he was appointed commissary of the institute to accompany the inspectors general of public instruction. In this latter capacity, he visited the south of France, but in the early part of 1803, he was chosen permanent secretary of the department of physical sciences of the Academy, and he consequently abandoned the earlier appointment and returned to Paris. In 1806, he became a foreign member of the Royal Society, and in 1812, a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. In 1812, he became a correspondent for the Royal Institute of the Netherlands, and became a member in 1827. Cuvier was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1822.
Cuvier then devoted himself more especially to three lines of inquiry: (i) the structure and classification of the &quot;Mollusca&quot;; (ii) the comparative anatomy and systematic arrangement of the fishes; (iii) fossil mammals and reptiles and, secondarily, the osteology of living forms belonging to the same groups.

In 1812, Cuvier made what the cryptozoologist Bernard Heuvelmans called his &quot;Rash dictum&quot;: he remarked that it was unlikely that any large animal remained undiscovered. Ten years after his death, the word &quot;dinosaur&quot; would be coined by Richard Owen in 1842.

During his lifetime, Cuvier served as an imperial councillor under Napoleon, president of the Council of Public Instruction and chancellor of the university under the restored Bourbons, Grand Officer of the Legion of Honour, a Peer of France, Minister of the Interior, and president of the Council of State under Louis Philippe. He was eminent in all these capacities, and yet the dignity given by such high administrative positions was as nothing compared to his leadership in natural science.

Cuvier was by birth, education, and conviction a devout Lutheran, and remained Protestant throughout his life while regularly attending church services. Despite this, he regarded his personal faith as a private matter; he evidently identified himself with his confessional minority group when he supervised governmental educational programs for Protestants. He also was very active in founding the Parisian Biblical Society in 1818, where he later served as a vice president. From 1822 until his death in 1832, Cuvier was Grand Master of the Protestant Faculties of Theology of the French University.

== Scientific ideas and their impact ==

=== Opposition to evolution ===
Cuvier was critical of theories of evolution, in particular those proposed by his contemporaries Lamarck and Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, which involved the gradual transmutation of one form into another. He repeatedly emphasized that his extensive experience with fossil material indicated one fossil form does not, as a rule, gradually change into a succeeding, distinct fossil form. A deep-rooted source of his opposition to the gradual transformation of species was his goal of creating an accurate taxonomy based on principles of comparative anatomy. Such a project would become impossible if species were mutable, with no clear boundaries between them. According to the University of California Museum of Paleontology, &quot;Cuvier did not believe in organic evolution, for any change in an organism&#x27;s anatomy would have rendered it unable to survive. He studied the mummified cats and ibises that Geoffroy had brought back from Napoleon&#x27;s invasion of Egypt, and showed they were no different from their living counterparts; Cuvier used this to support his claim that life forms did not evolve over time.&quot;

He also observed that Napoleon&#x27;s expedition to Egypt had retrieved animals mummified thousands of years previously that seemed no different from their modern counterparts. &quot;Certainly&quot;, Cuvier wrote, &quot;one cannot detect any greater difference between these creatures and those we see, than between the human mummies and the skeletons of present-day men.&quot;

Lamarck dismissed this conclusion, arguing that evolution happened much too slowly to be observed over just a few thousand years. Cuvier, however, in turn criticized how Lamarck and other naturalists conveniently introduced hundreds of thousands of years &quot;with a stroke of a pen&quot; to uphold their theory. Instead, he argued that one may judge what a long time would produce only by multiplying what a lesser time produces. Since a lesser time produced no organic changes, neither, he argued, would a much longer time. Moreover, his commitment to the principle of the correlation of parts caused him to doubt that any mechanism could ever gradually modify any part of an animal in isolation from all the other parts (in the way Lamarck proposed), without rendering the animal unable to survive. In his &quot;Éloge de M. de Lamarck&quot; (&quot;Praise for M. de Lamarck&quot;), Cuvier wrote that Lamarck&#x27;s theory of evolution

Instead, he said, the typical form makes an abrupt appearance in the fossil record, and persists unchanged to the time of its extinction. Cuvier attempted to explain this paleontological phenomenon he envisioned (which would be readdressed more than a century later by &quot;punctuated equilibrium&quot;) and to harmonize it with the &quot;Bible&quot;. He attributed the different time periods he was aware of as intervals between major catastrophes, the last of which is found in &quot;Genesis&quot;.

Cuvier&#x27;s claim that new fossil forms appear abruptly in the geological record and then continue without alteration in overlying strata was used by later critics of evolution to support creationism, to whom the abruptness seemed consistent with special divine creation (although Cuvier&#x27;s finding that different types made their paleontological debuts in different geological strata clearly did not). The lack of change was consistent with the supposed sacred immutability of &quot;species&quot;, but, again, the idea of extinction, of which Cuvier was the great proponent, obviously was not.

Many writers have unjustly accused Cuvier of obstinately maintaining that fossil human beings could never be found. In his &quot;Essay on the Theory of the Earth&quot;, he did say, &quot;no human bones have yet been found among fossil remains&quot;, but he made it clear exactly what he meant: &quot;When I assert that human bones have not been hitherto found among extraneous fossils, I must be understood to speak of fossils, or petrifactions, properly so called&quot;. Petrified bones, which have had time to mineralize and turn to stone, are typically far older than bones found to that date. Cuvier&#x27;s point was that all human bones found that he knew of, were of relatively recent age because they had not been petrified and had been found only in superficial strata. He was not dogmatic in this claim, however; when new evidence came to light, he included in a later edition an appendix describing a skeleton that he freely admitted was an &quot;instance of a fossil human petrifaction&quot;.

The harshness of his criticism and the strength of his reputation, however, continued to discourage naturalists from speculating about the gradual transmutation of species, until Charles Darwin published &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot; more than two decades after Cuvier&#x27;s death.

=== Extinction ===
Early in his tenure at the National Museum in Paris, Cuvier published studies of fossil bones in which he argued that they belonged to large, extinct quadrupeds. His first two such publications were those identifying mammoth and mastodon fossils as belonging to extinct species rather than modern elephants and the study in which he identified the &quot;Megatherium&quot; as a giant, extinct species of sloth. His primary evidence for his identifications of mammoths and mastodons as separate, extinct species was the structure of their jaws and teeth. His primary evidence that the &quot;Megatherium&quot; fossil had belonged to a massive sloth came from his comparison of its skull with those of extant sloth species.

Cuvier wrote of his paleontological method that &quot;the form of the tooth leads to the form of the condyle, that of the scapula to that of the nails, just as an equation of a curve implies all of its properties; and, just as in taking each property separately as the basis of a special equation we are able to return to the original equation and other associated properties, similarly, the nails, the scapula, the condyle, the femur, each separately reveal the tooth or each other; and by beginning from each of them the thoughtful professor of the laws of organic economy can reconstruct the entire animal.&quot; 

However, Cuvier&#x27;s actual method was heavily dependent on the comparison of fossil specimens with the anatomy of extant species in the necessary context of his vast knowledge of animal anatomy and access to unparalleled natural history collections in Paris. This reality, however, did not prevent the rise of a popular legend that Cuvier could reconstruct the entire bodily structures of extinct animals given only a few fragments of bone.

At the time Cuvier presented his 1796 paper on living and fossil elephants, it was still widely believed that no species of animal had ever become extinct. Authorities such as Buffon had claimed that fossils found in Europe of animals such as the woolly rhinoceros and the mammoth were remains of animals still living in the tropics (i.e. rhinoceros and elephants), which had shifted out of Europe and Asia as the earth became cooler.

Thereafter, Cuvier performed a pioneering research study on some elephant fossils excavated around Paris. The bones he studied, however, were remarkably different from the bones of elephants currently thriving in India and Africa. This discovery led Cuvier to denounce the idea that fossils came from those that are currently living. The idea that these bones belonged to elephants living – but hiding – somewhere on Earth seemed ridiculous to Cuvier, because it would be nearly impossible to miss them due to their enormous size. The &quot;Megatherium&quot; provided another compelling data point for this argument. Ultimately, his repeated identification of fossils as belonging to species unknown to man, combined with mineralogical evidence from his stratigraphical studies in Paris, drove Cuvier to the proposition that the abrupt changes the Earth underwent over a long period of time caused some species to go extinct.

Cuvier&#x27;s theory on extinction has met opposition from other notable natural scientists like Darwin and Charles Lyell. Unlike Cuvier, they didn&#x27;t believe that extinction was a sudden process; they believed that like the Earth, animals collectively undergo gradual change as a species. This differed widely from Cuvier&#x27;s theory, which seemed to propose that animal extinction was catastrophic.

However, Cuvier&#x27;s theory of extinction is still justified in the case of mass extinctions that occurred in the last 600 million years, when approximately half of all living species went completely extinct within a short geological span of two million years, due in part by volcanic eruptions, asteroids, and rapid fluctuations in sea level. At this time, new species rose and others fell, precipitating the arrival of human beings.
Cuvier&#x27;s early work demonstrated conclusively that extinction was indeed a credible natural global process. Cuvier&#x27;s thinking on extinctions was influenced by his extensive readings in Greek and Latin literature; he gathered every ancient report known in his day relating to discoveries of petrified bones of remarkable size in the Mediterranean region.

Influence on Cuvier&#x27;s theory of extinction was his collection of specimens from the New World, many of them obtained from Native Americans. He also maintained an archive of Native American observations, legends, and interpretations of immense fossilized skeletal remains, sent to him by informants and friends in the Americas. He was impressed that most of the Native American accounts identified the enormous bones, teeth, and tusks as animals of the deep past that had been destroyed by catastrophe.

=== Catastrophism ===


Cuvier came to believe that most, if not all, the animal fossils he examined were remains of species that had become extinct. Near the end of his 1796 paper on living and fossil elephants, he said:

:&quot;All of these facts, consistent among themselves, and not opposed by any report, seem to me to prove the existence of a world previous to ours, destroyed by some kind of catastrophe.&quot;

Contrary to many natural scientists&#x27; beliefs at the time, Cuvier believed that animal extinction was not a product of anthropogenic causes. Instead, he proposed that humans were around long enough to indirectly maintain the fossilized records of ancient Earth. He also attempted to verify the water catastrophe by analyzing records of various cultural backgrounds. Though he found many accounts of the water catastrophe unclear, he did believe that such an event occurred at the brink of human history nonetheless.

This led Cuvier to become an active proponent of the geological school of thought called catastrophism, which maintained that many of the geological features of the earth and the history of life could be explained by catastrophic events that had caused the extinction of many species of animals. Over the course of his career, Cuvier came to believe there had not been a single catastrophe, but several, resulting in a succession of different faunas. He wrote about these ideas many times, in particular, he discussed them in great detail in the preliminary discourse (an introduction) to a collection of his papers, &quot;Recherches sur les ossements fossiles de quadrupèdes&quot; (&quot;Researches on quadruped fossil bones&quot;), on quadruped fossils published in 1812.

Cuvier&#x27;s own explanation for such a catastrophic event is derived from two different sources, including those from Jean-André Deluc and Déodat de Dolomieu. The former proposed that the continents existing ten millennia ago collapsed, allowing the ocean floors to rise higher than the continental plates and become the continents that now exist today. The latter proposed that a massive tsunami hit the globe, leading to mass extinction. Whatever the case was, he believed that the deluge happened quite recently in human history. In fact, he believed that Earth&#x27;s existence was limited and not as extended as many natural scientists, like Lamarck, believed it to be.

Much of the evidence he used to support his catastrophist theories has been taken from his fossil records. He strongly suggested that the fossils he found were evidence of the world&#x27;s first reptiles, followed chronologically by mammals and humans. Cuvier didn&#x27;t wish to delve much into the causation of all the extinction and introduction of new animal species but rather focused on the sequential aspects of animal history on Earth. In a way, his chronological dating of Earth&#x27;s history somewhat reflected Lamarck&#x27;s transformationist theories.

Cuvier also worked alongside Alexandre Brongniart in analyzing the Parisian rock cycle. Using stratigraphical methods, they were both able to extrapolate key information regarding Earth history from studying these rocks. These rocks contained remnants of molluscs, bones of mammals, and shells. From these findings, Cuvier and Brongniart concluded that many environmental changes occurred in quick catastrophes, though Earth itself was often placid for extended periods of time in between sudden disturbances.

The &#x27;Preliminary Discourse&#x27; became very well known and, unauthorized translations were made into English, German, and Italian (and in the case of those in English, not entirely accurately). In 1826, Cuvier published a revised version under the name, &quot;Discours sur les révolutions de la surface du globe&quot; (&quot;Discourse on the upheavals of the surface of the globe&quot;).

After Cuvier&#x27;s death, the catastrophic school of geological thought lost ground to uniformitarianism, as championed by Charles Lyell and others, which claimed that the geological features of the earth were best explained by currently observable forces, such as erosion and volcanism, acting gradually over an extended period of time. The increasing interest in the topic of mass extinction starting in the late twentieth century, however, has led to a resurgence of interest among historians of science and other scholars in this aspect of Cuvier&#x27;s work.

=== Stratigraphy ===
Cuvier collaborated for several years with Alexandre Brongniart, an instructor at the Paris mining school, to produce a monograph on the geology of the region around Paris. They published a preliminary version in 1808 and the final version was published in 1811.

In this monograph, they identified characteristic fossils of different rock layers that they used to analyze the geological column, the ordered layers of sedimentary rock, of the Paris basin. They concluded that the layers had been laid down over an extended period during which there clearly had been faunal succession and that the area had been submerged under sea water at times and at other times under fresh water. Along with William Smith&#x27;s work during the same period on a geological map of England, which also used characteristic fossils and the principle of faunal succession to correlate layers of sedimentary rock, the monograph helped establish the scientific discipline of stratigraphy. It was a major development in the history of paleontology and the history of geology.

=== Age of reptiles ===

In 1800 and working only from a drawing, Cuvier was the first to correctly identify in print, a fossil found in Bavaria as a small flying reptile, which he named the &quot;Ptero-Dactyle&quot; in 1809, (later Latinized as &quot;Pterodactylus antiquus&quot;)—the first known member of the diverse order of pterosaurs. In 1808 Cuvier identified a fossil found in Maastricht as a giant marine lizard, the first known mosasaur.

Cuvier speculated correctly that there had been a time when reptiles rather than mammals had been the dominant fauna. This speculation was confirmed over the two decades following his death by a series of spectacular finds, mostly by English geologists and fossil collectors such as Mary Anning, William Conybeare, William Buckland, and Gideon Mantell, who found and described the first ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurs, and dinosaurs.

=== Principle of the correlation of parts ===
In a 1798 paper on the fossil remains of an animal found in some plaster quarries near Paris, Cuvier states what is known as the principle of the correlation of parts. He writes:

:&quot;If an animal&#x27;s teeth are such as they must be, in order for it to nourish itself with flesh, we can be sure without further examination that the whole system of its digestive organs is appropriate for that kind of food, and that its whole skeleton and locomotive organs, and even its sense organs, are arranged in such a way as to make it skilful at pursuing and catching its prey. For these relations are the necessary conditions of existence of the animal; if things were not so, it would not be able to subsist.&quot;

This idea is referred to as Cuvier&#x27;s principle of correlation of parts, which states that all organs in an animal&#x27;s body are deeply interdependent. Species&#x27; existence relies on the way in which these organs interact. For example, a species whose digestive tract is best suited to digesting flesh but whose body is best suited to foraging for plants cannot survive. Thus in all species, the functional significance of each body part must be correlated to the others, or else the species cannot sustain itself.

==== Applications ====
Cuvier believed that the power of his principle came in part from its ability to aid in the reconstruction of fossils. In most cases, fossils of quadrupeds were not found as complete, assembled skeletons, but rather as scattered pieces that needed to be put together by anatomists. To make matters worse, deposits often contained the fossilized remains of several species of animals mixed together. Anatomists reassembling these skeletons ran the risk of combining remains of different species, producing imaginary composite species. However, by examining the functional purpose of each bone and applying the principle of correlation of parts, Cuvier believed that this problem could be avoided.

This principle&#x27;s ability to aid in the reconstruction of fossils was also helpful to Cuvier&#x27;s work in providing evidence in favour of extinction. The strongest evidence Cuvier could provide in favour of extinction would be to prove that the fossilized remains of an animal belonged to a species that no longer existed. By applying Cuvier&#x27;s principle of correlation of parts, it would be easier to verify that a fossilized skeleton had been authentically reconstructed, thus validating any observations drawn from comparing it to skeletons of existing species.

In addition to helping anatomists reconstruct fossilized remains, Cuvier believed that his principle also held enormous predictive power. For example, when he discovered a fossil that resembled a marsupial in the gypsum quarries of Montmartre, he correctly predicted that the fossil would contain bones commonly found in marsupials in its pelvis as well.

==== Impact ====

Cuvier hoped that his principles of anatomy would provide the law-based framework that would elevate natural history to the truly scientific level occupied by physics and chemistry thanks to the laws established by Isaac Newton (1643 – 1727) and Antoine Lavoisier (1743 – 1794), respectively. He expressed confidence in the introduction to &quot;Le Règne Animal&quot; that someday anatomy would be expressed as laws as simple, mathematical, and predictive as Newton&#x27;s laws of physics, and he viewed his principle as an important step in that direction. To him, the predictive capabilities of his principles demonstrated in his prediction of the existence of marsupial pelvic bones in the gypsum quarries of Montmartre demonstrated that these goals were not only in reach, but imminent.

The principle of correlation of parts was also Cuvier&#x27;s way of understanding function in a non-evolutionary context, without invoking a divine creator. In the same 1798 paper on the fossil remains of an animal found in plaster quarries near Paris, Cuvier emphasizes the predictive power of his principle, writing,

Today comparative anatomy has reached such a point of perfection that, after inspecting a single bone, one can often determine the class, and sometimes even the genus of the animal to which it belonged, above all if that bone belonged to the head or the limbs ... This is because the number, direction, and shape of the bones that compose each part of an animal&#x27;s body are always in a necessary relation to all the other parts, in such a way that—up to a point—one can infer the whole from any one of them and vice versa.

Though Cuvier believed that his principle&#x27;s major contribution was that it was a rational, mathematical way to reconstruct fossils and make predictions, in reality, it was difficult for Cuvier to use his principle. The functional significance of many body parts was still unknown at the time, and so relating those body parts to other body parts using Cuvier&#x27;s principle was impossible. Though Cuvier was able to make accurate predictions about fossil finds, in practice, the accuracy of his predictions came not from application of his principle, but rather from his vast knowledge of comparative anatomy. However, despite Cuvier&#x27;s exaggerations of the power of his principle, the basic concept is central to comparative anatomy and paleontology.

== Scientific work ==

=== Comparative anatomy and classification ===

At the Paris Museum, Cuvier furthered his studies on the anatomical classification of animals. He believed that classification should be based on how organs collectively function, a concept he called functional integration. Cuvier reinforced the idea of subordinating less vital body parts to more critical organ systems as part of anatomical classification. He included these ideas in his 1817 book, &quot;The Animal Kingdom&quot;.

In his anatomical studies, Cuvier believed function played a bigger role than form in the field of taxonomy. His scientific beliefs rested in the idea of the principles of the correlation of parts and of the conditions of existence. The former principle accounts for the connection between organ function and its practical use for an organism to survive. The latter principle emphasizes the animal&#x27;s physiological function in relation to its surrounding environment. These findings were published in his scientific readings, including &quot;Leçons d&#x27;anatomie comparée&quot; (&quot;Lessons on Comparative Anatomy&quot;) between 1800 and 1805, and &quot;The Animal Kingdom&quot; in 1817.

Ultimately, Cuvier developed four embranchements, or branches, through which he classified animals based on his taxonomical and anatomical studies. He later performed groundbreaking work in classifying animals in vertebrate and invertebrate groups by subdividing each category. For instance, he proposed that the invertebrates could be segmented into three individual categories, including &quot;Mollusca&quot;, &quot;Radiata&quot;, and &quot;Articulata&quot;. He also articulated that species cannot move across these categories, a theory called transmutation. He reasoned that organisms cannot acquire or change their physical traits over time and still retain optimal survival. As a result, he often conflicted with Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and Jean-Baptiste Lamarck&#x27;s theories of transmutation.

In 1798, Cuvier published his first independent work, the &quot;Tableau élémentaire de l&#x27;histoire naturelle des animaux&quot;, which was an abridgement of his course of lectures at the École du Pantheon and may be regarded as the foundation and first statement of his natural classification of the animal kingdom.

=== Mollusks ===
Cuvier categorized snails, cockles, and cuttlefish into one category he called molluscs (&quot;Mollusca&quot;), an embranchment. Though he noted how all three of these animals were outwardly different in terms of shell shape and diet, he saw a noticeable pattern pertaining to their overall physical appearance.

Cuvier began his intensive studies of molluscs during his time in Normandy – the first time he had ever seen the sea – and his papers on the so-called &quot;Mollusca&quot; began appearing as early as 1792. However, most of his memoirs on this branch were published in the &quot;Annales du museum&quot; between 1802 and 1815; they were subsequently collected as &quot;Mémoires pour servir à l&#x27;histoire et à l&#x27;anatomie des mollusques&quot;, published in one volume at Paris in 1817.

=== Fish ===
Cuvier&#x27;s researches on fish, begun in 1801, finally culminated in the publication of the &quot;Histoire naturelle des poissons&quot;, which contained descriptions of 5,000 species of fishes, and was a joint production with Achille Valenciennes. Cuvier&#x27;s work on this project extended over the years 1828–1831.

=== Palaeontology and osteology ===

In palaeontology, Cuvier published a long list of memoirs, partly relating to the bones of extinct animals, and partly detailing the results of observations on the skeletons of living animals, specially examined with a view toward throwing light upon the structure and affinities of the fossil forms.

Among living forms he published papers relating to the osteology of the &quot;Rhinoceros indicus&quot;, the tapir, &quot;Hyrax capensis&quot;, the hippopotamus, the sloths, the manatee, etc.

He produced an even larger body of work on fossils, dealing with the extinct mammals of the Eocene beds of Montmartre and other localities near Paris, such as the Buttes Chaumont, the fossil species of hippopotamus, &quot;Palaeotherium&quot;, &quot;Anoplotherium&quot;, a marsupial (which he called &quot;Didelphys gypsorum&quot;), the &quot;Megalonyx&quot;, the &quot;Megatherium&quot;, the cave-hyena, the pterodactyl, the extinct species of rhinoceros, the cave bear, the mastodon, the extinct species of elephant, fossil species of manatee and seals, fossil forms of crocodilians, chelonians, fish, birds, etc. If his identification of fossil animals was dependent upon comparison with the osteology of extant animals whose anatomy was poorly known, Cuvier would often publish a thorough documentation of the relevant extant species&#x27; anatomy before publishing his analyses of the fossil specimens. The department of palaeontology dealing with the Mammalia may be said to have been essentially created and established by Cuvier.

The results of Cuvier&#x27;s principal palaeontological and geological investigations ultimately were given to the world in the form of two separate works: &quot;Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles de quadrupèdes&quot; (Paris, 1812; later editions in 1821 and 1825); and &quot;Discours sur les revolutions de la surface du globe&quot; (Paris, 1825). In this latter work he expounded a scientific theory of Catastrophism.

=== &quot;The Animal Kingdom&quot; (&quot;Le Règne Animal&quot;) ===

Cuvier&#x27;s most admired work was his &quot;Le Règne Animal&quot;. It appeared in four octavo volumes in 1817; a second edition in five volumes was brought out in 1829–1830. In this classic work, Cuvier presented the results of his life&#x27;s research into the structure of living and fossil animals. With the exception of the section on insects, in which he was assisted by his friend Latreille, the whole of the work was his own. It was translated into English many times, often with substantial notes and supplementary material updating the book in accordance with the expansion of knowledge.

=== Racial studies ===
Cuvier was a Protestant and a believer in monogenism, who held that all men descended from the biblical Adam, although his position usually was confused as polygenist. Some writers who have studied his racial work have dubbed his position as &quot;quasi-polygenist&quot;, and most of his racial studies have influenced scientific racism. Cuvier believed there were three distinct races: the Caucasian (white), Mongolian (yellow), and the Ethiopian (black). Cuvier claimed that Adam and Eve were Caucasian, the original race of mankind. The other two races originated from survivors escaping in different directions after a major catastrophe hit the earth 5,000 years ago, with those survivors then living in complete isolation from each other.

Cuvier categorized these divisions he identified into races according to his perception of the beauty or ugliness of their skulls and the quality of their civilizations. Cuvier&#x27;s racial studies held the supposed features of polygenism, namely fixity of species; limits on environmental influence; unchanging underlying type; anatomical and cranial measurement differences in races; and physical and mental differences between distinct races.

==== Sarah Baartman ====
Alongside other French naturalists, Cuvier subjected Sarah Baartman, a South African Khokhoi woman exhibited in European freak shows as the &quot;Hottentot Venus&quot;, to examinations. At the time that Cuvier interacted with Baartman, Baartman&#x27;s &quot;existence was really quite miserable and extraordinarily poor. Sara was literally [sic] treated like an animal.&quot; In 1815, while Baartman was very ill, Cuvier commissioned a nude painting of her. She died shortly afterward, aged 26.

Following Baartman&#x27;s death, Cuvier sought out and received permission to dissect her body, focusing on her genitalia, buttocks and skull shape. In his examination, Cuvier concluded that many of Baartman&#x27;s features more closely resembled the anatomy of a monkey than a human. Her remains were displayed in the Musée de l’Homme in Paris until 1970, then were put into storage. Her remains were returned to South Africa in 2002.

==Taxa described by him==
*See :Category:Taxa named by Georges Cuvier

== Official and public work ==
Apart from his own original investigations in zoology and paleontology Cuvier carried out a vast amount of work as perpetual secretary of the National Institute, and as an official connected with public education generally; and much of this work appeared ultimately in a published form. Thus, in 1808 he was placed by Napoleon upon the council of the Imperial University, and in this capacity he presided (in the years 1809, 1811, and 1813) over commissions charged to examine the state of the higher educational establishments in the districts beyond the Alps and the Rhine that had been annexed to France, and to report upon the means by which these could be affiliated with the central university. He published three separate reports on this subject.

In his capacity, again, of perpetual secretary of the Institute, he not only prepared a number of &quot;éloges historiques&quot; on deceased members of the Academy of Sciences, but was also the author of a number of reports on the history of the physical and natural sciences, the most important of these being the &quot;Rapport historique sur le progrès des sciences physiques depuis 1789&quot;, published in 1810.

Prior to the fall of Napoleon (1814) he had been admitted to the council of state, and his position remained unaffected by the restoration of the Bourbons. He was elected chancellor of the university, in which capacity he acted as interim president of the council of public instruction, while he also, as a Lutheran, superintended the faculty of Protestant theology. In 1819 he was appointed president of the committee of the interior, an office he retained until his death.

In 1826 he was made grand officer of the Legion of Honour; he subsequently was appointed president of the council of state. He served as a member of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres from 1830 to his death. A member of the Doctrinaires, he was nominated to the ministry of the interior in the beginning of 1832.

== Commemorations ==
Cuvier is commemorated in the naming of several animals; they include Cuvier&#x27;s beaked whale (which he first thought to be extinct), Cuvier&#x27;s gazelle, Cuvier&#x27;s toucan, Cuvier&#x27;s bichir, Cuvier&#x27;s dwarf caiman, and &quot;Galeocerdo cuvier&quot; (tiger shark). Cuvier is commemorated in the scientific name of the following reptiles: &quot;Anolis cuvieri&quot; (a lizard from Puerto Rico), &quot;Bachia cuvieri&quot; (a synonym of &quot;Bachia alleni)&quot;, and &quot;Oplurus cuvieri&quot;.

The fish &quot;Hepsetus cuvieri&quot;, sometimes known as the African pike or Kafue pike characin, which is a predatory freshwater fish found in southern Africa was named after him.

There also are some extinct animals named after Cuvier, such as the South American giant sloth &quot;Catonyx cuvieri&quot;.

Cuvier Island in New Zealand was named after Cuvier by D&#x27;Urville.

The professor of English Wayne Glausser argues at length that the Aubrey-Maturin series of 21 novels (1970–2004) by Patrick O&#x27;Brian make the character Stephen Maturin &quot;an advocate of the neo-classical paradigm articulated .. by Georges Cuvier.&quot;

Cuvier is referenced in Edgar Allan Poe&#x27;s short story &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; as having written a description of the orangutan. Arthur Conan Doyle also refers to Cuvier in &quot;The Five Orange Pips&quot;, in which Sherlock Holmes compares Cuvier&#x27;s methods to his own.

There is a statue of Cuvier standing in front of the Hôtel de Ville in Montbéliard.

== Works ==
*&quot;Tableau élémentaire de l&#x27;histoire naturelle des animaux&quot; (1797–1798)
*&quot;Leçons d&#x27;anatomie comparée&quot; (5 volumes, 1800–1805)
*&quot;Essais sur la géographie minéralogique des environs de Paris, avec une carte géognostique et des coupes de terrain&quot;, with Alexandre Brongniart (1811)
*&quot;Le Règne animal distribué d&#x27;après son organisation, pour servir de base à l&#x27;histoire naturelle des animaux et d&#x27;introduction à l&#x27;anatomie comparée&quot; (4 volumes, 1817)
*&quot;Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles de quadrupèdes, où l&#x27;on rétablit les caractères de plusieurs espèces d&#x27;animaux que les révolutions du globe paroissent avoir détruites&quot; (4 volumes, 1812) (text in French) 2 3 4 
*&quot;Mémoires pour servir à l&#x27;histoire et à l&#x27;anatomie des mollusques&quot; (1817)
*&quot;Éloges historiques des membres de l&#x27;Académie royale des sciences, lus dans les séances de l&#x27;Institut royal de France par M. Cuvier&quot; (3 volumes, 1819–1827) Vol. 1, Vol. 2, and Vol. 3
*&quot;Théorie de la terre&quot; (1821)
::--- &quot;Essay on the theory of the earth&quot;, 1813; 1815, trans. Robert Kerr.
* &quot;Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles&quot;, 1821–1823 (5 vols). 
*&quot;Discours sur les révolutions de la surface du globe et sur les changements qu&#x27;elles ont produits dans le règne animal&quot; (1822). New edition: Christian Bourgeois, Paris, 1985. (text in French)
*&quot;Histoire des progrès des sciences naturelles depuis 1789 jusqu&#x27;à ce jour&quot; (5 volumes, 1826–1836)
*&quot;Histoire naturelle des poissons&quot; (11 volumes, 1828–1848), continued by Achille Valenciennes
*&quot;Histoire des sciences naturelles depuis leur origine jusqu&#x27;à nos jours, chez tous les peuples connus, professée au Collège de France&quot; (5 volumes, 1841–1845), edited, annotated, and published by Magdeleine de Saint-Agit
*&quot;Cuvier&#x27;s History of the Natural Sciences: twenty-four lessons from Antiquity to the Renaissance&quot; [edited and annotated by Theodore W. Pietsch, translated by Abby S. Simpson, foreword by Philippe Taquet], Paris: Publications scientifiques du Muséum national d&#x27;Histoire naturelle, 2012, 734 p. (coll. Archives; 16) 
*&quot;Variorum of the works of Georges Cuvier: Preliminary Discourse of the Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles 1812, containing the Memory on the ibis of the ancient Egyptians, and the Discours sur les révolutions de la surface du Globe 1825, containing the Determination of the birds called ibis by the ancient Egyptians&quot;

Cuvier also collaborated on the &quot;Dictionnaire des sciences naturelles&quot; (61 volumes, 1816–1845) and on the &quot;Biographie universelle&quot; (45 volumes, 1843–18??)

== Taxon named in his honour ==
* &quot;Anampses cuvier&quot;, commonly known as the Pearl wrasse, a fish found in the Pacific Ocean.
*&quot;Paromola cuvieri&quot;, a crab from the northern hemisphere.

== See also ==

* Saartjie Baartman, the &quot;Hottentot Venus&quot; whose body Cuvier examined
* Frédéric Cuvier, also a naturalist, was Georges Cuvier&#x27;s younger brother.
* History of paleontology for more on the impact of Cuvier&#x27;s scientific ideas
* List of works by James Pradier

== References ==

===Footnotes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*
* 
*
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==
* 
* Published as an introduction to the &quot;Éloges historiques&quot; of Cuvier.
* Kolbert, Elizabeth. (16 December 2013). &quot;Annals of Extinction Part One: The Lost World.&quot; &quot;The New Yorker.&quot; p. 28. Profile of Cuvier and his work on extinction and taxonomy.
* 
* 
== External links ==

* 
* Victorian Web Bio
* Infoscience
* English translation of Discourses
* Cuvier&#x27;s principle of the correlation of parts
* Cuvier&#x27;s &quot;Elegy of Lamarck&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="0" end="43" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Jean Léopold Nicolas Frédéric, baron Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="85" end="99" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="119" end="129" title="natural history" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="134" end="143" title="zoology" label="zoologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q843900" start="351" end="370" title="comparative anatomy" label="comparative anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="375" end="387" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634677" start="499" end="522" title="vertebrate paleontology" label="vertebrate paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372154" start="540" end="557" title="Linnaean taxonomy" label="Linnaean taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="583" end="588" title="phylum" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="702" end="712" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q826716" start="1064" end="1077" title="catastrophism" label="catastrophism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="1081" end="1088" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="1133" end="1139" title="stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q755001" start="1147" end="1158" title="Paris basin" label="Paris basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q442937" start="1164" end="1184" title="Alexandre Brongniart" label="Alexandre Brongniart"/>
<link wikidata="Q864826" start="1221" end="1236" title="biostratigraphy" label="biostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="1400" end="1408" title="mastodon" label="mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="1464" end="1473" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q933583" start="1502" end="1514" title="ground sloth" label="ground sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q310387" start="1537" end="1548" title="Megatherium" label="Megatherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q755001" start="1605" end="1616" title="Paris Basin" label="Paris Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q138047" start="1629" end="1642" title="Palaeotherium" label="Palaeotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q138945" start="1659" end="1672" title="Anoplotherium" label="Anoplotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q309490" start="1797" end="1810" title="Pterodactylus" label="Pterodactylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312131" start="1885" end="1895" title="Mosasaurus" label="Mosasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="2129" end="2135" title="Charles Darwin" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82122" start="2175" end="2199" title="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck" label="Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q192428" start="2204" end="2226" title="Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire" label="Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="2270" end="2279" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612702" start="2391" end="2397" title="outburst flood" label="deluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383078" start="2440" end="2455" title="Cuvier–Geoffroy debate" label="a famous debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="2765" end="2782" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q232041" start="2918" end="2932" title="Sarah Baartman" label="Sarah Baartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454306" start="3263" end="3278" title="Le Règne Animal" label="Le Règne Animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509927" start="3360" end="3364" title="peerage of France" label="peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="3498" end="3505" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q122972" start="3561" end="3574" title="Louis Agassiz" label="Louis Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q151556" start="3622" end="3634" title="Richard Owen" label="Richard Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q162873" start="3670" end="3708" title="List of the 72 names on the Eiffel Tower" label="72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q154715" start="3776" end="3787" title="Montbéliard" label="Montbéliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227570" start="4108" end="4128" title="Duchy of Württemberg" label="Duchy of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="4295" end="4304" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="4754" end="4763" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60116" start="4790" end="4804" title="Conrad Gessner" label="Conrad Gessner"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="4889" end="4904" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q229264" start="4996" end="5015" title="Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon" label="the Comte de Buffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138032" start="5037" end="5055" title="Histoire Naturelle" label="Histoire Naturelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="5353" end="5362" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q58751" start="5610" end="5632" title="Abraham Gottlob Werner" label="Abraham Gottlob Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136420" start="5652" end="5661" title="Neptunism" label="Neptunism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6088" end="6107" title="Comte d&amp;#x27;Héricy" label="Comte d&amp;#x27;Héricy"/>
<link wikidata="Q628033" start="6277" end="6284" title="Valmont, Seine-Maritime" label="Valmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="6512" end="6518" title="Reign of Terror" label="Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340217" start="6666" end="6689" title="Encyclopédie Méthodique" label="Encyclopédie Méthodique"/>
<link wikidata="Q360312" start="7088" end="7115" title="Antoine-Augustin Parmentier" label="Antoine-Augustin Parmentier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7317" end="7336" title="Jean-Claude Mertrud" label="Jean-Claude Mertrud"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="7389" end="7403" title="Animal anatomy" label="Animal Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q730948" start="7411" end="7429" title="Jardin des Plantes" label="Jardin des Plantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q843900" start="7531" end="7550" title="Comparative anatomy" label="Comparative Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q377066" start="7557" end="7575" title="Institut de France" label="Institut de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="7641" end="7660" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7705" end="7731" title="École Centrale du Pantheon" label="École Centrale du Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="8027" end="8035" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="8049" end="8056" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="8057" end="8063" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="8220" end="8228" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q310387" start="8256" end="8267" title="Megatherium" label="Megatherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q933583" start="8452" end="8463" title="ground sloth" label="giant sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q195974" start="8564" end="8587" title="history of paleontology" label="history of paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q843900" start="8615" end="8634" title="comparative anatomy" label="comparative anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="8790" end="8800" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q546443" start="8825" end="8834" title="Louis-Jean-Marie Daubenton" label="Daubenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q202660" start="8880" end="8897" title="Collège de France" label="Collège de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q730948" start="8955" end="8973" title="Jardin des Plantes" label="Jardin des Plantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="9404" end="9417" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="9456" end="9489" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q253439" start="9534" end="9568" title="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="Royal Institute of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="9651" end="9688" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="9819" end="9827" title="Mollusca" label="Mollusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q819121" start="9962" end="9971" title="osteology" label="osteology"/>
<link wikidata="Q542873" start="10065" end="10083" title="Bernard Heuvelmans" label="Bernard Heuvelmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q151556" start="10274" end="10286" title="Richard Owen" label="Richard Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="10364" end="10372" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="10464" end="10481" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="restored Bourbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="10610" end="10624" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Louis Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="10849" end="10857" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q906066" start="10929" end="10943" title="church service" label="church service"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="11138" end="11149" title="protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280834" start="11200" end="11216" title="Bible society" label="Biblical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13529" end="13566" title="#Principle of the correlation of parts" label="principle of the correlation of parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q582558" start="14184" end="14206" title="punctuated equilibrium" label="punctuated equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="16198" end="16212" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="16229" end="16253" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q978198" start="17151" end="17158" title="condyle" label="condyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336" start="17172" end="17179" title="scapula" label="scapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q188949" start="18360" end="18377" title="woolly rhinoceros" label="woolly rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="18452" end="18462" title="rhinoceros" label="rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="18467" end="18475" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333" start="19584" end="19597" title="Charles Lyell" label="Charles Lyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="21736" end="21749" title="Human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q826716" start="22223" end="22236" title="catastrophism" label="catastrophism"/>
<link wikidata="Q21907045" start="22871" end="22880" title="quadrupedalism" label="quadruped"/>
<link wikidata="Q123670" start="23029" end="23045" title="Jean-André Deluc" label="Jean-André Deluc"/>
<link wikidata="Q380520" start="23050" end="23068" title="Déodat Gratet de Dolomieu" label="Déodat de Dolomieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="23300" end="23307" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q82122" start="23558" end="23565" title="Lamarck" label="Lamarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q130788" start="23801" end="23816" title="chronologically" label="chronologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q12764401" start="24045" end="24065" title="chronological dating" label="chronological dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q442937" start="24182" end="24202" title="Alexandre Brongniart" label="Alexandre Brongniart"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="24247" end="24262" title="stratigraphical" label="stratigraphical"/>
<link wikidata="Q208650" start="25147" end="25164" title="uniformitarianism" label="uniformitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333" start="25183" end="25196" title="Charles Lyell" label="Charles Lyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="25438" end="25453" title="Extinction event" label="mass extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q442937" start="25689" end="25709" title="Alexandre Brongniart" label="Alexandre Brongniart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319281" start="26212" end="26229" title="Principle of faunal succession" label="faunal succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q313533" start="26341" end="26354" title="William Smith (geologist)" label="William Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="26601" end="26613" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q195974" start="26649" end="26672" title="history of paleontology" label="history of paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779809" start="26681" end="26699" title="history of geology" label="history of geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q309490" start="26954" end="26967" title="Pterodactylus" label="Pterodactylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179204" start="27031" end="27040" title="pterosaur" label="pterosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309" start="27087" end="27097" title="Maastricht" label="Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q729456" start="27140" end="27148" title="mosasaur" label="mosasaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="27211" end="27218" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="27232" end="27238" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q230491" start="27434" end="27445" title="Mary Anning" label="Mary Anning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143830" start="27447" end="27464" title="William Conybeare (geologist)" label="William Conybeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q312389" start="27466" end="27482" title="William Buckland" label="William Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q348455" start="27488" end="27502" title="Gideon Mantell" label="Gideon Mantell"/>
<link wikidata="Q194515" start="27538" end="27549" title="ichthyosaur" label="ichthyosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q269195" start="27552" end="27562" title="plesiosaur" label="plesiosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="27569" end="27577" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454306" start="30882" end="30897" title="Le Règne Animal" label="Le Règne Animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508827" start="33211" end="33233" title="functional integration (neurobiology)" label="functional integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454306" start="33418" end="33436" title="Le Règne Animal" label="The Animal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460770" start="34689" end="34702" title="transmutation of species" label="transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="35377" end="35385" title="Mollusca" label="Mollusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="35661" end="35669" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="36128" end="36132" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q340257" start="36328" end="36348" title="Achille Valenciennes" label="Achille Valenciennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="36838" end="36848" title="Rhinoceros" label="Rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745367" start="36868" end="36873" title="tapir" label="tapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q53099" start="36881" end="36886" title="Hyrax" label="Hyrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="36907" end="36919" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274076" start="36925" end="36930" title="sloth" label="sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42797" start="36937" end="36944" title="manatee" label="manatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="37044" end="37050" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q186115" start="37059" end="37069" title="Montmartre" label="Montmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="37096" end="37101" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q532113" start="37115" end="37130" title="Buttes Chaumont" label="Buttes Chaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="37154" end="37166" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q138047" start="37174" end="37187" title="Palaeotherium" label="Palaeotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q138945" start="37201" end="37214" title="Anoplotherium" label="Anoplotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25336" start="37224" end="37233" title="marsupial" label="marsupial"/>
<link wikidata="Q134380" start="37294" end="37303" title="Megalonyx" label="Megalonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q310387" start="37321" end="37332" title="Megatherium" label="Megatherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139935" start="37344" end="37354" title="cave hyena" label="cave-hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q309490" start="37360" end="37371" title="pterodactylus" label="pterodactyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="37396" end="37406" title="rhinoceros" label="rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q188851" start="37412" end="37421" title="cave bear" label="cave bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="37427" end="37435" title="mastodon" label="mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="37460" end="37468" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="37470" end="37476" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="37500" end="37505" title="Pinniped" label="seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q43169" start="37523" end="37535" title="crocodile" label="crocodilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="37537" end="37547" title="Turtle" label="chelonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="37908" end="37914" title="Mammal" label="Mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q826716" start="38397" end="38410" title="Catastrophism" label="Catastrophism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454306" start="38529" end="38544" title="Le Règne Animal" label="Le Règne Animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="38824" end="38830" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q312771" start="38872" end="38881" title="Pierre André Latreille" label="Latreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="39119" end="39129" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901593" start="39148" end="39158" title="monogenism" label="monogenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q323800" start="39262" end="39272" title="polygenist" label="polygenist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="39425" end="39442" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129609" start="39497" end="39506" title="Caucasian race" label="Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207912" start="39516" end="39525" title="Mongoloid race" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="39544" end="39552" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="39583" end="39595" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839081" start="39735" end="39746" title="Disaster" label="catastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q323800" start="40080" end="40090" title="polygenism" label="polygenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q232041" start="40377" end="40391" title="Sarah Baartman" label="Sarah Baartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591557" start="40445" end="40455" title="freak show" label="freak show"/>
<link wikidata="Q670268" start="41139" end="41155" title="Musée de l&amp;#x27;Homme" label="Musée de l’Homme"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41288" end="41326" title=":Category:Taxa named by Georges Cuvier" label=":Category:Taxa named by Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="41417" end="41429" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="41677" end="41685" title="Napoleon I" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551587" start="41710" end="41729" title="University of France" label="Imperial University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="41915" end="41919" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="41928" end="41933" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42218" end="42236" title="éloges historiques" label="éloges historiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="42677" end="42685" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238355" start="42702" end="42730" title="Chancellor of the University of Paris" label="chancellor of the university"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="42838" end="42846" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="43048" end="43064" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q337526" start="43160" end="43203" title="Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres" label="Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531463" start="43244" end="43256" title="Doctrinaires" label="Doctrinaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q623173" start="43425" end="43451" title="Cuvier&amp;#x27;s beaked whale" label="Cuvier&amp;#x27;s beaked whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q744173" start="43492" end="43513" title="Cuvier&amp;#x27;s gazelle" label="Cuvier&amp;#x27;s gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q384839" start="43515" end="43535" title="white-throated toucan" label="Cuvier&amp;#x27;s toucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515914" start="43537" end="43557" title="Polypterus senegalus" label="Cuvier&amp;#x27;s bichir"/>
<link wikidata="Q757363" start="43559" end="43585" title="Cuvier&amp;#x27;s dwarf caiman" label="Cuvier&amp;#x27;s dwarf caiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q188212" start="43622" end="43633" title="tiger shark" label="tiger shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="43666" end="43681" title="Binomial nomenclature" label="scientific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852076" start="43715" end="43729" title="Anolis cuvieri" label="Anolis cuvieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q85744769" start="43812" end="43825" title="Bachia alleni" label="Bachia alleni"/>
<link wikidata="Q74232" start="43844" end="43859" title="Oplurus cuvieri" label="Oplurus cuvieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q14538242" start="43883" end="43899" title="Hepsetus cuvieri" label="Hepsetus cuvieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q820268" start="44176" end="44189" title="Cuvier Island" label="Cuvier Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q204735" start="44231" end="44245" title="Jules Dumont d&amp;#x27;Urville" label="D&amp;#x27;Urville"/>
<link wikidata="Q10376289" start="44314" end="44335" title="Aubrey-Maturin series" label="Aubrey-Maturin series"/>
<link wikidata="Q355438" start="44364" end="44384" title="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Brian" label="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Brian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706662" start="44404" end="44419" title="Stephen Maturin" label="Stephen Maturin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="44533" end="44555" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q459667" start="44574" end="44603" title="The Murders in the Rue Morgue" label="The Murders in the Rue Morgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q41050" start="44649" end="44658" title="orangutan" label="orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="44660" end="44678" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193379" start="44710" end="44730" title="The Five Orange Pips" label="The Five Orange Pips"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="44747" end="44762" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643152" start="44860" end="44874" title="Hôtel de Ville, Montbéliard" label="Hôtel de Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q154715" start="44878" end="44889" title="Montbéliard" label="Montbéliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q442937" start="45192" end="45212" title="Alexandre Brongniart" label="Alexandre Brongniart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454306" start="45227" end="45393" title="Le Règne Animal" label="Le Règne animal distribué d&amp;#x27;après son organisation, pour servir de base à l&amp;#x27;histoire naturelle des animaux et d&amp;#x27;introduction à l&amp;#x27;anatomie comparée"/>
<link wikidata="Q340257" start="46556" end="46576" title="Achille Valenciennes" label="Achille Valenciennes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47603" end="47625" title="Référence:Biographie universelle ancienne et moderne : histoire par ordre alphabétique de la vie publique et privée de tous les hommes (Michaud)" label="Biographie universelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706024" start="47697" end="47712" title="Anampses cuvier" label="Anampses cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="47776" end="47789" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896374" start="47792" end="47820" title="Paromola cuvieri" label="&amp;quot;Paromola cuvieri&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q232041" start="47878" end="47895" title="Sarah Baartman" label="Saartjie Baartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q467962" start="47958" end="47973" title="Frédéric Cuvier" label="Frédéric Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q195974" start="48039" end="48062" title="History of paleontology" label="History of paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014266" start="48122" end="48152" title="List of works by James Pradier" label="List of works by James Pradier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162285" wikidata="Q372584" url="?curid=162285" title="Pierre Bézier">
<text>Pierre Étienne Bézier (1 September 1910 – 25 November 1999; ) was a French engineer and one of the founders of the fields of solid, geometric and physical modelling as well as in the field of representing curves, especially in computer-aided design and manufacturing systems. As an engineer at Renault, he became a leader in the transformation of design and manufacturing, through mathematics and computing tools, into computer-aided design and three-dimensional modeling. 
Bézier patented and popularized the Bézier curves and Bézier surfaces that are now used in most computer-aided design and computer graphics systems.

==Background==
Born in Paris, Bézier was the son and grandson of engineers. He obtained a degree in mechanical engineering from the École nationale supérieure d&#x27;arts et métiers in 1930. He earned a second degree in electrical engineering in 1931 at the École supérieure d&#x27;électricité, and a doctorate in 1977 in mathematics from the Pierre-and-Marie-Curie University where he contributed to the study of parametric polynomial curves and their vector coefficients.

From 1968 to 1979 Bézier was Professor of Production Engineering at the Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers.

He wrote four books and numerous papers, and received several distinctions including the Steven Anson Coons Award from the Association for Computing Machinery and an honorary doctorate from Technische Universität Berlin. He was an honorary member of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and of the Société Belge des Mécaniciens, president of the Société des Ingénieurs et Scientifiques de France, Société des Ingénieurs Arts et Metiers, and one of the first Advisory Editors of &quot;Computer-Aided Design&quot; magazine.

With his family&#x27;s consent, the Solid Modeling Association established &quot;The Pierre Bézier Award for Solid, Geometric and Physical Modeling and Applications&quot; in 2007.

==Bézier curve==

Bézier popularized but did not actually create the Bézier curve — using such curves to design automobile bodies. The curves were first developed in 1959 by Paul de Casteljau using de Casteljau&#x27;s algorithm, a numerically stable method to evaluate Bézier curves. The curves remain widely used in computer graphics to model smooth curves.

Bézier developed the notation, consisting of nodes with attached control handles, with which the curves are represented in computer software. The control handles define the shape of the curve on either side of the common node, and can be manipulated by the user, via the software.

Bézier curves were adopted as the standard curve of the PostScript language and subsequently were adopted by vector programs such as Adobe Illustrator, CorelDRAW and Inkscape. Most outline fonts, including TrueType and PostScript Type 1, are defined with Bézier curves.

==Renault==
From 1933 to 1975 Bézier worked for Renault, where he would ultimately develop his UNISURF CAD CAM system.

He began his 42-year tenure at Renault as a Tool Setter. In 1934, Bézier became Tool Designer and in 1945 became Head of the Tool Design Office. As Director of Production Engineering in 1949, he designed the &quot;transfer machines&quot; that produced most of the mechanical parts for the Renault 4CV. The transfer machines were high-performance work tools designed to machine engine blocks. While imprisoned during WWII, Bézier developed and improved on the &quot;automatic machine principle&quot; introduced before the war by General Motors. The new &quot;transfer station&quot;, with multiple workstations and electromagnetic heads (antecedents to robots), enabled different operations on a single part to be consecutively performed by transferring the part from one station to another.

In 1957, Bézier became Director of the Machine Tool Division, responsible for the automatic assembly of mechanical components and for the design and production of numerical control drilling and milling machines. Bézier began managing technical development at Renault in 1960. He retired from Renault in 1975.

==CAD==
Bézier began researching CAD/CAM in 1960 while at Renault, focusing on the UNISURF system he developed for use with drawing machines, computer control, interactive free-form curves, surface design and 3D milling for manufacturing clay models and masters. UNISURF debuted in 1968 and has been in full use since 1975.

In 1985 he was recognized by ACM SIGGRAPH with a Steven A. Coons Award for his lifetime contribution to computer graphics and interactive techniques.

==See also==
*Bézier triangle

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q372584" start="0" end="21" title="Pierre Bézier" label="Pierre Étienne Bézier"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="227" end="248" title="computer-aided design" label="computer-aided design"/>
<link wikidata="Q660192" start="253" end="266" title="Computer-aided manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="294" end="301" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="481" end="487" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q214728" start="510" end="522" title="Bézier curve" label="Bézier curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q926066" start="528" end="542" title="Bézier surface" label="Bézier surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="596" end="613" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="647" end="652" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="724" end="746" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570220" start="756" end="805" title="École nationale supérieure d&amp;#x27;arts et métiers" label="École nationale supérieure d&amp;#x27;arts et métiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="844" end="866" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q273493" start="882" end="917" title="École supérieure d&amp;#x27;électricité" label="École supérieure d&amp;#x27;électricité"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="946" end="957" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144549" start="967" end="1000" title="Pierre-and-Marie-Curie University (University of Paris 6)" label="Pierre-and-Marie-Curie University"/>
<link wikidata="Q524289" start="1171" end="1213" title="Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers" label="Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614452" start="1305" end="1323" title="Steven Anson Coons" label="Steven Anson Coons"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="1339" end="1374" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="Association for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="1382" end="1400" title="honorary doctorate" label="honorary doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q51985" start="1406" end="1435" title="Technische Universität Berlin" label="Technische Universität Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q466950" start="1470" end="1510" title="American Society of Mechanical Engineers" label="American Society of Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1522" end="1551" title="Société Belge des Mécaniciens" label="Société Belge des Mécaniciens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151060" start="1570" end="1619" title="Ingénieurs et scientifiques de France" label="Société des Ingénieurs et Scientifiques de France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1621" end="1659" title="Société des Ingénieurs Arts et Metiers" label="Société des Ingénieurs Arts et Metiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991685" start="1783" end="1797" title="solid modeling" label="Solid Modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q214728" start="1997" end="2009" title="Bézier curve" label="Bézier curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="2040" end="2050" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396450" start="2102" end="2119" title="Paul de Casteljau" label="Paul de Casteljau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179419" start="2126" end="2155" title="de Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="de Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430640" start="2159" end="2177" title="numerical stability" label="numerically stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q529768" start="2353" end="2368" title="Adjustment handles" label="control handles"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="2626" end="2636" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q215016" start="2703" end="2720" title="Adobe Illustrator" label="Adobe Illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q142371" start="2722" end="2731" title="CorelDRAW" label="CorelDRAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041" start="2736" end="2744" title="Inkscape" label="Inkscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q751800" start="2776" end="2784" title="TrueType" label="TrueType"/>
<link wikidata="Q785247" start="2789" end="2806" title="PostScript fonts" label="PostScript Type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="2889" end="2896" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550682" start="2936" end="2943" title="UNISURF" label="UNISURF"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="2944" end="2947" title="Computer-aided design" label="CAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q660192" start="2948" end="2951" title="Computer-aided manufacturing" label="CAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q917677" start="3250" end="3261" title="Renault 4CV" label="Renault 4CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="3489" end="3503" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q190247" start="3915" end="3932" title="numerical control" label="numerical control"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="4095" end="4098" title="computer-aided design" label="CAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q660192" start="4099" end="4102" title="computer-aided manufacturing" label="CAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550682" start="4145" end="4152" title="UNISURF" label="UNISURF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412169" start="4416" end="4428" title="ACM SIGGRAPH" label="ACM SIGGRAPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412169" start="4436" end="4457" title="Steven A. Coons Award" label="Steven A. Coons Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q612409" start="4552" end="4567" title="Bézier triangle" label="Bézier triangle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162289" wikidata="Q660192" url="?curid=162289" title="Computer-aided manufacturing">
<text>Computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) also known as computer-aided modeling or computer-aided machining is the use of software to control machine tools in the manufacturing of work pieces. This is not the only definition for CAM, but it is the most common. It may also refer to the use of a computer to assist in all operations of a manufacturing plant, including planning, management, transportation and storage. Its primary purpose is to create a faster production process and components and tooling with more precise dimensions and material consistency, which in some cases, uses only the required amount of raw material (thus minimizing waste), while simultaneously reducing energy consumption.
CAM is now a system used in schools and lower educational purposes.
CAM is a subsequent computer-aided process after computer-aided design (CAD) and sometimes computer-aided engineering (CAE), as the model generated in CAD and verified in CAE can be input into CAM software, which then controls the machine tool. CAM is used in many schools alongside CAD to create objects.

==Overview==

Traditionally, CAM has been numerical control (NC) programming tool, wherein two-dimensional (2-D) or three-dimensional (3-D) models of components are generated in CAD. As with other &quot;computer-aided&quot; technologies, CAM does not eliminate the need for skilled professionals such as manufacturing engineers, NC programmers, or machinists. CAM leverages both the value of the most skilled manufacturing professionals through advanced productivity tools, while building the skills of new professionals through visualization, simulation and optimization tools.

A CAM tool generally converts a model to a language the target machine in question understands, typically G-code. The numerical control can be applied to machining tools, or more recently to 3D printers.

==History==
Early commercial applications of CAM were in large companies in the automotive and aerospace industries; for example, Pierre Béziers work developing the CAD/CAM application UNISURF in the 1960s for car body design and tooling at Renault. Alexander Hammer at DeLaval Steam Turbine Company invented a technique to progressively drill turbine blades out of a solid metal block of metal with the drill controlled by a punch card reader in 1950. Boeing first obtained NC machines in 1956, made by companies such as Kearney and Trecker, Stromberg-Carlson and Thompson Ramo Waldridge.

Historically, CAM software was seen to have several shortcomings that necessitated an overly high level of involvement by skilled CNC machinists. Fallows created the first CAD software but this had severe shortcomings and was promptly taken back into the developing stage. CAM software would output code for the least capable machine, as each machine tool control added on to the standard G-code set for increased flexibility. In some cases, such as improperly set up CAM software or specific tools, the CNC machine required manual editing before the program will run properly. None of these issues were so insurmountable that a thoughtful engineer or skilled machine operator could not overcome for prototyping or small production runs; G-Code is a simple language. In high production or high precision shops, a different set of problems were encountered where an experienced CNC machinist must both hand-code programs and run CAM software.

The integration of CAD with other components of CAD/CAM/CAE Product lifecycle management (PLM) environment requires an effective CAD data exchange. Usually it had been necessary to force the CAD operator to export the data in one of the common data formats, such as IGES or STL or Parasolid formats that are supported by a wide variety of software.
The output from the CAM software is usually a simple text file of G-code/M-codes, sometimes many thousands of commands long, that is then transferred to a machine tool using a direct numerical control (DNC) program or in modern Controllers using a common USB Storage Device.

CAM packages could not, and still cannot, reason as a machinist can. They could not optimize toolpaths to the extent required of mass production. Users would select the type of tool, machining process and paths to be used. While an engineer may have a working knowledge of G-code programming, small optimization and wear issues compound over time. Mass-produced items that require machining are often initially created through casting or some other non-machine method. This enables hand-written, short, and highly optimized G-code that could not be produced in a CAM package.

At least in the United States, there is a shortage of young, skilled machinists entering the workforce able to perform at the extremes of manufacturing; high precision and mass production. As CAM software and machines become more complicated, the skills required of a machinist or machine operator advance to approach that of a computer programmer and engineer rather than eliminating the CNC machinist from the workforce.

;Typical areas of concern
* High-Speed Machining, including streamlining of tool paths
* Multi-function Machining
* 5 Axis Machining
* Feature recognition and machining
* Automation of Machining processes
* Ease of Use

===Overcoming historical shortcomings===
Over time, the historical shortcomings of CAM are being attenuated, both by providers of niche solutions and by providers of high-end solutions. This is occurring primarily in three arenas:
# Ease of usage
# Manufacturing complexity
# Integration with PLM and the extended enterprise

;Ease in use

:For the user who is just getting started as a CAM user, out-of-the-box capabilities providing Process Wizards, templates, libraries, machine tool kits, automated feature based machining and job function specific tailorable user interfaces build user confidence and speed the learning curve.
:User confidence is further built on 3D visualization through a closer integration with the 3D CAD environment, including error-avoiding simulations and optimizations.

;Manufacturing complexity
:The manufacturing environment is increasingly complex. The need for CAM and PLM tools by the manufacturing engineer, NC programmer or machinist is similar to the need for computer assistance by the pilot of modern aircraft systems. The modern machinery cannot be properly used without this assistance.
:Today&#x27;s CAM systems support the full range of machine tools including: turning, 5 axis machining, waterjet, laser / plasma cutting, and wire EDM. Today’s CAM user can easily generate streamlined tool paths, optimized tool axis tilt for higher feed rates, better tool life and surface finish, and ideal cutting depth. In addition to programming cutting operations, modern CAM software can also drive non-cutting operations such as machine tool probing.

;Integration with PLM and the extended enterprise LM to integrate manufacturing with enterprise operations from concept through field support of the finished product.
:To ensure ease of use appropriate to user objectives, modern CAM solutions are scalable from a stand-alone CAM system to a fully integrated multi-CAD 3D solution-set. These solutions are created to meet the full needs of manufacturing personnel including part planning, shop documentation, resource management and data management and exchange. To prevent these solutions from detailed tool specific information a dedicated tool management

== Machining process ==
Most machining progresses through many stages, each of which is implemented by a variety of basic and sophisticated strategies, depending on the part design, material, and software available.
;Roughing
: This process usually begins with raw stock, known as billet, or a rough casting which a CNC machine cuts roughly to shape of the final model, ignoring the fine details. In milling, the result often gives the appearance of terraces or steps, because the strategy has taken multiple &quot;steps&quot; down the part as it removes material. This takes the best advantage of the machine&#x27;s ability by cutting material horizontally. Common strategies are zig-zag clearing, offset clearing, plunge roughing, rest-roughing, and trochoidal milling (adaptive clearing). The goal at this stage is to remove the most material in the least time, without much concern for overall dimensional accuracy. When roughing a part, a small amount of extra material is purposely left behind to be removed in subsequent finishing operation(s).

;Semi-finishing

: This process begins with a roughed part that unevenly approximates the model and cuts to within a fixed offset distance from the model. The semi-finishing pass must leave a small amount of material (called the scallop) so the tool can cut accurately, but not so little that the tool and material deflect away from the cutting surfaces. Common strategies are raster passes, waterline passes, constant step-over passes, pencil milling.

;Finishing
: Finishing involves many light passes across the material in fine steps to produce the finished part. When finishing a part, the steps between passes is minimal to prevent tool deflection and material spring back. In order to reduce the lateral tool load, tool engagement is reduced, while feed rates and spindle speeds are generally increased in order to maintain a target surface speed (SFM). A light chip load at high feed and RPM is often referred to as High Speed Machining (HSM), and can provide quick machining times with high quality results. The result of these lighter passes is a highly accurate part, with a uniformly high surface finish. In addition to modifying speeds and feeds, machinists will often have finishing specific endmills, which never used as roughing endmills. This is done to protect the endmill from developing chips and flaws in the cutting surface, which would leave streaks and blemishes on the final part.

;Contour milling
: In milling applications on hardware with rotary table and/or rotary head axes, a separate finishing process called contouring can be performed. Instead of stepping down in fine-grained increments to approximate a surface, the work piece or tool is rotated to make the cutting surfaces of the tool tangent to the ideal part features. This produces an excellent surface finish with high dimensional accuracy. This process is commonly used to machine complex organic shapes such as turbine and impeller blades, which due to their complex curves and overlapping geometry, are impossible to machine with only three axis machines.

==Software: large vendors==

== See also ==

* Computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM)
* Digital modeling and fabrication
* Direct numerical control (DNC)
* Flexible manufacturing system (FMS)
* Integrated Computer-Aided Manufacturing (ICAM)
* Manufacturing process management (MPM)
* STEP-NC
* Rapid prototyping and rapid manufacturing – solid freeform fabrication direct from CAD models
* CNC pocket milling

==References==
==Further reading==
*https://patents.google.com/patent/US5933353A/en

==External links==

*CADSite.ru CAD Models
*Cimatron Brazil about Software CAD/CAM CimatronE
*Dragomatz and Mann reviewed toolpath algorithms in 1997.
*Pocket Machining Based on Offset Curves by Martin Held
* Purdue University Purdue Research and Education Centre for Information Systems in Engineering
* How to evaluate a CAM system Sheetmetalworld.com article</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q660192" start="0" end="28" title="Computer-aided manufacturing" label="Computer-aided manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q660192" start="30" end="33" title="Computer-aided manufacturing" label="CAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q660192" start="49" end="72" title="Computer-aided manufacturing" label="computer-aided modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q660192" start="76" end="100" title="Computer-aided manufacturing" label="computer-aided machining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="115" end="123" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q19768" start="135" end="148" title="machine tools" label="machine tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="156" end="169" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="330" end="349" title="manufacturing plant" label="manufacturing plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662013" start="371" end="381" title="Industrial management" label="management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408286" start="453" end="471" title="production process" label="production process"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="813" end="834" title="computer-aided design" label="computer-aided design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050567" start="855" end="881" title="computer-aided engineering" label="computer-aided engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q190247" start="1113" end="1130" title="numerical control" label="numerical control"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="1249" end="1252" title="Computer aided design" label="CAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11049265" start="1375" end="1397" title="manufacturing engineer" label="manufacturing engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q196721" start="1419" end="1428" title="machinist" label="machinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q620464" start="1757" end="1763" title="G-code" label="G-code"/>
<link wikidata="Q372584" start="1986" end="1999" title="Pierre Bézier" label="Pierre Bézier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550682" start="2041" end="2048" title="UNISURF" label="UNISURF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="2097" end="2104" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130970" start="2378" end="2397" title="Kearney and Trecker" label="Kearney and Trecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624369" start="2399" end="2416" title="Stromberg-Carlson" label="Stromberg-Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q967620" start="2421" end="2444" title="TRW Inc." label="Thompson Ramo Waldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q190247" start="2577" end="2580" title="CNC" label="CNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q620464" start="2836" end="2842" title="G-code" label="G-code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967338" start="3450" end="3478" title="Product lifecycle management" label="Product lifecycle management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008575" start="3519" end="3536" title="CAD data exchange" label="CAD data exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q616714" start="3656" end="3660" title="IGES" label="IGES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238229" start="3664" end="3667" title="STL (file format)" label="STL"/>
<link wikidata="Q389964" start="3671" end="3680" title="Parasolid" label="Parasolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10765065" start="3915" end="3939" title="direct numerical control" label="direct numerical control"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="3994" end="3997" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="4144" end="4159" title="mass production" label="mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="4920" end="4939" title="Programmer" label="computer programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439687" start="5151" end="5170" title="Feature recognition" label="Feature recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572577" start="5529" end="5532" title="Product life-cycle management (marketing)" label="PLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="6278" end="6286" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q258127" start="6443" end="6450" title="turning" label="turning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934572" start="6452" end="6468" title="Multiaxis machining" label="5 axis machining"/>
<link wikidata="Q660875" start="6470" end="6478" title="Water jet cutter" label="waterjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q593053" start="6480" end="6485" title="Laser cutting" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385316" start="6488" end="6502" title="plasma cutting" label="plasma cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q577484" start="6508" end="6516" title="Wire cutting" label="wire EDM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6802" end="6822" title="Coordinate-measuring machine#New probing systems" label="machine tool probing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824050" start="7416" end="7431" title="tool management" label="tool management"/>
<link wikidata="Q867705" start="7714" end="7720" title="Billet (manufacturing)" label="billet"/>
<link wikidata="Q838625" start="7883" end="7891" title="Terrace (agriculture)" label="terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295263" start="8863" end="8876" title="raster passes" label="raster passes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162332" start="8923" end="8937" title="pencil milling" label="pencil milling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439090" start="9587" end="9601" title="surface finish" label="surface finish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122190" start="10585" end="10618" title="Computer-integrated manufacturing" label="Computer-integrated manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276115" start="10627" end="10659" title="Digital modeling and fabrication" label="Digital modeling and fabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q10765065" start="10662" end="10686" title="Direct numerical control" label="Direct numerical control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424398" start="10695" end="10724" title="Flexible manufacturing system" label="Flexible manufacturing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042822" start="10733" end="10772" title="Integrated Computer-Aided Manufacturing" label="Integrated Computer-Aided Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q462877" start="10782" end="10814" title="Manufacturing process management" label="Manufacturing process management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460109" start="10823" end="10830" title="STEP-NC" label="STEP-NC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128971" start="10833" end="10850" title="Rapid prototyping" label="Rapid prototyping"/>
<link wikidata="Q229367" start="10855" end="10874" title="rapid manufacturing" label="rapid manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q656950" start="10929" end="10947" title="CNC pocket milling" label="CNC pocket milling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162291" wikidata="Q123839" url="?curid=162291" title="Heinrich Bullinger">
<text>Heinrich Bullinger (18 July 1504 – 17 September 1575) was a Swiss Reformer and theologian, the successor of Huldrych Zwingli as head of the Church of Zürich and a pastor at the Grossmünster. One of the most important leaders of the Swiss Reformation, Bullinger co-authored the Helvetic Confessions and collaborated with John Calvin to work out a Reformed doctrine of the Lord&#x27;s Supper.

== Life ==

=== Early life and studies (1504–1522) ===
Heinrich Bullinger was born to Heinrich Bullinger Sr., a priest, and Anna Wiederkehr, at Bremgarten, Aargau, Switzerland. Heinrich and Anna were able to live as husband and wife, even though not legally married, because the bishop of Constance, who had clerical oversight over Aargau, had unofficially sanctioned clerical concubinage by waiving penalties against the offense in exchange for an annual fee, called a cradle tax. Heinrich was the fifth son and youngest of seven children born to the couple. The family was relatively affluent, and often hosted guests. As a small child, Bullinger survived the plague and a potentially fatal accident.

At age 11, Bullinger was sent to the St. Martin&#x27;s Latin school in Emmerich in the Duchy of Cleves. Though the family was wealthy by standards of the day, Bullinger&#x27;s father refused to provide the boy money for food. He encouraged his son to beg for bread for three years, as he had done, and by doing so increase the boy&#x27;s empathy for the poor. At St. Martin&#x27;s Latin school, Bullinger studied classic texts, including Jerome, Horace, and Virgil. He was also influenced by the Brethren of the Common Life and their adoption of the &quot;Devotio moderna&quot;, which emphasized Christian living and the reading of the Bible. Due to this influence, he expressed an interest in becoming a Carthusian monk.

In 1519, at 14, he went to the University of Cologne, where it was supposed he would prepare to follow his father into the clergy. Although there is no evidence that Bullinger was initially aware of Martin Luther&#x27;s &quot;Ninety-five Theses&quot; or the Leipzig Disputation of 1519, a year later, he had definitely been exposed to Reformation teaching. He read Peter Lombard&#x27;s &quot;Sentences&quot; and the &quot;Decretum Gratiani&quot;, which led him to the church fathers. Bullinger discovered that the Fathers relied more on Scripture than did Lombard and Gratian, and this discovery encouraged Bullinger to read both the Bible and Luther, including &quot;The Babylonian Captivity of the Church&quot; and &quot;The Freedom of a Christian&quot;. He also read works by other Reformers, such as Philip Melanchthon&#x27;s &quot;Loci communes&quot;. Now believing that salvation came through God&#x27;s grace rather than through man&#x27;s good works, Bullinger was converted to Protestantism. Later in life, he wrote that he had also been encouraged to embrace the Reformation because of the humanist influence of two of his teachers, Johannes Pfrissemius and Arnold von Wesel. Other intellectual influences on Bullinger included the humanism of Erasmus and Rodolphus Agricola, the theology of the church fathers Cyprian, Lactantius, Hilary, Athanasius, Jerome, and Augustine, and the theology of Thomas Aquinas.

In 1522, as a follower of Martin Luther, Bullinger earned his Master of Arts degree but ceased receiving the Eucharist. He also abandoned his previous intention of entering the Carthusian order. When he returned to Bremgarten, his family accepted his new theological views. Though Bullinger was called to lead an abbey in the Black Forest, he found its monks worldly and licentious and so returned home again and spent some months reading history, the church fathers, and Reformation theology.

=== Kappel Abbey and the early Swiss Reformation (1523–1531) ===
==== Kappel Abbey (1523–1528) ====
In 1523, he accepted a post as a teacher at a Cistercian monastery, Kappel Abbey, though only under the condition that he would not take monastic vows nor attend mass. At Kappel Abbey, Bullinger initiated a systematic program of Bible reading and exegesis. He also tried to reform its &quot;Trivium&quot; curriculum in a more humanist and Protestant direction. Bullinger discovered that the monks barely understood Latin, and so he preached to them in Swiss-German. By 1525, the abbey had abolished mass, and the next year all the monks renounced their vows as they participated in their first Reformed Eucharist.

During this period, during the Reformation in Zürich, Bullinger heard Huldrych Zwingli and Leo Jud preach; and in 1523, he met them. Bullinger became a friend and ally of Zwingli and was present at the Zürich disputation of 1525. Under the influence of Zwingli and the Waldensians, Bullinger moved to a more symbolic understanding of the Eucharist. In 1527, he spent five months in Zürich studying Greek and Hebrew while regularly attending the &quot;Prophezei&quot; that Zwingli had established there. Zürich authorities sent Bullinger with the city delegation to assist Zwingli at the Bern Disputation, an occasion where he met Martin Bucer, Ambrosius Blaurer, and Berthold Haller. In 1528, at the urging of the Zürich Synod, Bullinger left Kappel Abbey and was ordained as a parish minister in the new Reformed church of Zürich.

Meanwhile, Bullinger wrote theological treatises on the Eucharist, covenants, images, and the relationship of the church to society, important topics he continued to develop in his later writings. He sent these treatises to neighboring cities, attempting to win them to the Reformed position; and these treatises were attacked by Roman Catholics defending papal infallibility and transubstantiation. Bullinger&#x27;s humanism was also evident in his writings about the church fathers, his belief in the study of liberal arts as preparatory for the study of Scriptures, and even a play he wrote about the classical story of Lucretia.

==== Marriage to Anna Adlischweiler (1529) ====
In the summer of 1527, Bullinger met Anna Adlischweiler, a former nun, in Zurich. Contrary to contemporary practice, he sent her a direct proposal of marriage and was betrothed four weeks later. Anna&#x27;s mother objected because she wanted her daughter to marry a wealthier man and because she wanted Anna to stay by her side until her death. When the engagement became publicly known, she tried to legally break it. Though she failed in this effort, Anna did stay with her mother until her death two years later. Anna then married Bullinger on 17 August 1529. The couple had five daughters and six sons, all of the latter except one becoming Protestant ministers. The couple also adopted other children.

==== Hausen and Bremgarten (1528–31) ====
In June 1528, Bullinger took up a part-time preaching position in Hausen. Shortly thereafter, in February 1529, Bullinger&#x27;s father renounced Roman Catholicism. Though most of his congregation approved, city officials were wary because of the threat of Roman Catholic protests. Nevertheless, after a few months of debate, those sympathetic to the Reformation prevailed, and Bullinger was chosen to replace his father. Within a week of his first sermon, the images and church altar were removed from the church. Bullinger&#x27;s father also officially married his mother on 31 December in a Reformed ceremony. In Bremgarten, Bullinger preached four times a week and held a well-attended Bible study every day at 3 in the afternoon.

=== Ministry at Zürich (1531–1575) ===

==== Installed at Zürich (1531) ====
While Zwingli viewed war as an appropriate way of spreading the Reformation, Bullinger did not. When Zwingli called the cantons of Zürich and Bern to war against the Catholic cantons, Bullinger opposed him, even preaching against it. Bullinger argued that religious reform came only through the preaching of the gospel, not through war. Despite a period of peace following the First Kappel War, Zwingli once again sought military victory over the Roman Catholics. His bellicosity led to the Second Kappel War, after Roman Catholics attacked Bremgarten, where Bullinger was ministering. Zwingli&#x27;s supposed reinforcements turned out to be Roman Catholic and deserted him, and Zwingli was killed. Although the Peace of Kappel allowed each canton to choose its own religion, Bremgarten was excluded from the agreement and re-catholicized. Bullinger and his family lost almost all their possessions and fled to Zürich.

As a leading Protestant preacher, Bullinger was immediately called as pastor by Bern, Basel, and Appenzell. Only three days after fleeing from Bremgarten, Bullinger stood in the pulpit of the Grossmünster. Oswald Myconius said Bullinger so &quot;thundered a sermon from the pulpit that many thought Zwingli was not dead but resurrected like the phoenix&quot;. On 9 December, Zürich also officially asked him to be Zwingli&#x27;s successor as antistes. In part out of loyalty to Zürich, Bullinger chose to succeed Zwingli there. He retained the office until his death in 1575. Bullinger regularly preached 12 sermons a week in the Grossmünster for the first ten years of his ministry until Kaspar Megander was appointed to assume the majority of his preaching duties. Bullinger preached an estimated 28,000 sermons in the Grossmünster pulpit.

==== Zürich church government (1531–32) ====
Bullinger&#x27;s most important task was to rebuild the Zürich church, even as he continued to defend Zwingli&#x27;s character and theology. When the Zürich council initially asked Bullinger to be antistes, they listed seven articles as conditions for the position. The fourth article required Bullinger to be peaceful and not interfere in secular affairs. Bullinger agreed that ministers should not take civic roles, but he also stressed that the minister should retain the freedom to preach the Word of God, even if that message varied from the position of civil authorities. Bullinger&#x27;s rebuilding of the church also included defending it against the Roman Catholics, who were once again poised to invade Zürich. Bullinger persuaded them that he endorsed the Peace of Kappel and did not seek political controversy as Zwingli had done. Finally, in 1532 Bullinger negotiated a compromise peace that guaranteed the freedom of Protestants in exchange for the independence of Roman Catholics in Protestant cantons.

In 1532, Bullinger and Leo Jud engaged in a controversy over church discipline that developed into a debate about the proper relationship between church and state. Jud viewed the church and state as two separate institutions established by God, while Bullinger held a more traditional view. Following Johannes Oecolampadius, Jud proposed exercising church discipline separately from the secular power, while Bullinger argued that separating church and state courts was necessary only if the government were not Christian. In a July sermon, Jud not only sharply criticized Bullinger&#x27;s view of church discipline, he also accused Bullinger of abandoning the Reformation. Later in the year, a synod settled the debate by siding with Bullinger. The church would be overseen by both a civil council and the ministers of the church, each with its own president. In matters of civil discipline, the council would take precedence over the ministers, but the ministers could disagree with and criticize the council.

Through the arrangements of this synod, Bullinger was able to implement his own synodal order, which became a model for other Reformed churches in German-speaking areas. Bullinger freed the Zürich church from civil authorities by assuming direct personal oversight of the other clergy. He ensured that political and clerical controversies were discussed and resolved behind closed doors; and by carefully informing himself about the 120 parishes under his supervision, he was able to direct their clerical appointments and ordinations. Jud&#x27;s 1534 &quot;Catechism&quot; demonstrates that he eventually accepted Bullinger&#x27;s views on church discipline.

==== Additional responsibilities ====
In addition to his responsibilities as antistes, Bullinger also served as &quot;Schulherr&quot;, or school principal, charged with organizing Latin schools and theological education in Zürich. He transformed Zwingli&#x27;s &quot;Prophezei&quot; into the &quot;Lectorium&quot;, or &quot;Carolinium&quot;, to provide theological higher education. Although he helped run the &quot;Carolinium&quot;, he never held professorship in it, leaving the teaching to a notable faculty, which included Konrad Pellikan, Theodor Bibliander, Peter Martyr Vermigli, Conrad Gesner, and Bullinger&#x27;s son-in-law Rudolf Gwalther.

==== Interactions with Anabaptists (1531–60) ====
Bullinger sortied against the Anabaptists in his 1531 work, &quot;Four Books to Warn the Faithful of the Shameless Disturbance, Offensive Confusion, and False Teachings of the Anabaptists&quot;. Although Bullinger regarded Anabaptists as unstable citizens who encouraged a society of chaos and superstition, in practice he allowed them to follow their consciences and refused to forbid their freedom of worship in Zurich. Bullinger upheld this principle of quasi-toleration for the rest of his life. During Bullinger&#x27;s leadership of Zürich from 1531 to 1575, not a single Anabaptist was executed for his faith. By comparison, four Anabaptists were executed under Zwingli and forty in Bern. Nevertheless, when the Anabaptist Munster fell in 1534, he wrote, on behalf of the whole Zürich synod, a defense of the death penalty for Anabaptists who had offended the public peace. Bullinger eventually wrote a long history of the Anabaptists called &quot;On the Origins of Anabaptism&quot; (1560), which detailed their origin and spread in Europe. The book was widely disseminated and is still reflected in recent histories of Anabaptists.

==== Interactions with Lutherans (1536–45) ====
In 1536, Bullinger and other Protestant reformers, including Jud and Martin Bucer, drafted the First Helvetic Confession, an attempt to reach a consensus of Protestant belief. The confession, a combination of Zwinglian and Lutheran theology, was adopted by a number of Protestant churches, but Bullinger distrusted Bucer, and by 1538, negotiations to unite the Swiss and Lutheran churches broke down. During the last years of his life, Luther denounced the Swiss Zwinglians in his &quot;Short Confession of the Lord&#x27;s Supper&quot; (1543), and Bullinger responded in 1545 with his own &quot;True Confession.&quot;

==== Cooperation with Geneva ====

By the 1540s, Bullinger had drawn closer to John Calvin of Geneva. Together they wrote a response to the Council of Trent, and then, in 1549, they jointly drafted the &quot;Consensus Tigurinus&quot;, an agreement between Calvinists and Zwinglians about the doctrine of the Eucharist.

In the early 1550s, Bullinger published his most significant work, &quot;Decades&quot;, a series of fifty sermons, written in Latin and published from 1548 to 1551, a series that effectively served as a systematic theology. The sermons were widely distributed, and Bullinger became even better known as a Reformer. Nevertheless, Bullinger&#x27;s Zurich suffered bad weather, poor harvests, the bane of Swiss politics, and the plague. Bullinger&#x27;s wife and daughter both died of the plague during the early 1560s, when the disease swept across central and western Europe.

Bullinger played a crucial role in drafting the &quot;Second Helvetic Confession&quot; of 1566. Bullinger had written the first draft in 1562 as a personal statement of faith, which in a 1564 revision, he intended to be presented to the Zürich Rathaus after his death. In 1566, after Frederick III the Pious, elector palatine, introduced Reformed elements into churches in his region, Bullinger had this statement of faith circulated among the Protestant cities of Switzerland; and it gained a favorable response in many Swiss cities, including Bern, Zürich, Schaffhausen, St. Gallen, Chur, and Geneva. The statement was also adopted by Reformed churches in Scotland (1566), Hungary (1567), France (1571), and Poland (1578). Only the Heidelberg Catechism was better known as a Reformed confession. The Second Helvetic Confession was also slightly modified to become the French Confession de Foy (1559), the Scottish Confessio Fidei (1560) the Belgian Ecclasiarum Belgicarum Confessio (1561) and the Heidelberg Catechism (1563) itself. 
==== Death ====
Bullinger died at Zürich in 1575 and was followed as antistes by Zwingli&#x27;s adopted son Rudolf Gwalther.

== Theological views ==
=== The Eucharist ===
Bullinger&#x27;s mature eucharistic theology differed notably from that of Zwingli. Though at first Bullinger viewed both the Old Covenant Passover feast and the New Covenant Lord&#x27;s Supper as symbolic, a view reflected in the language of the First Helvetic Confession (1536), in 1544, in a pamphlet responding to Luther, Bullinger argued that the real spiritual presence of Christ occurred in the Eucharist. Bullinger thereafter linked the symbolic and spiritual presence in the Consensus Tigurinus of 1549, which he composed with Calvin, a formula codified in the Heidelberg Catechism (1563) and the Second Helvetic Confession (1562/4).

=== Covenant theology ===
Bullinger played an important role in developing covenant theology in the Reformed tradition. Bullinger initially used the covenants as an interpretive grid for eucharistic theology, but by the 1550s he employed the covenant as a theological category.

=== Baptism ===
Bullinger, like Zwingli, was a staunch advocate of infant baptism. As early as 1525, both argued that Old Covenant circumcision was the predecessor of New Covenant baptism.

== Works ==
Bullinger&#x27;s writings exceed Luther and Calvin combined, including 12,000 surviving letters. During his lifetime they were translated in several languages and counted among the best known theological works in Europe.

=== Theological works ===

==== Helvetic Confessions ====
Bullinger was part of the drafting of the &quot;First Helvetic Confession&quot;, an early consensus document of the Reformation and expression of Swiss theology.

Bullinger was also part of the drafting of the &quot;Second Helvetic Confession&quot; of 1566, which he originally drafted himself in 1562 as a personal statement of faith.

==== &quot;The Decades&quot; ====
Bullinger&#x27;s main theological work was the &quot;Dekaden&quot;, or &quot;The Decades&quot;, which is a compilation of 50 sermons that Bullinger published from 1549 to 1551. Many regard &quot;The Decades&quot; to be comparable to Calvin&#x27;s &quot;Institutes of the Christian Religion&quot; and Peter Martyr Vermigli&#x27;s &quot;Loci communes&quot; as an early Reformed theological explication. Though in sermon form, it was likely never actually delivered by Bullinger, but only written in imitation of the sermonic form. They are structured upon the Ten Commandments, the Apostles&#x27; Creed, the Lord&#x27;s Prayer, and the two Protestant sacraments. The work was quickly translated from Latin into German, French, Dutch, and English, and was one of the most popular Protestant theological works in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Indeed, it was so essential that it was termed &quot;house book&quot; by German and Dutch translators. The Dutch, at points, even required a copy of the book to be in all Dutch trading vessels by law, which led to its spread into America and Asia.

==== Other Theological Works ====
In 1531, Bullinger helped edit and write the preface to the &quot;Zürich Bible&quot; with Jud, Bibliander, and Pellikan.
Many of his sermons were translated into English (reprinted, 4 vols., 1849). His works, mainly expository and polemical, have not been collected.

=== Historical ===

Besides theological works, Bullinger also wrote some historical works of value. The &quot;Tiguriner Chronik&quot; is a history of Zürich from Roman times to the Reformation; others are a history of the Reformation and a history of the Swiss confederation. Bullinger also wrote in detail on Biblical chronology, working within the framework that was universal in the Christian theological tradition until the second half of the 17th century, namely that the Bible affords a faithful and normative reference for all ancient history.

=== Letters ===
There exist about 12,000 letters from and to Bullinger, the most extended correspondence preserved from Reformation times. He was called by German Reformation historian Rainer Henrich &quot;a one-man communication system&quot;.

Bullinger was a personal friend and advisor of many leading personalities of the reformation era. He corresponded with Reformed, Anglican, Lutheran, and Baptist theologians, with Henry VIII of England, Edward VI of England, Lady Jane Grey and Elizabeth I of England, Christian II of Denmark, Philipp I of Hesse and Frederick III, Elector Palatine.

== Legacy ==
Bullinger&#x27;s Helvetic Confessions are still used by Reformed churches as a theological standard. His legacy as a writer and historian survives today. His idea of covenant influenced the development of covenant theology.

Among Bullinger&#x27;s direct descendants were the Swiss painter Johann Balthasar Bullinger and the British theologian E.W. Bullinger.

=== Impact on England ===
Bullinger opened Zürich to Protestant fugitives from religious persecution in other countries. After the passing of the Six Articles in 1539 by Henry VIII of England, and again during the rule of Mary I of England from 1553 to 1558, Bullinger accepted many English fugitives. When the English fugitives returned to England after the death of Mary I, Bullinger&#x27;s writings found a broad distribution in England. In England, from 1550 to 1560, there were 77 editions of Bullinger&#x27;s Latin &quot;Decades&quot; and 137 editions of their vernacular translation &quot;House Book&quot;, a treatise in pastoral theology. In comparison, Calvin&#x27;s &quot;Institutes&quot; had two editions in England during the same time. By 1586, John Whitgift, the Archbishop of Canterbury, ordered all non-graduate ordinands to buy and read Bullinger&#x27;s &quot;Decades&quot;. Due to his involvement and correspondence with the English Reformers, some historians count Bullinger together with Bucer as the most influential theologian of the English Reformation.

Two of the English fugitives were John and Anne Hooper. Anne eventually became Bullinger&#x27;s correspondent and in 1546, Bullinger became the godfather of Hooper&#x27;s daughter during her infant baptism. Bullinger also accepted fugitives from northern Italy and France, especially after the St. Bartholomew&#x27;s Day Massacre. Johann Pestalozzi was a descendant of the Italian fugitives.

==References==
== External links ==
*
*
*Heinrich Bullinger Foundation
*Edition of Bullingers Correspondence Online
*Database of Bullingers Correspondence (Work in Progress) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q123839" start="0" end="18" title="Heinrich Bullinger" label="Heinrich Bullinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="60" end="65" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q763779" start="66" end="74" title="Protestant reformers" label="Reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="79" end="89" title="theologian" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="108" end="124" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Huldrych Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q684948" start="177" end="189" title="Grossmünster" label="Grossmünster"/>
<link wikidata="Q671922" start="232" end="249" title="Reformation in Switzerland" label="Swiss Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q676162" start="277" end="297" title="Helvetic Confessions" label="Helvetic Confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="320" end="331" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944880" start="346" end="389" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Supper in Reformed theology" label="Reformed doctrine of the Lord&amp;#x27;s Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q64139" start="536" end="546" title="Bremgarten AG" label="Bremgarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q11972" start="548" end="554" title="Aargau" label="Aargau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="556" end="567" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q57006" start="1167" end="1175" title="Emmerich am Rhein" label="Emmerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q641138" start="1183" end="1198" title="Duchy of Cleves" label="Duchy of Cleves"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="1534" end="1540" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="1542" end="1548" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="1554" end="1560" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q736039" start="1592" end="1619" title="Brethren of the Common Life" label="Brethren of the Common Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q756170" start="1646" end="1673" title="Devotio Moderna" label="&amp;quot;Devotio moderna&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q220979" start="1801" end="1811" title="Carthusian" label="Carthusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q54096" start="1850" end="1871" title="University of Cologne" label="University of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="2018" end="2031" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q157506" start="2045" end="2063" title="Ninety-five Theses" label="Ninety-five Theses"/>
<link wikidata="Q688998" start="2077" end="2096" title="Leipzig Debate" label="Leipzig Disputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q315347" start="2184" end="2197" title="Peter Lombard" label="Peter Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703316" start="2211" end="2220" title="Sentences" label="Sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182119" start="2241" end="2258" title="Decretum Gratiani" label="Decretum Gratiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="2287" end="2301" title="Church Fathers" label="church fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q282497" start="2487" end="2525" title="On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church" label="The Babylonian Captivity of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q569330" start="2542" end="2568" title="On the Freedom of a Christian" label="The Freedom of a Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76325" start="2623" end="2641" title="Philip Melanchthon" label="Philip Melanchthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542696" start="2655" end="2668" title="Loci communes" label="Loci communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="3073" end="3080" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q365557" start="3085" end="3103" title="Rodolphus Agricola" label="Rodolphus Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q190240" start="3140" end="3147" title="Cyprian" label="Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q209102" start="3149" end="3159" title="Lactantius" label="Lactantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44344" start="3161" end="3167" title="Hilary of Poitiers" label="Hilary"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="3169" end="3179" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="3181" end="3187" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="3193" end="3202" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="3224" end="3238" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q220979" start="3418" end="3428" title="Carthusian" label="Carthusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204" start="3567" end="3579" title="Black Forest" label="Black Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q664504" start="3904" end="3916" title="Kappel Abbey" label="Kappel Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q584157" start="3973" end="3986" title="monastic vows" label="monastic vows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="3998" end="4002" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q205186" start="4127" end="4134" title="Trivium" label="Trivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906109" start="4482" end="4503" title="Reformation in Zürich" label="Reformation in Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="4521" end="4537" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Huldrych Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345599" start="4542" end="4549" title="Leo Jud" label="Leo Jud"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="4720" end="4731" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="4789" end="4798" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="4833" end="4839" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16061290" start="4902" end="4911" title="Prophezei" label="Prophezei"/>
<link wikidata="Q824562" start="5038" end="5054" title="Bern Disputation" label="Bern Disputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q318622" start="5081" end="5093" title="Martin Bucer" label="Martin Bucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q77820" start="5095" end="5112" title="Ambrosius Blarer" label="Ambrosius Blaurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q88381" start="5118" end="5133" title="Berthold Haller" label="Berthold Haller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380107" start="5256" end="5281" title="Evangelical Reformed Church of the Canton of Zürich" label="Reformed church of Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q229432" start="5907" end="5915" title="Lucretia" label="Lucretia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="6032" end="6035" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q65231" start="6782" end="6788" title="Hausen am Albis" label="Hausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q679589" start="7906" end="7922" title="First War of Kappel" label="First Kappel War"/>
<link wikidata="Q233594" start="8020" end="8037" title="Second War of Kappel" label="Second Kappel War"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="8529" end="8533" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="8535" end="8540" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q688257" start="8546" end="8555" title="Appenzell" label="Appenzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q684948" start="8641" end="8653" title="Grossmünster" label="Grossmünster"/>
<link wikidata="Q116363" start="8655" end="8670" title="Oswald Myconius" label="Oswald Myconius"/>
<link wikidata="Q48444" start="8794" end="8801" title="Phoenix (mythology)" label="phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q352719" start="8891" end="8899" title="antistes" label="antistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735077" start="9138" end="9153" title="Kaspar Megander" label="Kaspar Megander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345599" start="10379" end="10386" title="Leo Jud" label="Leo Jud"/>
<link wikidata="Q733981" start="10417" end="10434" title="church discipline" label="church discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q123450" start="10657" end="10679" title="Johannes Oecolampadius" label="Johannes Oecolampadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16061290" start="12353" end="12363" title="Carolinum, Zürich" label="Carolinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q116548" start="12556" end="12571" title="Konrad Pellikan" label="Konrad Pellikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q115851" start="12573" end="12591" title="Theodor Bibliander" label="Theodor Bibliander"/>
<link wikidata="Q598060" start="12593" end="12614" title="Peter Martyr Vermigli" label="Peter Martyr Vermigli"/>
<link wikidata="Q60116" start="12616" end="12629" title="Conrad Gessner" label="Conrad Gesner"/>
<link wikidata="Q120138" start="12663" end="12678" title="Rudolf Gwalther" label="Rudolf Gwalther"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="12761" end="12772" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q691882" start="13460" end="13467" title="Münster rebellion" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q318622" start="13988" end="14000" title="Martin Bucer" label="Martin Bucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q676162" start="14014" end="14039" title="Helvetic Confessions" label="First Helvetic Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="14617" end="14628" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="14632" end="14638" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="14678" end="14694" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q354451" start="14746" end="14765" title="Consensus Tigurinus" label="Consensus Tigurinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="14794" end="14804" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinists"/>
<link wikidata="Q445559" start="15678" end="15685" title="Rathaus (Zürich)" label="Rathaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q62171" start="15718" end="15741" title="Frederick III, Elector Palatine" label="Frederick III the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q315710" start="15743" end="15759" title="elector palatine" label="elector palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q120138" start="16578" end="16593" title="Rudolf Gwalther" label="Rudolf Gwalther"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405836" start="16666" end="16686" title="eucharistic theology" label="eucharistic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="16781" end="16795" title="Passover" label="Passover feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q676162" start="16889" end="16914" title="First Helvetic Confession" label="First Helvetic Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944880" start="16990" end="17027" title="Real spiritual presence" label="the real spiritual presence of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q354451" start="17126" end="17145" title="Consensus Tigurinus" label="Consensus Tigurinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q327152" start="17212" end="17232" title="Heidelberg Catechism" label="Heidelberg Catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q676162" start="17248" end="17274" title="Helvetic Confessions" label="Second Helvetic Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373014" start="17361" end="17378" title="covenant theology" label="covenant theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741926" start="17632" end="17646" title="infant baptism" label="infant baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="17696" end="17708" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q371558" start="18671" end="18707" title="Institutes of the Christian Religion" label="Institutes of the Christian Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q598060" start="18718" end="18739" title="Peter Martyr Vermigli" label="Peter Martyr Vermigli"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="18976" end="18992" title="Ten Commandments" label="Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q51646" start="18998" end="19018" title="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed" label="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="19024" end="19042" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q248436" start="19617" end="19629" title="Zürich Bible" label="Zürich Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="19713" end="19720" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q193748" start="20129" end="20148" title="History of ancient Israel and Judah" label="Biblical chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="20795" end="20816" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="20818" end="20838" title="Edward VI of England" label="Edward VI of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q162356" start="20840" end="20854" title="Lady Jane Grey" label="Lady Jane Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="20859" end="20881" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q154460" start="20883" end="20906" title="Christian II of Denmark" label="Christian II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q169319" start="20908" end="20926" title="Philipp I of Hesse" label="Philipp I of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q62171" start="20931" end="20962" title="Frederick III, Elector Palatine" label="Frederick III, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="21034" end="21051" title="Calvinism" label="Reformed churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373014" start="21183" end="21200" title="covenant theology" label="covenant theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q119373" start="21268" end="21294" title="Johann Balthasar Bullinger" label="Johann Balthasar Bullinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q249582" start="21322" end="21336" title="E. W. Bullinger" label="E.W. Bullinger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21481" end="21497" title="Thirty-nine Articles#Six Articles (1539)" label="the Six Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="21509" end="21530" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="21561" end="21578" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q473302" start="22097" end="22110" title="John Whitgift" label="John Whitgift"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="22116" end="22140" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="22167" end="22176" title="Ordination" label="ordinands"/>
<link wikidata="Q318622" start="22347" end="22352" title="Bucer" label="Bucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q647264" start="22451" end="22455" title="John Hooper (bishop)" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q26844526" start="22460" end="22471" title="Anne Hooper (protestant)" label="Anne Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="22608" end="22622" title="Baptism" label="infant baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="22663" end="22677" title="northern Italy" label="northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163891" start="22711" end="22746" title="St. Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Day massacre" label="St. Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Day Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q105428" start="22748" end="22765" title="Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi" label="Johann Pestalozzi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162292" wikidata="Q6686" url="?curid=162292" title="Renault">
<text>Renault S.A., commonly referred to as Groupe Renault ( , , , also known as the Renault Group in English), is a French multinational automobile manufacturer established in 1899. The company currently produces a range of cars and vans. It has manufactured trucks, tractors, tanks, buses/coaches, aircraft and aircraft engines, as well as autorail vehicles.

Headquartered in Boulogne-Billancourt, near Paris, the Renault group is made up of the namesake Renault marque along with subsidiaries Alpine, Dacia from Romania, and Mobilize. It is part of Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance (previously Renault–Nissan Alliance) since 1999. The French state and Nissan each own a 15% share of the company.

Renault also has other subsidiaries such as RCI Banque (automotive financing), Renault Retail Group (automotive distribution), and Motrio (automotive parts). Renault has various joint ventures, including Horse Powertrain (engine development), Oyak-Renault (Turkish manufacturing), Renault Nissan Automotive India (Indian manufacturing), and Renault Korea (previously Renault Samsung Motors, South Korean manufacturing). Renault Trucks, previously known as Renault Industriels, has been part of Volvo since 2001. Renault Agriculture became 100% owned by German agricultural equipment manufacturer CLAAS in 2008.

Renault is known for its role in motor sport, particularly rallying, Formula 1 and Formula E. Its early work on mathematical curve modeling for car bodies is significant in the history of computer graphics.

==History==
===Founding and early years (1898–1918)===
The Renault corporation was founded on 25 February 1899 as &quot;Société Renault Frères&quot; by Louis Renault and his brothers Marcel and Fernand. Louis was a bright, aspiring young engineer who had already designed and built several prototypes before teaming up with his brothers, who had honed their business skills working for their father&#x27;s textile firm. While Louis handled design and production, Marcel and Fernand managed the business.

The first Renault car, the Renault Voiturette 1CV, was sold to a friend of Louis&#x27; father after giving him a test ride on 24 December 1898.

In 1903, Renault began to manufacture its own engines; until then it had purchased them from De Dion-Bouton. The first major volume sale came in 1905 when Société des Automobiles de Place bought Renault AG1 cars to establish a fleet of taxis. These vehicles were later used by the French military to transport troops during World War I which earned them the nickname &quot;Taxi de la Marne.&quot; By 1907, a significant percentage of London and Paris taxis had been built by Renault. Renault was also the best-selling foreign brand in New York in 1907 and 1908. In 1908 the company produced 3,575 units, becoming the country&#x27;s largest car manufacturer.

The brothers recognised the value of publicity that participation in motor racing could generate for their vehicles. Renault made itself known through succeeding in the first city-to-city races held in Switzerland, producing rapid sales growth. Both Louis and Marcel raced company vehicles, but Marcel was killed in an accident during the 1903 Paris-Madrid race. Although Louis never raced again, his company remained very involved, including Ferenc Szisz winning the first Grand Prix motor racing event in a Renault AK 90CV in 1906.

Louis took full control of the company as the only remaining brother in 1906 when Fernand retired for health reasons. Fernand died in 1909 and Louis became the sole owner, renaming the company &quot;Société des Automobiles Renault&quot; (Renault Automobile Company).

Renault fostered its reputation for innovation from very early on. At the time, cars were luxury items manufactured without assembly line advances. The price of the smallest Renaults at the time was 3000 francs (₣); an amount equal to ten years pay for the average worker. In 1905, the company introduced mass production techniques and Taylorism in 1913. In 1911, Renault visited Henry Ford at the Highland Park factory and adopted some of the manufacturing principles from his trip.

Renault manufactured buses and commercial cargo vehicles in the pre-war years. The first real commercial truck from the company was introduced in 1906. Renault were also an important pre-war manufacturer of aircraft engines. The firm entered the business in 1907 with the first of what would become a series of air-cooled V8 engines. In 1911 the Renault 90 hp became the world&#x27;s first V12 aircraft engine when it was exhibited at the Salon de l’Aéronautique at the Grand Palais in Paris.

During World War I, the company branched out into ammunition and military vehicles such as the revolutionary Renault FT tank. Production of aero engines also ramped up with additional licensed production of the firms&#x27; products being undertaken by various companies, including Rolls-Royce who got their start in the aircraft engine business producing a batch of Renault 70 hp air-cooled V8s. Renault&#x27;s most successful aircraft engine was the 300 hp 12Fe with around 5,300 built during the war. The company&#x27;s military designs were so successful that Louis was awarded the Legion of Honour for his company&#x27;s contributions. The company exported engines to American automobile manufacturers for use in such automobiles as the GJG, which used a Renault or four-cylinder engine.

===Interwar years (1919–1938)===
Louis Renault enlarged Renault&#x27;s scope after 1918, producing agricultural and industrial machinery. The war from 1914 until 1918 led to many new products. The first Renault tractor, the Type GP was produced between 1919 and 1930. It was based on the FT tank. Renault struggled to compete with the increasingly popular small, affordable &quot;people&#x27;s cars,&quot; while problems with the United States stock market and the workforce slowed the company&#x27;s growth. Renault also had to find a way to distribute its vehicles more efficiently. In 1920, Louis signed one of its first distribution contracts with Gustave Gueudet, an entrepreneur from Amiens, France.

The pre-First World War cars had a distinctive front shape caused by positioning the radiator behind the engine to give a so-called &quot;coal scuttle&quot; bonnet. This continued through the 1920s. Only in 1930 did all models place the radiator at the front. The bonnet badge changed from circular to the familiar and continuing diamond shape in 1925. The practice of installing the radiator behind the engine against the firewall continued during the 1950s and 1960s on vehicles where the engine was installed longitudinally in the rear of the vehicle.

Renault introduced new models at the Paris Motor Show, which was held in September or October of the year. This led to confusion about model years. For example, a &quot;1927&quot; model was mostly produced in 1928.

Renault cars during this time period had two model lines; the economy four-cylinder engine models that in the 1930s had the suffix &quot;Quatre&quot; and the luxury six-cylinder models that were sold with the suffix &quot;-six&quot;, later becoming &quot;Stella.&quot; For example, in 1928, when Renault produced 45,809 cars, its seven models started with a 6CV, a 10CV, the Monasix, 15CV, the Vivasix, the 18/22CV and the 40CV. Renault offered eight body styles. The longer rolling chassis were available to coachbuilders. The smaller were the most popular while the least produced was the 18/24CV. The most expensive body style in each range was the closed car. Roadsters and tourers (torpedoes) were the cheapest.

The London operation was important to Renault in 1928. The UK market was quite large and North America also received exports for the luxury car market. Lifted suspensions, enhanced cooling, and special bodies were common on vehicles sold abroad. Exports to the US by 1928 had declined to near-zero from their high point prior to WWI. A Type NM 40CV Tourer had a US list price of over US$4,600 ($ in dollars), about the same as a Cadillac V-12, Packard Eight, Fiat 520, or Delahaye. Closed 7-seat limousines like the Renault Suprastella started at US$6,000 ($ in dollars).

Cars were conservatively engineered and built. The Renault Vivasix, model PG1, was sold as the &quot;executive sports&quot; model beginning in 1927. Lighter weight factory steel bodies powered by a 3,180 cubic centimetre (cc) six-cylinder motor provided a formula that lasted until the Second World War.

&quot;de Grand Luxe Renaults&quot;, those with a wheelbase over , were produced in small numbers in two major types – six- and eight-cylinder. The 1927 six-cylinder Grand Renault models NM, PI and PZ introduced the new three spring rear suspension that considerably aided stability that was needed since some vehicles surpassed .

The straight 8-cylinder Reinastella was introduced in 1929 and expanded to a range culminating in 1939 Suprastella. Coachbuilders included Kellner, Labourdette, J. Rothschild et Fils and Renault bodies. Closed car Renault bodies were often trimmed with interior woodwork by Rothschild.
In 1928, Renault introduced an upgraded specification to its &quot;Stella&quot; line. The Vivastella&#x27;s and Grand Renaults had upgraded interior fittings and a small star fitted above the front hood logo. This proved to be a winning differentiator and in the 1930s all cars changed to the Stella suffix from the previous two alpha character model identifiers.

The Grand Renaults were built using a considerable amount of aluminium. Engines, brakes, transmissions, floor and running boards and all external body panels were aluminium. Of the few that were built, many went to scrap to aid the war effort.

In 1931, Renault introduced diesel engines for its commercial vehicles.

Renault was one of the few French vehicle manufacturers that pursued the production of aircraft engines after World War I. In the late 1920s, it attempted to produce a high-power military engine to compete with the American Pratt &amp; Whitney units, which proved unsuccessful, although its civil engines achieved better results.
In the 1930s, the company took over the aircraft manufacturer Caudron, focusing its production in small airplanes, acquired a stake in Air France and partnered to establish the airmail company Air Bleu. Renault Caudron airplanes settled several speed world records during the 1930s. Renault continued developing tanks as part of France&#x27;s rearming effort, including the D1 and the FT&#x27;s replacement, the R 35.

During the late 1920s and early 1930s, Renault was surpassed by Citroën as the largest car manufacturer in France. Citroën models at the time were more innovative and popular than Renault&#x27;s. However, by mid-1930s the French manufacturers were hit by the Great Depression. Renault could initially offset losses through its tractor, railroad and weaponry businesses, while Citroën filed for bankruptcy, and was later acquired by Michelin. Renault became again the largest car manufacturer, a position it would keep until the 1980s.

Renault was finally affected by the Great Depression economic crisis in 1936. The company spun off Caudron and its foundry and aircraft engine divisions into related but autonomous operations, keeping its core automotive business. Between 1936 and 1938, a series of labour disputes, strikes, and worker unrest spread throughout the French automobile industry. The disputes were eventually quashed by Renault in a particularly intransigent way, and over 2,000 people lost their jobs.

===World War II and aftermath (1939–1944)===
After the French capitulation in 1940, Louis Renault refused to produce tanks for Nazi Germany, which took control of his factories. As Renault was manufacturing the Renault UE tank for the Allies, he produced trucks instead. On 3 March 1942, the British Royal Air Force (RAF) launched 235 low-level bombers at the Île Seguin, Billancourt, Paris plant, the largest number aimed at a single target during the war. of bombs were dropped on the plant and the surrounding area, causing extensive damage along with heavy civilian casualties. Renault resolved to rebuild the factory as quickly as possible, but bombardments continued a year later, on 4 April, this time delivered by the Americans, and on 3 and 15 September 1943.

A few weeks after the Liberation of Paris, at the start of September 1944, the factory gates at Renault&#x27;s Billancourt plant reopened. Operations restarted slowly, in an atmosphere poisoned by plotting and political conspiracy. In 1936, the Billancourt factory had been the scene of violent political and industrial unrest that had surfaced under Léon Blum&#x27;s Popular Front government. The political jostling and violence that followed liberation ostensibly reflected the rivalries between capitalist collaboration and communist resistance; many of the scores settled predated the invasion.

Responding to the chaotic situation at Renault, a 27 September 1944 meeting of the Council of Ministers took place under de Gaulle&#x27;s presidency. Postwar European politics had quickly become polarised between communists and anti-communists, and in France de Gaulle was keen to resist Communist Party attempts to monopolise the political dividends available to resistance heroes: politically Billancourt was a communist stronghold. The government decided to &quot;requisition&quot; the Renault factories. A week later, on 4 October, Pierre Lefaucheux, a resistance leader with a background in engineering and top-level management, was appointed provisional administrator of the firm, assuming his responsibilities at once.

Meanwhile, provisional government accused Louis Renault of collaborating with the Germans. In the frenzied atmosphere of those early post-liberation days, with many wild accusations, Renault was advised by his lawyers to present himself to a judge. He appeared before Judge Marcel Martin, on 22 September 1944 and was arrested on 23 September 1944, as were several other French automobile-industry leaders. Renault&#x27;s harsh handling of the 1936–1938 strikes had left him without political allies and no one came to his aid. He was incarcerated at Fresnes prison where he died on 24 October 1944 under unclear circumstances, while awaiting trial.

On 1 January 1945, by de Gaulle&#x27;s decree, the company was posthumously expropriated from Louis Renault. On 16 January 1945, it was formally nationalised as &quot;Régie Nationale des Usines Renault&quot;. Renault&#x27;s were the only factories permanently expropriated by the French government. In subsequent years, the Renault family tried to have the nationalisation rescinded by French courts and receive compensation. In 1945, and again in 1961, the Courts responded that they had no authority to review the government&#x27;s actions.

===Postwar resurgence (1945–1971)===

Under the leadership of Pierre Lefaucheux, Renault experienced both a commercial resurgence and labor unrest, that was to continue into the 1980s.

In the early 1950s, Renault assembled at least two models; &quot;Standard Saloon&quot; and &quot;De Luxe Saloon&quot; in England.
In secrecy during the war, Louis Renault had developed the rear engine 4CV which was subsequently launched under Lefacheux in 1946. Renault debuted its flagship model, the largely conventional 2-litre 4-cylinder Renault Frégate (1951–1960), shortly thereafter. The 4CV proved a capable rival for cars such as the Morris Minor and Volkswagen Beetle; its sales of more than half a million ensured its production until 1961.
After the success of the 4CV, Lefacheux continued to defy the postwar French Ministry of Industrial Production, which had wanted to convert Renault solely to truck manufacture, by directing the development of its successor. He oversaw the prototyping of the Dauphine (until his death), enlisting the help of artist Paule Marrot in pioneering the company&#x27;s textile and color division.

The Dauphine sold well as the company expanded production and sales further abroad, including Africa and North America. The Dauphine sold well initially in the US, although it subsequently became outdated against increased competition, including from the country&#x27;s nascent domestic compacts such as the Chevrolet Corvair. Renault also sold the Renault Caravelle roadster, which was called the Floride outside North America.

During the 1950s, Renault absorbed two small French heavy vehicle manufacturers (Somua and Latil) and in 1955 merged them with its own truck and bus division to form the Société Anonyme de Véhicules Industriels et d&#x27;Equipements Mécaniques (Saviem).
Renault then launched two successful cars – the Renault 4 (1961–1992), a practical competitor for the likes of the Citroën 2CV, and the rear-engined Renault 8. The larger Renault 10 followed the success of the Renault 8, and was the last rear-engined Renault. The company achieved success with the more modern and more upmarket Renault 16, a pioneering hatchback launched in 1966, followed by the smaller Renault 6.
On 16 January 1970, the manufacturer celebrated the 25th anniversary of its 1945 rebirth as the nationalised &quot;Régie Nationale des Usines Renault&quot;. The 1960s had been a decade of aggressive growth: a few months earlier, in October 1969, the manufacturer had launched the Renault 12, combining the engineering philosophy of its hatchbacks with the more conservative &quot;three-box&quot; design. The four-door Renault 12 model slotted between the Renault 6 and Renault 16. The model was a success. 1970 was also the first year during which Renault produced more than a million cars in a single year, building 1,055,803.

===Modern era (1972–1980)===

The company&#x27;s compact and economical Renault 5 model, launched in January 1972, was another success, anticipating the 1973 energy crisis. The Renault 18 was introduced in 1978 and the larger Renault 20 in 1975.

During the mid-seventies, the already broad-based company diversified into more industries and continued to expand globally, including South East Asia. The energy crisis led Renault to again attempt to attack the North American market. Despite the Dauphine&#x27;s success in the United States in the late 1950s and an unsuccessful assembly project in Saint-Bruno-de-Montarville, Quebec (1964–72), Renault began to disappear from North America at the end of the decade.

Renault acquired a controlling stake in Automobiles Alpine in 1973, and over the decades, Renault developed a collaborative partnership with Nash Motors Rambler and its successor American Motors Corporation (AMC). From 1962 until 1967, Renault assembled complete knock down (CKD) kits of the Rambler Classic sedans in its factory in Belgium. Renault did not have large or luxury cars in its product line and the &quot;Rambler Renault&quot; was positioned as an alternative to the Mercedes-Benz &quot;Fintail&quot; cars. Later, Renault continued to make and sell a hybrid of AMC&#x27;s Rambler American and Rambler Classic called the Renault Torino in Argentina (sold through IKA-Renault). Renault partnered with AMC on other projects, such as a rotary concept engine in the late 1960s.

In the late 1960s and 1970s, the company established subsidiaries in Eastern Europe, most notably Dacia in Romania, and South America (many of which remain active) and forged technological cooperation agreements with Volvo and Peugeot, (for instance, for the development of the PRV V6 engine, which was used in Renault 30, Peugeot 604, and Volvo 260 in the late 1970s).
In the mid-1960s, Renault Australia was set up in Melbourne. The company produced and assembled models including the R8, R10, R12, R16, sporty R15, R17 coupes, R18, and R20. The unit closed in 1981 and the factory closed with LNC Industries taking over import and distribution of Renaults in Australia.

When Peugeot acquired Citroën and formed PSA, the group&#x27;s collaboration with Renault was reduced, although established joint production projects were maintained. Prior its merging with Peugeot, Citroën sold to Renault the truck and bus manufacturer Berliet in December 1974, merging it with its subsidiary Saviem in 1978 to create Renault Véhicules Industriels, which became the only French manufacturer of heavy commercial vehicles. In 1976, Renault reorganised the company into four business areas: automobiles (for car and light commercial vehicles or LCVs), finance and services, commercial vehicles (coaches and trucks over 2.5 tons GVW), and minor operations under an industrial enterprises division (farm machinery, plastics, foundry, etc.). In 1980, Renault produced 2,053,677 cars and LCVs. The cars at the time were the Renault 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, and 30; the LCVs were the 4, 5, and 12 Société and the Estafette. The company added 54,086 buses/coaches and trucks.

In North America, Renault partnered with American Motors Corporation (AMC), lending AMC operating capital and buying a minority 22.5% stake in the company in late 1979. The first Renault model sold through AMC&#x27;s dealerships was the R5, renamed Renault Le Car. Jeep was keeping AMC afloat until new products, particularly the XJ Cherokee, could be launched. When the bottom fell out of the four-wheel drive (4×4) truck market in early 1980, AMC was in danger of bankruptcy. To protect its investment, Renault bailed AMC out with cash – at the price of a controlling 47.5% interest. Renault replaced some AMC executives, and Jose Dedeurwaerder of Renault became President of AMC.

The partnership resulted in the marketing of Jeep vehicles in Europe. The Jeep XJ Cherokee may have been a joint AMC/Renault project since some early sketches of the XJ series were made in collaboration by Renault and AMC engineers (AMC insisted that the XJ Cherokee was designed by AMC personnel; even though a former Renault engineer designed the Quadra-Link front suspension for the XJ series). The Jeep also used wheels and seats from Renault. Part of AMC&#x27;s overall strategy was to save manufacturing costs by using Renault&#x27;s parts and engineering expertise when practical. This led to the improvement of the venerable AMC inline six – a Renault/Bendix-based port electronic fuel injection system (usually called Renix) transformed it into a modern, competitive powerplant with a jump from with less displacement (from 4.2 to 4.0 litres). The XJC Cherokee concept, which was conceived in 1983 as a successor to the XJ series, was also a joint collaboration with AMC and Renault engineers until the design was inherited by the Chrysler Corporation in late 1987 after Renault divested AMC – which debuted in 1989 as the Jeep Concept 1 (evolving into the Jeep Grand Cherokee in April 1992).

The Renault-AMC marketing effort in passenger cars was unsuccessful compared to the popularity of Jeep vehicles. This was because, by the time the Renault range was ready, the second energy crisis was over, taking with it much of the desire for economical, compact cars. One exception was the Renault Alliance (an Americanised version of the Renault 9), which debuted for the 1983 model year. Assembled at AMC&#x27;s Kenosha, Wisconsin plant, the Alliance received &quot;Motor Trend&quot;″s domestic Car of The Year award in 1983. The Alliance&#x27;s 72% US content allowed it to qualify as a domestic vehicle, making it the first car with a foreign nameplate to win the award. (In 2000, &quot;Motor Trend&quot; did away with separate awards for domestic and imported vehicles.) A surprising side effect of the AMC linkup was that Renault felt the effects of the Arab League boycott of companies doing business with Israel, as AMC built Jeeps there under license. Plans to sell the Renault 9 in the Middle East were mothballed as a result.

Introductions in the US during the 1980s included the Renault Alliance GTA and GTA convertible – an automatic-top convertible with a 2.0 L engine – big for a car of its class and the Renault Fuego coupé. The Alliance was followed by the Encore (US version of the Renault 11), an Alliance-based hatchback. In 1982, Renault become the second European automaker to build cars in the US, after Volkswagen. However, bland styling and poor product quality proved insurmountable.

Eventually, Renault sold AMC to Chrysler in 1987 after the assassination of Renault&#x27;s chairman, Georges Besse by Action directe. The Renault Medallion (Renault 21 in Europe) sedan and wagon was sold from 1987 until 1989 through Jeep-Eagle dealerships. Jeep-Eagle was the division Chrysler created out of the former AMC. Renault imports ended after 1989. A completely new full-sized 4-door sedan, the Eagle Premier, was developed during the partnership between AMC and Renault. The Premier design, as well as its state-of-the-art manufacturing facility in Bramalea, Ontario, Canada, were the starting point for the sleek LH sedans such as the Eagle Vision and Chrysler 300M.

In early 1979, as part of its attempts to expand into the US market, Renault bought a 20% stake in truck manufacturer Mack. The aim of this operation was to make use of the company&#x27;s extensive dealership network to distribute light trucks. In 1983, Renault increased its stake in Mack to 44.6%. In 1987, it transferred the ownership of a 42% stake to Renault Véhicules Industriels.

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Renault increased its involvement in motorsport, with novel inventions such as turbochargers in its Formula One cars. Renault&#x27;s Head of Engines, Georges Douin, orchestrated the installation of turbocharged engines across much of the Renault range beginning in 1980. 10% of all turbocharged European cars in 1984 were Renaults. The company&#x27;s road car designs were revolutionary in other ways also – the Renault Espace was one of the first minivans and was to remain the most well-known minivan in Europe for the next two decades. The second-generation Renault 5, the European Car of the Year-winning Renault 9, and the most luxurious Renault yet, the aerodynamic 25, were all released in the early 1980s. At the same time, poor product quality damaged the brand. The ill-fated Renault 14 may have been the culmination of these problems in the early 1980s.

===Restructuring (1981–1995)===
Renaults were somewhat successful on both road and track, including the 1984 Espace launch, which was Europe&#x27;s first multi-purpose vehicle, a dozen years before any competitor. However, Renault was losing a billion francs a month totaling ₣12.5 billion in 1984. The government intervened and Georges Besse was installed as chairman; he set about cutting costs dramatically, selling many of Renault&#x27;s non-core assets (Volvo stake, Gitane, Eurocar, and Renix), withdrawing almost entirely from motorsports, and laying off many employees. This halved the deficit by 1986, but Besse was murdered by the communist terrorist group &quot;Action Directe&quot; in November 1986. He was replaced by Raymond Lévy, who continued Besse&#x27;s initiatives, slimming the company enough that by the end of 1987, Renault was more or less financially stable. However, while Besse was convinced that Renault needed a presence in the North American market and wanted to push forward with restructuring AMC, Lévy, facing domestic losses from Renault at home, and losses from AMC in the US, along with the political climate that led to Besse&#x27;s assassination, decided to sell AMC to Chrysler that same year.

The Renault 9, a small four-door family saloon, was voted European Car of the Year on its 1981 launch. It sold well in France, but was eventually eclipsed by its sister vehicle, the Renault 11 hatchback, as the hatchback body style became more popular in this size of the car. The Renault 5 entered its second generation in 1984 and continued to sell well. The long-running Renault 18 was replaced by the Renault 21 early in 1986, adding a seven-seater estate badged as the Nevada or Savanna depending on where it was sold. Renault&#x27;s top-of-the-range model in the 1980s was the Renault 25, launched at the end of 1983.

In 1990, Renault strengthened its collaboration with Volvo by signing an agreement that allowed both companies to reduce vehicle conception costs and purchasing expenses. Renault had access to Volvo&#x27;s expertise in upper market segments and in return, Volvo exploited Renault&#x27;s designs for low and medium segments. In 1993, the two companies announced their intention to merge operations by 1 January 1994 and increased their cross-shareholding. The French accepted the merger, while Volvo shareholders rejected it.

A revitalised Renault launched successful new cars in the early 1990s, accompanied by an improved marketing effort on European markets, including the 5 replacement, the Clio in May 1990. The Clio was the first new model of a generation that replaced numeric identifiers with traditional nameplates. The Clio was voted European Car of the Year soon after its launch, and was one of Europe&#x27;s best-selling cars in the 1990s, proving even more popular than its predecessor. Other important launches included the third-generation Espace in 1996 and the innovative Twingo in 1992, the first car to be marketed as a city car MPV (multi-purpose vehicle). The Twingo was roomier than any prior cars of its size range. Twingo sales reached 2.4 million in Europe, even though the original was only built for (Continental) left-hand drive markets.
===Privatisation and the alliance era (1996–2019)===
It was eventually decided that the company&#x27;s state-owned status was a detriment. By 1994, plans to sell shares to public investors were officially announced. The company was privatised in 1996. This new freedom allowed the company to venture once again into markets in Eastern Europe and South America, including a new factory in Brazil and upgrades for its infrastructure in Argentina and Turkey. In December 1996, General Motors Europe and Renault begun to collaborate in the development of LCVs, starting with the second generation Trafic (codenamed X83).
Renault&#x27;s financial problems were not all fixed by the privatisation, and Renault&#x27;s president, Louis Schweitzer gave to his then deputy, Carlos Ghosn, the task of confronting them. Ghosn elaborated a plan to cut costs for the period 1998–2000, reducing the workforce, revising production processes, standardising vehicle parts and pushing the launch of new models. The company also undertook organisational changes, introducing a lean production system with delegate responsibilities inspired by Japanese systems (the &quot;Renault Production Way&quot;), reforming work methods, and centralising research and development at its Technocentre to reduce vehicle conception costs while accelerating such conception.

After Volvo&#x27;s exit, Renault searched for a new partner to cope with an industry that was consolidating. Talks with BMW, Mitsubishi, Nissan, PSA and others were held and yielded a relationship with Nissan, whose negotiations with Daimler had stalled. Starting on 27 March 1999, the Renault–Nissan Alliance is the first of its kind involving a Japanese and a French company, including cross-ownership. Renault initially acquired a 36.8% stake at a cost of £2.7 billion in Nissan, while Nissan, in turn, took a 15% non-voting stake in Renault. Renault continued to operate as a stand-alone company, but with the intent to collaborate with its alliance partner to reduce costs. The same year, Renault bought a 51% majority stake of the Romanian company Dacia for £408.5 million, thus returning after 30 years, in which time the Romanians had built over 2 million cars that primarily consisted of local versions of the Renault 8, 12 and 20. In 2000, Renault acquired a controlling stake of the newly formed South Korean Samsung Group&#x27;s automotive division for £59.5 million.

In Japan, Renault was formerly licensed by Yanase Co, Japan&#x27;s premier seller of imported cars. However, as a result of Renault&#x27;s purchase of an interest in Nissan in 1999, Yanase cancelled its licensing contract with Renault in the spring of 2000, and Nissan took over as the sole licensee, hence sales of Renault vehicles in Japan were transferred from &quot;Yanase Store&quot; locations to &quot;Nissan Red Stage Store&quot; locations.

In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Renault sold various assets to finance its inversions and acquisitions, refocusing itself as a car and van manufacturer. In 1999, the company sold its industrial automation subsidiary, Renault Automation, to Comau and its engine parts division to TWR Engine Components. In 2001, Renault sold its 50% stake in bus/coach manufacturer Irisbus to co-owner Iveco and its logistics subsidiary, CAT France, to Global Automotive Logistics. Following the sale of Renault Industriels to Volvo in 2001, the company retained a minority (but controlling) stake (20%) in the Volvo Group. In 2010 Renault reduced its shareholding to 6.5% and in December 2012 sold its remaining shares. In 2004, Renault sold a 51% majority stake in its agricultural machinery division, Renault Agriculture, to CLAAS. In 2006, CLAAS increased its ownership to 80% and in 2008 took full control.

In the twenty-first century, Renault developed a reputation for distinctive, outlandish design. The second generation of the Laguna and Mégane featured ambitious, angular designs that turned out to be successful, The 2000 Laguna was the second European car to feature &quot;keyless&quot; entry and ignition. Less successful were the company&#x27;s more upmarket models. The Avantime, a unique coupé multi-purpose vehicle, sold poorly and was quickly discontinued while the luxury Vel Satis model also disappointed. However, the design inspired the lines of the second-generation Mégane, the maker&#x27;s most successful car. As well as its distinctive styling, Renault was to become known for its car safety by the independent company Euro NCAP Thus, in 2001, the Laguna achieved a five-star rating, followed in 2004 by the Modus, and acquired control of AvtoVAZ in 2008.

In April 2010, Renault–Nissan announced an alliance with Daimler. Renault supplied Mercedes-Benz with its brand new 1.6-litre turbo-diesel engine and Mercedes-Benz provided a 2.0 litre four-cylinder petrol engine to Renault–Nissan. The resulting new alliance was to develop a replacement for the Smart based on the Twingo.

In February 2010, Renault opened a new production factory near Tangier, Morocco, with an annual output capacity of 170,000 vehicles. Initially, it manufactured the Dacia Lodgy and Dacia Dokker models followed in October 2013 by the second generation Dacia Sandero. The output capacity increased to 340,000 vehicles per year with the inauguration of a second production line. The site is located in a dedicated free trade area, neighboring Tanger Automotive City. According to Renault, the new factory emits zero carbon and industrial liquid discharges. Over 100,000 vehicles were produced there in 2013. Renault expects to eventually increase production at the Tangier plant to 400,000 vehicles per year.

In the 2010s, Renault increased its efforts to gain market share in the Chinese market. In 2013, it formed a joint venture with Dongfeng Motor Group named as Dongfeng Renault, based on a failed previous venture with the Chinese company Sanjiang. In December 2017, it signed an agreement with Brilliance Auto to create a new joint venture (Renault Brilliance Jinbei) aimed at producing light commercial vehicles and minivans under the Renault, Jinbei and Huasong marques. In December 2018, Renault announced it would acquire a &quot;significant&quot; stake in JMCG&#x27;s electric vehicle subsidiary JMEV. In July 2019, Renault took a 50% majority stake from JMEV through capital increase. In April 2020, Renault announced it planned to withdraw from the Dongfeng Renault venture, transferring its stake to Dongfeng.

In December 2012, the Algeria&#x27;s National Investment Fund (FNI), the Société Nationale de Véhicules Industriels (SNVI), and Renault signed an agreement to establish a factory near the city of Oran, Algeria, with the aim of manufacturing Symbol units from 2014 onwards. The production output was estimated at 25,000 vehicles. The Algerian State has a 51% stake in the facility.

In September 2013, Renault launched its brand in Indonesia, the world&#x27;s fourth most populous country, with the aim of becoming one of the top European brands there until 2016. The model range at the time of the launch consisted of the Duster (locally assembled), the Koleos and the Mégane RS. Later, the Clio and the Captur were also added.

In April 2015, the French government upped their stake in Renault from 15% to 19.73% with the aim of blocking a resolution at the next annual general meeting that could reduce its control over the company. In 2017, the government sold back shares and returned to a 15% stake as agreed with Renault.

During 2016, Renault changed position on the viability of small (B-segment) diesel cars in Europe, as they become significantly more expensive when re-engineered to comply with new emissions regulations as a result of the Volkswagen emissions scandal. Renault believes that all small and some mid-size (C-segment) will no longer be diesels by 2020. However, on Friday, 13 January 2017, Renault shares fell as the Paris prosecutor started an investigation into possible exhaust emissions cheating. The company later recalled 15,000 cars for emission testing and fixing. Renault, along with several other automobile companies, has been accused of manipulating the measurement equipment for pollution from diesel cars. Independent tests carried out by the German car club ADAC proved that, under normal driving conditions, diesel vehicles, including the Renault Espace, exceeded legal European emission limits for nitrogen oxide () by more than 10 times. Renault denied any foul play, stating compliance with French and European standards.

In November 2018, Renault&#x27;s CEO Ghosn was arrested by Japanese officials for allegedly underreporting his Nissan&#x27;s salary, following an internal review conducted by the Japanese company. Renault traded shares fell more than 15% after the arrest was known. After Ghosn&#x27;s arrest, the chief operating officer and company deputy chief Thierry Bolloré became the acting CEO and the board director Philippe Lagayette the acting chairman. In January 2019, following Ghosn&#x27;s resignation, Renault announced it had appointed Jean-Dominique Senard as chairman and the acting CEO Bolloré as CEO. In October 2019, Bolloré was fired and replaced by Renault&#x27;s CFO Clotilde Delbos as acting CEO. Bolloré said his dismissal was a &quot;coup&quot; by Senard. In January 2020, Renault announced it had named Italian Luca de Meo as its new CEO, with him taking his post on 1 July. Delbos was named as his deputy.

=== COVID effects, company and Alliance reforms (2019–present) ===

In May 2020, Renault announced a cost-cutting plan aimed at eliminating 15,000 jobs worldwide, about 10% of the company&#x27;s workforce, due to falling sales and the COVID-19 pandemic.

In January 2021, as part of a company revamp, Renault said it would divide its automotive division into four business units: Renault, Dacia and Lada, Alpine, and Mobilize (the latter for new &quot;new mobility services&quot;).

In April 2021, Renault said that its revenue fell by 1.1% from the beginning of 2021 until March and it will reduce car production and focus on models with higher margins.

In November 2022, Renault said it plans to spin off the electric car development into a subsidiary company tentatively called Ampère. It also plans to spin off its powertrain production and development operations (including internal combustion engines and hybrid systems) into a joint venture company named Horse with Geely as co-owner.

In January 2023, Renault said it intended to transfer almost 30% of its controlling stake in Nissan to a French trust (pending approval by both companies), reducing its shares with voting rights to a minority 15% and, in doing so, making Nissan shares in Renault to gain voting rights. The shareholding and voting ratio of both companies is set to be fixed in the future. The agreement also included Nissan investing in Ampere and projects in various markets. In February 2023, both companies approved the going-ahead for the shareholding changes. Final details and regulatory clearances for the transaction were set to be completed by the first quarter of 2023 and it would be done by the fourth quarter. The companies also approved joint projects and Nissan&#x27;s Ampere investment. The share transfer was completed in November 2023.

===Innovations===
*1899 Louis Renault &quot;Driving, speed-changing mechanism and reversing gear&quot; Louis Renault invented a revolutionary &quot;direct drive&quot; gear with no drive belt, with much better uphill performances.
*1961 – Renault 4 was the first serial car with hatchback body style
*1963 – Renault 8 was the first serial car with four-wheel disc brake system
*1980 – First patents for &quot;Braking distribution device for total adherence&quot;
*1982 – Renault Fuego was the first serial car with keyless entry.
*1988 CARMINAT, a real-time system for location and weather information. This program received European support from 1988, under the code Eureka EU-55 CARMINAT. These innovations for the real-time location and human-machine interfaces are included in the Renault R-link system and Carminat TomTom devices.
*2000 – Renault Laguna was the second European car to feature &quot;keyless&quot; entry and ignition.

==Controversies==

Following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine which began on 24 February, many international, particularly Western companies pulled out of Russia. Unlike most of its Western competitors, Renault was slow to announce any divestments or scaling back of its operations in Russia, drawing criticism. On 21 March, after a brief halt, Renault resumed production at the Renault Russia car plant near Moscow. On 23 March, while addressing the French National Assembly, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy called for French companies, including Renault, to leave Russia. Later that day, Renault said it had &quot;suspended&quot; Renault Russia operations and was &quot;assessing the available options&quot; regarding its AvtoVAZ ownership. 

In May 2022, Renault signed agreements to sell 100% of its shares in Renault Russia to Moscow City entity and its 67.69% interest in AvtoVAZ to NAMI (the Central Research and Development Automobile and Engine Institute). The agreement provides an option for Renault to buy back its interest in AvtoVAZ, exercisable at certain times during the next six years.

==Motorsport==

Renault took part in motorsport at the beginning of the 20th century, promoted by Marcel Renault&#x27;s racing interests and over the years acquired companies with a sporting connection such as Gordini and Alpine.

In the 1970s, Renault set up a dedicated motorsport division called Renault Sport, and, in 1978, won the 24 Hours of Le Mans with the Renault Alpine A442. Renault has also achieved success in both rallying and in Formula One over the past few decades.

The company has also backed various one-make single-seater series such as Formula Renault and the Formula Renault 3.5. These two racing series were a step in the career of thousands of drivers, including Formula One champions Fernando Alonso, Sebastian Vettel, Kimi Räikkönen and Lewis Hamilton, as well as IndyCar champion Will Power.

Renault Sport develops and manufactures the Renault Sport-badged cars, as the Renault Clio RS (for Renault Sport) and the Renault Mégane RS, which own the world records in their categories, such as the Nürburgring, and the Suzuka circuit and awards from &quot;What Car?&quot;, &quot;Evo&quot;, and other magazines.



===Formula One===

Renault introduced the turbo engine to Formula One when they debuted their first car, the Renault RS01 at Silverstone in 1977. The Renault team continued until 1986. From 1989 Renault supplied engines for the successful Williams-Renault car.

Renault took over the Benetton Formula team in 2000 for the 2001 season and renamed it Renault F1 in 2002. In 2005 and 2006 the team won the Constructors&#x27; and Drivers&#x27; titles (with Fernando Alonso). At the 2005 French Grand Prix Carlos Ghosn set out his policy regarding the company&#x27;s involvement in motorsport:
: &quot;We are not in Formula One out of habit or tradition. We&#x27;re here to show our talent and that we can do it properly ... Formula One is a cost if you don&#x27;t get the results. Formula One is an investment if you do have them and know how to exploit them.&quot;

Renault powered the winning 2010 Red Bull Racing team, and took a similar role with its old team in December 2010, when it sold its final stake to the investment group Genii Capital, the main stakeholder since December 2009, ending Renault&#x27;s direct role in running a F1 team for the second time.

Renault bought the Enstone-based team for the 2016 season, rebranding it Renault. In 2021, the team was renamed Alpine F1 Team and became part of the new Alpine business unit, with Renault retained as the engine nameplate. Renault will stop manufacturing F1 engines at Viry-Châtillon after the season.

===Rallying===
Renault has been involved in rallying from an early era. Marcel Renault won the 1902 Rallye Paris-Vienna, but lost his life while competing in the 1903 Paris-Madrid rally.

During the 1950s and 1960s, Renault manufactured several small cars with rear wheel drive in some cases, as the 4CV, the R8 or the Dauphine. These cars were well-adapted to the rally of the time, and the tuner Amedee Gordini collaborated with its performance. In the 1950s the Renault Dauphine won several international rallies, including the 1956 Mille Miglia and the 1958 Monte Carlo Rally.

In 1973, Renault took control of Automobiles Alpine, a related company for several years, which was responsible for building successful rally cars such as the A110. A highly evolved A110 won the first World Rally Championship, representing Alpine-Renault.

In 1976, the Alpine&#x27;s competition department and the Gordini factory at Viry-Chatillon were merged into Renault Sport. The focus shifted to Formula One, although Renault achieved several victories including the 1981 Monte Carlo Rally with the Renault 5 Turbo before retirement from the world rally in late 1994.

Renault cars also participate of cross-country races, most prominently the Dakar Rally. The Marreau brothers won the 1982 edition driving a Renault 20 Turbo 4x4 prototype.

Later, Renault provided a Renault Megane platform and sponsored the Schlesser-Renault Elf buggies that won the 1999 and 2000 editions. The 1999 car was the first two-wheel drive Dakar&#x27;s winner.

Renaults won the European Rally Championship four times, in 1970, 1999, 2004 and 2005.

==Financial data==
==Production==
===Country-wise production===

===Vehicle production===
Below is the ranking of vehicle production in Renault group factories in 2023:
===Engine production===
Below is the production of engines, Horse division for thermal engines and Ampere division for electric motors, in the Renault group factories in 2023:
===Gearbox production===
Below is the production of gearboxes in the Renault group factories in 2023:
==Corporate governance==
Renault&#x27;s head office is in Boulogne-Billancourt. The head office is located near the old Renault factories; Renault has maintained a historical presence in Boulogne-Billancourt since the company&#x27;s opening in 1898.

Renault is administered through a board of directors, an executive committee and a management committee. , members of the 19-seat board include Jean-Dominique Senard (as chairman), Cherie Blair, Catherine Barba and Pascale Sourisse. Clotilde Delbos is the acting CEO.

==Products and technologies==

===Current models===
Current model line up, with calendar year of introduction:

* Espace (1984–present; crossover)
* Clio (1990–present; hatchback)
* Mégane E-Tech Electric (2021–present; crossover)
* Kangoo (1997–present; developed by Renault and sold in some markets as the Mercedes-Benz Citan and the Nissan Townstar)
* Captur (2013–present; crossover)
* Duster Oroch (Latin America only) (2015–present; pick-up)
* Kwid (2015–present; hatchback)
* Alaskan (2016–present; pick-up)
* Triber (2019–present; mini MPV)
* Arkana (2019–present; crossover)
* Kiger (2021–present)
* Taliant (2021–present; restyled Dacia Logan)
* Austral (2022–present; crossover)
* Espace (2023-present; )
* Rafale (2024–present; crossover coupé)
* Scenic E-Tech (2024–present; crossover)
* Symbioz (2024–present; crossover)
* 5 E-Tech (2024–present; hatchback)

Dacia vehicles, sold in some markets under the Renault marque:

* Logan (2004–present)
* Sandero (2008–present)
* Duster (2009–present)

Renault Samsung vehicles, sold in some markets under the Renault marque:

* Koleos (2008–present; Renault Samsung QM5/Renault Samsung QM6)
* Arkana (2020–present; Renault Samsung XM3)

Renault light commercial vehicles:

* Master (1980–present; developed by Renault and sold in some markets as the Nissan Interstar)
* Trafic (1980–present; developed by Renault and sold in some markets as the Nissan Primastar)
* Kangoo (1997–present; developed by Renault and sold in some markets as the Mercedes-Benz Citan and the Nissan Townstar)
* Express (2021–present; developed by Renault and sold in some markets as the Mercedes-Benz Citan and the Nissan Townstar)

Dacia light commercial vehicles, sold in some markets under the Renault marque:

* Dokker (2012–2020)
* Duster Commercial (2017–present)

===Concept cars===
Renault concept cars show future design and technology directions. Since 2008, Renault has displayed various all-electric car concepts under the name &quot;Z.E.&quot;, for zero emission, starting with a concept based on the Renault Kangoo Be Bop. Further concepts and announcements followed, with the production of the Fluence Z.E. saloon beginning in 2011 and the Renault Zoe in 2012.

Renault revealed the Ondelios hybrid concept in 2008. but this was overtaken by the Z.E. programme. However, Renault presented a new hybrid car in September 2014, the Eolab, which incorporates various innovations that the company said will be added to production models by 2020.

In 2014 at the New Delhi Auto Show, Renault announced a new model, the Kwid Concept, which comes with helicopter drone.


===Electric vehicles===


In 2013, Renault became the leader of electric vehicles sales in Europe, thanks to its large range of vehicles (Twizy, Zoe, Fluence, Kangoo). The Renault Zoe was Europe&#x27;s best selling all-electric car in 2015 and 2016. Global Zoe sales reached the 50,000 unit mark in June 2016, and achieved the 150,000 unit milestone in June 2019. Groupe Renault global electric vehicle sales passed the 100,000 unit milestone in September 2016. Since the launch of the Renault electric program, the Group has sold more than 273,550 electric vehicles worldwide through December 2019. Since inception, a total of 181,893 Zoe city cars, 48,821 Kangoo Z.E. electric vans, 29,118 Twitzy heavy quadricycles, and 10,600 Fluence Z.E. cars have been sold globally through December 2019.

Beginning in 2008, Renault made agreements for its planned zero-emissions products, including with Israel, Portugal, Denmark and the US states of Tennessee and Oregon, Yokohama in Japan and the Principality of Monaco. Serge Yoccoz is the electric vehicle project director.

In 2008, Renault–Nissan signed a deal to produce electric cars for an initiative in Israel with Better Place, a US company developing new non-petroleum–based transport infrastructure. Renault aimed to sell 10–20,000 cars a year in Israel. Renault also agreed to develop exchangeable batteries for the project. Renault collaborated with Better Place to produce a network of all-electric vehicles and thousands of charging stations in Denmark, planned to be operational by 2011. The Renault Fluence Z.E., was selected for the Israel project. It became the first zero-emission vehicle with a switchable battery, with trials in 2010 undertaken with the Renault Laguna. Renault ended the partnership in 2013, following Better Place&#x27;s bankruptcy, with only 1,000 vehicle sales in Israel and 240 in Denmark.

Renault–Nissan and the largest French electric utility, Électricité de France (EDF), signed an agreement to promote electric vehicles in France. The partnership planned to pilot projects on battery management and charging infrastructure. Renault–Nissan also signed deals with Ireland&#x27;s Electricity Supply Board (ESB), and in Milton Keynes as part of the UK&#x27;s Plugged in Places national project.

According to Ghosn, the Renault–Nissan alliance was a fundamental step in electric car development, and that they needed each other for other issues such as battery manufacturing, charging infrastructure and business strategy.

The Renault–Nissan group is a member of the PHEV Research Center. In September 2013, Renault and Bolloré announced an agreement to collaborate on a new electric vehicle and in car-sharing project.
In 2021, Renault launched a new EV and mobility brand called Mobilize and showed a prototype for a small Twizy-style EV called the EZ-1. Renault Group also invested into a start-up company Verkor, that should develop EV batteries and about in 2026 build a gigafactory in France.

By 2025, the yearly output of 400,000 electric vehicles is planned.

===Eco²===
In 2007 Renault introduced a new line of eco-friendly derivatives marked eco² that were based on production platforms. A minimum of 5% recycled plastic was used and the vehicle&#x27;s materials were 95% reusable. Eco²&#x27;s CO2 emissions were not to exceed 140g/km, or would be biofuel compatible. At the 2008 Fleet World Honours, Renault received the Environment Award. The chairman of Judges, George Emmerson, commented, &quot;This was the most hotly contested category in the history of the Fleet World Honours, such is the clamour for organizations&#x27; green credentials to be recognised. There were some very impressive entries, but the panel felt that Renault&#x27;s impressive range of low-emission vehicles was the most tangible, and the most quantifiable.

===Autonomous vehicles===
Renault plans to introduce autonomous vehicle technology by 2020. The company unveiled a prototype, the Next Two (based on the Zoe), in February 2014.

==Vehicle design==

===Design===
====&quot;Pre-design&quot; era====
During its early years, Renault only manufactured the cars&#x27; chassis, while the bodywork was completed by coachbuilders. The first car with Renault&#x27;s bodywork was the &quot;Taxi de la Marne&quot; introduced in 1905. Most Renault-made bodyworks were simple and utilitarian until the Reinastella unveiling in 1928. In the 1930s, Renault developed streamlined cars such as the Viva Grand Sport. In the 1950s, the company worked with Ghia designers.

====Renault Styling====
In 1961, with the assistance of the independent designer Philippe Charbonneaux (responsible for the R8), the company created Renault Styling as a design department, led by Gaston Juchet since 1963. In 1975, Robert Opron was named chief designer and Renault Styling was divided into Interior, Exterior and Advanced Design groups.

In the 1960s, an in-house computer-aided design (CAD) computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) system called UNISURF was introduced, led by Pierre Bézier (who popularised Bézier curves and worked at Renault from 1933 until 1975).

====Industrial Design Department====
In 1987, Renault named Patrick le Quément as chief designer and created the Industrial Design Department to replace Renault Styling. The new division incorporated a new management system, with more technology and personnel. Renault gave it the same importance as Engineering and Product Planning, participating in product development.

Le Quément was responsible for bold designs such as the Mégane II and the Vel Satis, giving Renault a more coherent and stylish image. In 1995, Design and Quality were merged under le Quément&#x27;s direction. Later, the new department moved to Guyancourt&#x27;s Technocentre, which also became the base for Engineering and Product Planning. The group was organised in three sections: Automobile Design; Truck, LCV and Bus Design; and Concept Cars and Advanced Design. During the next years, satellite centres opened in Spain (1999), Paris (2000), South Korea (2003), Romania (2007), India (2007), Brazil (2008) and China (2019).

At the end of 2009, le Quément was replaced by Laurens van den Acker, who introduced the &quot;cycle of life&quot; concept to Renault&#x27;s design.

===Engineering and Product Planning===
Most of Renault engineering was decentralised until 1998, when the Technocentre became the main Renault&#x27;s engineering facility. Satellite centres exist, including Renault Technologies Americas (with branches in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico), Renault Technologies Romania (branches in Morocco, Russia, Slovenia and Turkey) and Renault Technologies Spain (branch in Portugal). , Renault&#x27;s engineering section had over 6,500 employees worldwide, of which 34% were engineers and 63% technicians. Engine development is in charge of a specific division, Renault Powertrains, with nearly 65 engineers. Overseas engineering is increasing and research and design teams are in charge of adjusting existing vehicles to local needs and budgets.

, Engineering, and Product Planning, are directed by Gaspar Gascon Abellan and Philippe Klein respectively.

===Technocentre===
The Renault Technocentre () is the main research and development facility. It is located in Guyancourt. It covers and integrates all departments involved in developing products and industrial processes (design, engineering and product planning) as well as supplier representatives. The Technocentre gathers more than 8,000 employees and comprises three main sections: The Advance Precinct, The Hive and the prototype build centre. The Advance Precinct, a stepped structure surrounded by a lake, has design studios and other departments related to early design stages. The Hive is the tallest structure and includes research and engineering facilities dedicated to the development process of new vehicles. The prototype build centre is an extension of The Hive. The three main structures are accompanied by smaller technical buildings.

The Technocentre was one of the first enterprises to have real-time life-size 3D modelling systems.

===Renault Tech===
Renault Tech is a division of Renault Sport Technologies, headquartered in Les Ulis. It was established in 2008 and is in charge of modifying cars and vans for special purposes (mobility cars, driver&#x27;s school cars, and business fleets).

==Subsidiaries and alliances==
===Subsidiaries===
====Regional marques====
=====Dacia=====

In 1999, Renault acquired a 51% controlling stake from the Romanian-based manufacturer Automobile Dacia, which was later increased to 99.43%. As part of the Renault group, Dacia is a regional marque of entry-levels cars focused on Europe and Northern Africa which shares various models with the Renault marque.

====RCI Banque====

RCI Banque is a wholly owned subsidiary that provides financial services for Renault marques worldwide and Nissan marques in Europe, Russia and South America.

====Renault Retail Group====
Renault Retail Group is Renault&#x27;s wholly owned automobile distributor for Europe. In 1997, the French branches were merged to establish the subsidiary Renault France Automobiles (RFA). In 2001, it served as the basis for Renault Europe Automobiles (REA), which managed sales in Europe. In 2008, the company adopted its current name. Renault Retail Group operates in France, Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.

====Manufacturing subsidiaries====

=====French factories=====
*Batilly, subsidiary Société de Véhicules Automobiles de Batilly (SoVAB)
*ElectriCity
**Cléon
**Douai
** Maubeuge, subsidiary Maubeuge Construction Automobile (MCA).
**Ruitz, subsidiary Société des Transmissions Automatiques (STA) owned by Renault
*Dieppe, Société des Automobiles Alpine

*Flins
*Auto Châssis International (ACI)
**Le Mans
**Villeurbanne
**Meyzieu
*Sandouville
=====Manufacturing subsidiaries outside France=====

*Cacia (Portugal)
*Cormecánica S.A. (Chile)
*JMEV (China), a joint venture majority owned by Renault and with JMCG as the second largest shareholder
*Oyak-Renault (Turkey), a joint venture between Renault and Oyak (Turkey&#x27;s Armed Forces Pension Fund), established in 1969
*Renault Algérie (Algeria), a joint venture between SNVI (51%) and Renault (49%), established in 2012
*Renault Argentina (Argentina)
*Renault Brilliance Jinbei (China), a joint venture between Renault and Brilliance Auto, established in 2017
*Renault do Brasil (Brazil)
*Renault España (Spain)
*Renault India (India)
*Renault Industrie Belgique S.A./Renault Industrie België N.V. (Belgium)
*Renault Korea (South Korea), a Renault acquired car division of Samsung on 1 September 2000 in a $560 million deal for 70%, eventually increasing its stake to 80.1%. The majority of the company&#x27;s (renamed as Renault Samsung Motors) production at its Busan plant is exported under the Renault badge. In April 2024, after being renamed Renault Korea Motors and then Renault Korea, the company unified its marketing with the Renault marque and became an assembly subsidiary.

*Renault Med (Morocco), a subsidiary operating the Renault-Nissan Alliance factory in Tangier
*Renault México (Mexico, cars manufactured in Nissan&#x27;s Aguascalientes plant since 2013)
*Renault Pars (Iran), a joint venture established in 2004 and owned by Renault (51%) and Iran&#x27;s Industrial Development Renovation Organisation (IDRO) (49%)
*Renault South Africa (South Africa, cars manufactured in the Nissan&#x27;s Rosslyn plant)
*Revoz (Slovenia)
*Sofasa (Colombia)
*Somaca (Morocco)

===Alliances===
====Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi====

For many years, Renault had a 43.4% stake in Nissan, thereby giving it effective control , and Nissan held a 15% stake (with no voting rights) in Renault. Renault owns 15% shares with voting rights. It has more shares in a French trust which it can use for voting in a few limited situations.

As well as sharing engines and joint-development of zero-emissions technology, Nissan increased its presence in Europe by badging various Renault van models such as the Renault Kangoo/Nissan Kubistar, Renault Master/Nissan Interstar and the Renault Trafic/Nissan Primastar. Some passenger cars have also been badge-engineered, such as the Renault Clio-based Nissan Platina in Brazil. The &quot;Renault Production System&quot; standard used by all Renault factories borrowed extensively from the &quot;Nissan Production Way&quot; and resulted in Renault productivity improving by 15%. The alliance led to the loss of 21,000 jobs, and the closure of three assembly and two powertrain plants.

In March 2010 the Renault-Nissan alliance opened its first joint facility in Chennai, India, investing 45 billion rupees (US$991.1 million). The facility builds the Nissan Micra. The Renault Fluence and Renault Koleos are intended to be assembled there from completely knocked-down units. As a result of opening its own factory, Renault ended its five-year Mahindra Renault joint venture with Mahindra &amp; Mahindra company to make and sell the Renault Logan in India.

====Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi and Daimler alliance====
On 7 April 2010 Ghosn and Daimler AG CEO Dieter Zetsche announced a partnership between the three companies. Daimler acquired a 3.10 per cent stake in Renault-Nissan and Renault and Nissan each took a 1.55 per cent stake in Daimler.

==== Geely alliance ====
In January 2022, Renault and Chinese manufacturer Geely signed an agreement by which Renault&#x27;s South Korean subsidiary, Renault Korea Motors, would produce vehicles based on Geely Compact Modular Architecture platform, initially intended for the domestic market. In December 2022, Geely acquired a 34% stake of Renault Korea through capital increase as part of their partnership, although the company would continue to be majority owned by Renault and a consolidated subsidiary of it.

In May 2024, Renault and Geely established a joint venture holding aimed at producing powertrains, including internal combustion engines (ICE) and hybrid systems. The venture dates back to an agreement between the two companies in November 2022. Both Geely and Renault were set to transfer their intellectual property for ICEs and hybrid systems to the venture holding, and plans to supply engines to Dacia (part of Renault Group), Volvo, Lynk &amp; Co, Proton (part of Geely) as well as Nissan and Mitsubishi Motors from the Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance.

====American Motors====
In 1979, Renault entered into an agreement with American Motors Corporation (AMC) to sell cars in the US. A year later, Renault acquired a 22.5% interest in AMC. This was not the first time the two companies had worked together. In the early 1960s, Renault assembled CKD kits and marketed Ramblers in France. In 1982, Renault increased its stake in AMC to 46.4%. The Renault Alliance/Encore (a modified version of the Renault 9 and 11) entered production in the US, but following AMC&#x27;s continued decline, Renault withdrew from the US in 1987 and sold its share to Chrysler.

====Proposed alliances====
On 30 June 2006, the media reported that General Motors convened an emergency board meeting to discuss a proposal by shareholder Kirk Kerkorian to form an alliance with Renault-Nissan. However, GM CEO Richard Wagoner felt that an alliance would disproportionately benefit Renault&#x27;s shareholders and that GM should receive compensation accordingly. Talks between GM and Renault ended on 4 October 2006.

In 2007, Renault-Nissan entered talks with Indian manufacturer Bajaj Auto to develop a new ultra-low-cost car along the lines of the Tata Nano. Renault&#x27;s existing partner in India, Mahindra, was not interested in the project. The proposed joint venture did not come to fruition and in late 2009 the companies announced that Bajaj would develop and manufacturer the vehicle and supply Renault-Nissan with completed cars.

On 7 October 2008 a Renault executive said the company was interested in acquiring or partnering with Chrysler. On 11 October 2008, the &quot;New York Times&quot; reported that General Motors, Nissan and Renault had all been in discussions over the past month with Chrysler&#x27;s owner Cerberus Capital Management about acquiring Chrysler.

In May 2019, Fiat Chrysler Automobiles proposed merging its business with Renault. The proposal was later withdrawn.

==Awards==

Renault models have won the &quot;European Car of the Year&quot; award seven times :
*1966: Renault 16
*1982: Renault 9
*1991: Renault Clio
*1997: Renault Scénic
*2003: Renault Mégane II
*2006: Renault Clio III
*2024: Renault Scenic E-Tech

Renault cars have won numerous national-level awards in Spain, Australia, Ireland, the United States, Denmark, and elsewhere. Renault and its Dacia subsidiary have won three &quot;Autobest&quot; car of the year awards for the Duster, Logan, and Symbol models.

Under the patronage of the Italian Ministry of Culture, in the 2016 edition of the Corporate Art Awards Renault received by pptArt the award for its Art Collection that inspired the creativity of its car designers.

==Marketing and branding==
Renault markets its products under the marques Renault, Dacia and Alpine. Renault founded in 2021 the Mobilize brand, which started in 2024 with the marketing of electric mobility services and vehicles. 

===Renault badge===
Renault&#x27;s first badge was introduced in 1900 and consisted of the Renault brothers&#x27; intertwined initials. When the company started mass production in 1906, it adopted a gear-shaped logo with a car inside it. After World War I the company used a logo depicting an FT tank. In 1923 it introduced a new circle-shaped badge, which was replaced by the &quot;diamond&quot; or lozenge in 1925. The lozenge of Renault means a diamond that expresses the brand&#x27;s firm desire to project a strong and consistent corporate image.

The Renault diamond logo has been through many iterations. To modernise its image, Renault asked Victor Vasarely to design its new logo in 1972. The transformed logo maintained the diamond shape. The design was later revised to reflect the more rounded lines of the brand&#x27;s new styling cues. The current badge has been in use since 1992.

The logo for web and print use was updated three times thereafter. In 2002 a more realistic representation inside a yellow rectangle was made which is still used as the Renault Trucks logo albeit in red. In 2004 the logo received the &quot;Renault Identité&quot; typeface. In 2007, Saguez &amp; Partners produced a version with the wordmark and logo inside a square.

In April 2015, Renault introduced new designs to differentiate the company from the product brand, as part of the &#x27;Passion for life&#x27; campaign. The new brand logo replaced the yellow background with a yellow stripe. A new typeface was also introduced. A corporate logo was unveiled at the 2015 Annual General Meeting, incorporating Renault, Dacia and Renault Samsung Motors.

January 2021 saw the introduction of a new flat diamond logo alongside the Renault 5 Prototype electric concept car. The logo received so much positive feedback that Renault officially introduced the new symbol as their logo in March 2021, according to Renault&#x27;s design director Gilles Vidal, who joined the group in 2020. They plan to introduce the new diamond on many online platforms in June 2021 and the first model with the new logo featured will be revealed in 2022.

The yellow associated with the company appeared initially in the diamond badge of 1946, when Renault was nationalised.
===Typeface===
====Renault MN====
Both the Renault logo and its documentation (technical as well as commercial) historically used &quot;Renault MN,&quot; a custom typeface developed by British firm Wolff Olins. This type of family is said to have been designed mainly to save costs at a time where the use of typefaces was costly.

A retail version of the font family was sold by URW++ as Renault.

====Renault Identité====
In 2004, French typeface designer Jean-François Porchez was commissioned to design a replacement. This was shown in October of that year and was called &quot;Renault Identité&quot;. The OpenType font family was developed from the Renault logotype created by Éric de Berranger.

====Helvetica====
Since 2007, as part of the Saguez &amp; Partners revamp, all graphic advertising makes use of Helvetica Neue Condensed.

====Renault Life====
The Renault Life font family was built by Fontsmith Limited, based on the foundry&#x27;s FS Hackney font family.

The family consists of six fonts in three weights (Life, Regular, and Bold) and one width, with complimentary italic.

===L&#x27;Atelier Renault Paris===
Renault&#x27;s flagship showroom, L&#x27;Atelier Renault (), is located on the Champs-Élysées in Paris, with other manufacturers such as Peugeot, Citroën and Toyota. It opened in November 2000, located on the site of Pub Renault, which operated from 1963 until 1999. The first Renault venue at the location was the &quot;Magasin Renault&quot; in 1910, a pioneering car showroom.

L&#x27;Atelier features a Renault Boutique as well as regular exhibitions featuring Renault and Dacia cars. An upmarket restaurant is located on the second floor, looking out onto the Champs-Élysées. The ground floor can hold up to five exhibitions at any one time. As of March 2009, 20 million visitors had visited L&#x27;Atelier Renault.

===Renault Classic===

Renault Classic is a department within Renault that seeks to collect, preserve and exhibit notable vehicles from the company&#x27;s history. Originally named Histoire &amp; Collection, the collection was assembled in 2002 and its workshops formally opened on 24 April 2003.

===Music===
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Renault&#x27;s European advertising made extensive use of Robert Palmer&#x27;s song &quot;Johnny and Mary&quot;. Television advertisements initially used Palmer&#x27;s original version, while a range of special recordings in different styles were produced during the 1990s, most famously the acoustic interpretation by Martin Taylor that he released on his album &quot;Spirit of Django&quot;.

===Sponsorship===
Renault has sponsored films as an advertising technique since 1899. A Renault Voiturette Type A, driven by Louis Renault, appeared in one of the Lumières&#x27; early films. Between 1914 and 1940, the company commissioned a series of documentary films to promote its industrial activities. Renault also backed some films set in Africa during the 1920s to promote the reliability of its products on tough conditions. Since 1983, the company sponsors the Cannes Film Festival and it has also sponsored other festivals as the Venice Film Festival, the Marrakech Film Festival and the BFI London Film Festival.

Through its foundations and institutes, Renault funds projects around the world that focus on: education through scholarships, road safety and diversity.

==See also==
*Tanks in France

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="0" end="12" title="Renault" label="Renault S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="38" end="52" title="Renault" label="Groupe Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="79" end="92" title="Renault" label="Renault Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="118" end="131" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="132" end="155" title="Automotive industry" label="automobile manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="254" end="259" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="262" end="269" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="272" end="276" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="279" end="282" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="294" end="302" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333400" start="336" end="344" title="autorail" label="autorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q172455" start="373" end="393" title="Boulogne-Billancourt" label="Boulogne-Billancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="400" end="405" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q26944" start="491" end="497" title="Automobiles Alpine" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27460" start="499" end="504" title="Automobile Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108601900" start="523" end="531" title="Mobilize (marque)" label="Mobilize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477864" start="547" end="581" title="Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance" label="Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="652" end="658" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443747" start="741" end="751" title="RCI Banque" label="RCI Banque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918585" start="828" end="834" title="Motrio" label="Motrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802742" start="901" end="917" title="Horse Powertrain" label="Horse Powertrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854061" start="940" end="952" title="Oyak-Renault" label="Oyak-Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143731" start="978" end="1009" title="Renault Nissan Automotive India" label="Renault Nissan Automotive India"/>
<link wikidata="Q494168" start="1038" end="1051" title="Renault Korea" label="Renault Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q840045" start="1117" end="1131" title="Renault Trucks" label="Renault Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q163810" start="1191" end="1196" title="Volvo" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636184" start="1209" end="1228" title="Renault Agriculture" label="Renault Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q704756" start="1293" end="1298" title="CLAAS" label="CLAAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="1342" end="1353" title="motor sport" label="motor sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856" start="1368" end="1376" title="rallying" label="rallying"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="1378" end="1387" title="Renault F1" label="Formula 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1392" end="1401" title="DAMS#Formula E" label="Formula E"/>
<link wikidata="Q568742" start="1440" end="1448" title="3d modeling" label="modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="1497" end="1514" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q298766" start="1669" end="1682" title="Louis Renault (industrialist)" label="Louis Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q505344" start="1700" end="1706" title="Marcel Renault" label="Marcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q729431" start="1711" end="1718" title="Fernand Renault" label="Fernand"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="1923" end="1930" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267699" start="2049" end="2067" title="Renault Voiturette" label="Renault Voiturette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179850" start="2260" end="2274" title="De Dion-Bouton" label="De Dion-Bouton"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2491" end="2502" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915002" start="2540" end="2556" title="Renault Taxi de la Marne" label="Taxi de la Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2702" end="2710" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="2895" end="2907" title="motor racing" label="motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q478477" start="3170" end="3187" title="Paris-Madrid race" label="Paris-Madrid race"/>
<link wikidata="Q918792" start="3269" end="3281" title="Ferenc Szisz" label="Ferenc Szisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="3300" end="3323" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058369" start="3335" end="3350" title="Renault AK 90CV" label="Renault AK 90CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092872" start="3351" end="3358" title="1906 French Grand Prix" label="in 1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403377" start="3833" end="3838" title="franc" label="franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="3934" end="3949" title="mass production" label="mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q203549" start="3965" end="3974" title="Taylorism" label="Taylorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758972" start="4027" end="4048" title="Highland Park Ford Plant" label="Highland Park factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="4135" end="4140" title="buses" label="buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847183" start="4208" end="4224" title="commercial truck" label="commercial truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="4321" end="4337" title="Aircraft engine" label="aircraft engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q105043908" start="4425" end="4446" title="Renault 50/60 hp" label="air-cooled V8 engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q123924903" start="4460" end="4473" title="Renault 90 hp" label="Renault 90 hp"/>
<link wikidata="Q245272" start="4504" end="4507" title="V12 engine" label="V12"/>
<link wikidata="Q457318" start="4584" end="4596" title="Grand Palais" label="Grand Palais"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="4600" end="4605" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="4658" end="4668" title="ammunition" label="ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184840" start="4673" end="4690" title="Military vehicle" label="military vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q207734" start="4717" end="4727" title="Renault FT" label="Renault FT"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="4728" end="4732" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q679888" start="4889" end="4900" title="Rolls-Royce Limited" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312720" start="4974" end="4987" title="Renault 70 hp" label="Renault 70 hp"/>
<link wikidata="Q15125625" start="5059" end="5070" title="Renault 12Fe" label="300 hp 12Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="5193" end="5209" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513561" start="5349" end="5352" title="GJG" label="GJG"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="5500" end="5512" title="agricultural machinery" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112665" start="5517" end="5537" title="industrial machinery" label="industrial machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119239" start="6053" end="6068" title="Gueudet" label="Gustave Gueudet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="6091" end="6097" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163026" start="6193" end="6201" title="Radiator (engine cooling)" label="radiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q842395" start="6246" end="6258" title="coal scuttle" label="coal scuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27206" start="6265" end="6271" title="Hood (vehicle)" label="bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048801" start="6701" end="6717" title="Paris Motor Show" label="Paris Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496020" start="7255" end="7262" title="Renault Monasix" label="Monasix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117960" start="7274" end="7281" title="Renault Vivasix" label="Vivasix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582420" start="7303" end="7307" title="Renault 40CV" label="40CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q731988" start="7355" end="7370" title="rolling chassis" label="rolling chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734300" start="7389" end="7401" title="coachbuilder" label="coachbuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312719" start="7474" end="7478" title="Renault 24CV" label="24CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582420" start="7934" end="7953" title="Renault 40CV" label="Type NM 40CV Tourer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016490" start="8027" end="8040" title="Cadillac V-12" label="Cadillac V-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045630" start="8042" end="8055" title="Packard Eight" label="Packard Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660817" start="8057" end="8065" title="Fiat 520" label="Fiat 520"/>
<link wikidata="Q783891" start="8070" end="8078" title="Delahaye" label="Delahaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106501" start="8114" end="8133" title="Renault Suprastella" label="Renault Suprastella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117960" start="8222" end="8237" title="Renault Vivasix" label="Renault Vivasix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022113" start="8375" end="8391" title="cubic centimetre" label="cubic centimetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8457" end="8473" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128004" start="8525" end="8534" title="wheelbase" label="wheelbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512155" start="8831" end="8842" title="Renault Reinastella" label="Reinastella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106501" start="8910" end="8921" title="Renault Suprastella" label="Suprastella"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016378" start="8946" end="8953" title="Kellner-Béchereau" label="Kellner"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8955" end="8966" title=":fr:Jean Henri-Labourdette" label="Labourdette"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072609" start="8968" end="8989" title="Clément-Rothschild" label="J. Rothschild et Fils"/>
<link wikidata="Q282383" start="9183" end="9193" title="Renault Vivastella" label="Vivastella"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="9519" end="9528" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="9731" end="9744" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="9863" end="9878" title="aircraft engine" label="aircraft engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173150" start="10000" end="10019" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051494" start="10168" end="10175" title="Caudron" label="Caudron"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="10241" end="10251" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621307" start="10283" end="10290" title="airmail" label="airmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828182" start="10299" end="10307" title="Air Bleu" label="Air Bleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953995" start="10480" end="10482" title="Char D1" label="D1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141886" start="10518" end="10522" title="Renault R 35" label="R 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746" start="10589" end="10596" title="Citroën" label="Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="10784" end="10800" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="10919" end="10929" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151107" start="10957" end="10965" title="Michelin" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="11097" end="11113" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051494" start="11160" end="11167" title="Caudron" label="Caudron"/>
<link wikidata="Q170360" start="11600" end="11627" title="Second Armistice at Compiègne" label="French capitulation in 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q298766" start="11629" end="11642" title="Louis Renault (industrialist)" label="Louis Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="11672" end="11684" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q658963" start="11756" end="11766" title="Renault UE" label="Renault UE"/>
<link wikidata="Q11777421" start="11800" end="11806" title="Mercedes-Benz L3000" label="trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="11845" end="11860" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593224" start="11905" end="11935" title="Île Seguin" label="Île Seguin, Billancourt, Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q696835" start="12337" end="12356" title="Liberation of Paris" label="Liberation of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q18434" start="12666" end="12675" title="Leon Blum" label="Léon Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422284" start="12683" end="12696" title="Popular Front (France)" label="Popular Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="12813" end="12823" title="capitalist" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="12842" end="12851" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="12998" end="13018" title="Council of Ministers of France" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="13036" end="13052" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="de Gaulle&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="13203" end="13218" title="French Communist Party" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="13279" end="13289" title="French resistance" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q833121" start="13451" end="13468" title="Pierre Lefaucheux" label="Pierre Lefaucheux"/>
<link wikidata="Q783684" start="13653" end="13675" title="Provisional Government of the French Republic" label="provisional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503154" start="14193" end="14207" title="Fresnes prison" label="Fresnes prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q833121" start="14899" end="14916" title="Pierre Lefaucheux" label="Pierre Lefaucheux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037755" start="14971" end="14983" title="labor unrest" label="labor unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216464" start="15212" end="15223" title="rear engine" label="rear engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q917677" start="15224" end="15227" title="Renault 4CV" label="4CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539719" start="15365" end="15380" title="Renault Frégate" label="Renault Frégate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548674" start="15466" end="15478" title="Morris Minor" label="Morris Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="15483" end="15500" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370357" start="15652" end="15685" title="Paul-Marie Pons" label="Ministry of Industrial Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q676767" start="15833" end="15841" title="Renault Dauphine" label="Dauphine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15849" end="15858" title="Pierre Lefaucheux#Death" label="his death"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372604" start="15890" end="15902" title="Paule Marrot" label="Paule Marrot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15906" end="15962" title="Renault Dauphine#Paule Marrot" label="pioneering the company&amp;#x27;s textile and color division"/>
<link wikidata="Q676767" start="15969" end="15977" title="Renault Dauphine" label="Dauphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071151" start="16273" end="16290" title="Chevrolet Corvair" label="Chevrolet Corvair"/>
<link wikidata="Q614939" start="16314" end="16331" title="Renault Caravelle" label="Renault Caravelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393624" start="16476" end="16481" title="Somua" label="Somua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461642" start="16486" end="16491" title="Latil" label="Latil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140157" start="16565" end="16638" title="Saviem" label="Société Anonyme de Véhicules Industriels et d&amp;#x27;Equipements Mécaniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q247716" start="16697" end="16706" title="Renault 4" label="Renault 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q326015" start="16764" end="16775" title="Citroën 2CV" label="Citroën 2CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q578088" start="16798" end="16807" title="Renault 8" label="Renault 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726215" start="16820" end="16830" title="Renault 10" label="Renault 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124536" start="16977" end="16987" title="Renault 16" label="Renault 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q216762" start="17002" end="17011" title="hatchback" label="hatchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338440" start="17054" end="17063" title="Renault 6" label="Renault 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q591145" start="17345" end="17355" title="Renault 12" label="Renault 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q591145" start="17483" end="17493" title="Renault 12" label="Renault 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338440" start="17520" end="17529" title="Renault 6" label="Renault 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124536" start="17534" end="17544" title="Renault 16" label="Renault 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q504143" start="17766" end="17775" title="Renault 5" label="Renault 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="17847" end="17865" title="1973 energy crisis" label="1973 energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q531131" start="17871" end="17881" title="Renault 18" label="Renault 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q913559" start="17920" end="17930" title="Renault 20" label="Renault 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="18076" end="18091" title="South East Asia" label="South East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142333" start="18292" end="18326" title="Saint-Bruno-de-Montarville, Quebec" label="Saint-Bruno-de-Montarville, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q26944" start="18451" end="18469" title="Automobiles Alpine" label="Automobiles Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081459" start="18552" end="18563" title="Nash Motors" label="Nash Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760611" start="18564" end="18571" title="Nash Rambler" label="Rambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q202708" start="18590" end="18617" title="American Motors Corporation" label="American Motors Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933280" start="18665" end="18684" title="complete knock down" label="complete knock down"/>
<link wikidata="Q473352" start="18703" end="18718" title="Rambler Classic" label="Rambler Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818115" start="18891" end="18924" title="Mercedes-Benz Heckflosse" label="Mercedes-Benz &amp;quot;Fintail&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507706" start="18996" end="19012" title="Rambler American" label="Rambler American"/>
<link wikidata="Q473352" start="19017" end="19032" title="Rambler Classic" label="Rambler Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266681" start="19044" end="19058" title="Renault Torino" label="Renault Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="19267" end="19281" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27460" start="19296" end="19301" title="Dacia (car)" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621378" start="19318" end="19331" title="Industrias Kaiser Argentina" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q163810" start="19415" end="19420" title="Volvo" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="19425" end="19432" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431155" start="19476" end="19479" title="PRV engine" label="PRV"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="19480" end="19482" title="V6" label="V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q913559" start="19509" end="19519" title="Renault 30" label="Renault 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q179308" start="19521" end="19532" title="Peugeot 604" label="Peugeot 604"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341143" start="19538" end="19547" title="Volvo 200 series" label="Volvo 260"/>
<link wikidata="Q275623" start="19913" end="19916" title="Groupe PSA" label="PSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750" start="20126" end="20133" title="Berliet" label="Berliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q840045" start="20208" end="20237" title="Renault Trucks" label="Renault Véhicules Industriels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666883" start="20403" end="20428" title="light commercial vehicles" label="light commercial vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="20510" end="20514" title="Metric ton" label="tons"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870826" start="20515" end="20518" title="Gross vehicle weight rating" label="GVW"/>
<link wikidata="Q202708" start="20906" end="20933" title="American Motors Corporation" label="American Motors Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30113" start="21130" end="21134" title="Jeep" label="Jeep"/>
<link wikidata="Q8271454" start="21195" end="21206" title="Jeep XJ" label="XJ Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="21259" end="21275" title="four-wheel drive" label="four-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q124326375" start="21493" end="21511" title="Jose Dedeurwaerder" label="Jose Dedeurwaerder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652583" start="22182" end="22196" title="AMC Straight-6 engine" label="AMC inline six"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="22238" end="22252" title="fuel injection" label="fuel injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313267" start="22276" end="22281" title="Renix" label="Renix"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="22589" end="22609" title="Chrysler Corporation" label="Chrysler Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129521" start="22715" end="22734" title="Jeep Grand Cherokee" label="Jeep Grand Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="22928" end="22948" title="1979 energy crisis" label="second energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058565" start="23045" end="23061" title="Renault Alliance" label="Renault Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130825" start="23094" end="23103" title="Renault 9" label="Renault 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q462161" start="23169" end="23187" title="Kenosha, Wisconsin" label="Kenosha, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109600" start="23223" end="23234" title="Motor Trend" label="Motor Trend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918171" start="23252" end="23267" title="Motor Trend Car of the Year" label="Car of The Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911165" start="23615" end="23634" title="Arab League boycott of Israel" label="Arab League boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333796" start="23976" end="23989" title="Renault Fuego" label="Renault Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058565" start="24030" end="24036" title="Renault Encore" label="Encore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130825" start="24056" end="24066" title="Renault 11" label="Renault 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="24183" end="24193" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="24299" end="24307" title="Chrysler Corporation" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508821" start="24368" end="24381" title="Georges Besse" label="Georges Besse"/>
<link wikidata="Q343657" start="24385" end="24399" title="Action directe (armed group)" label="Action directe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276797" start="24405" end="24422" title="Renault Medallion" label="Renault Medallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6172899" start="24500" end="24510" title="Jeep-Eagle" label="Jeep-Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q304895" start="24643" end="24653" title="Full-size car" label="full-sized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276830" start="24672" end="24685" title="Eagle Premier" label="Eagle Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956084" start="24827" end="24844" title="Bramalea, Ontario" label="Bramalea, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114672" start="24892" end="24901" title="Chrysler LH platform" label="LH sedans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276852" start="24914" end="24926" title="Eagle Vision" label="Eagle Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q617415" start="24931" end="24944" title="Chrysler 300M" label="Chrysler 300M"/>
<link wikidata="Q950650" start="25065" end="25069" title="Mack Trucks" label="Mack"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="25449" end="25462" title="turbochargers" label="turbochargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="25470" end="25481" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q849485" start="25782" end="25796" title="Renault Espace" label="Renault Espace"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="25818" end="25825" title="minivan" label="minivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130825" start="25979" end="25988" title="Renault 9" label="Renault 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q215715" start="26042" end="26044" title="Renault 25" label="25"/>
<link wikidata="Q572290" start="26156" end="26166" title="Renault 14" label="Renault 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q849485" start="26345" end="26351" title="Renault Espace" label="Espace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508821" start="26565" end="26578" title="Georges Besse" label="Georges Besse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527685" start="26708" end="26714" title="Gitane" label="Gitane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="26770" end="26781" title="motorsports" label="motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="26887" end="26896" title="terrorist" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q343657" start="26909" end="26923" title="Action Directe (terrorist group)" label="Action Directe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="27443" end="27451" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130825" start="27473" end="27482" title="Renault 9" label="Renault 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q748054" start="27527" end="27551" title="European Car of the Year" label="European Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130825" start="27651" end="27661" title="Renault 11" label="Renault 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q504143" start="27750" end="27759" title="Renault 5" label="Renault 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q531131" start="27843" end="27853" title="Renault 18" label="Renault 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q504166" start="27874" end="27884" title="Renault 21" label="Renault 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q215715" start="28052" end="28062" title="Renault 25" label="Renault 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q309258" start="28789" end="28793" title="Renault Clio" label="Clio"/>
<link wikidata="Q748054" start="28938" end="28962" title="European Car of the Year" label="European Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q849485" start="29150" end="29156" title="Renault Espace" label="Espace"/>
<link wikidata="Q720634" start="29184" end="29190" title="Renault Twingo" label="Twingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="29248" end="29269" title="multi-purpose vehicle" label="multi-purpose vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="29436" end="29451" title="Left- and right-hand traffic" label="left-hand drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="29693" end="29703" title="privatization" label="privatised"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509797" start="29935" end="29956" title="General Motors Europe" label="General Motors Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140952" start="30054" end="30060" title="Renault Trafic" label="Trafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384681" start="30183" end="30199" title="Louis Schweitzer (businessman)" label="Louis Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q356719" start="30225" end="30237" title="Carlos Ghosn" label="Carlos Ghosn"/>
<link wikidata="Q380772" start="30518" end="30540" title="Lean manufacturing" label="lean production system"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="30684" end="30708" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="30921" end="30924" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q183275" start="30926" end="30936" title="Mitsubishi" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="30938" end="30944" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917347" start="31189" end="31204" title="Cross ownership" label="cross-ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823721" start="31318" end="31334" title="Non-voting stock" label="non-voting stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q27460" start="31555" end="31560" title="Automobile Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956246" start="31770" end="31787" title="Controlling interest" label="controlling stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="31821" end="31834" title="Samsung Group" label="Samsung Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345071" start="31925" end="31934" title="Yanase (car dealership)" label="Yanase Co"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32290" end="32312" title="Nissan#Japan" label="Nissan Red Stage Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="32517" end="32538" title="industrial automation" label="industrial automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271894" start="32574" end="32579" title="Comau" label="Comau"/>
<link wikidata="Q29755" start="32698" end="32705" title="Iveco Bus" label="Irisbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29913" start="32718" end="32723" title="Iveco" label="Iveco"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="32732" end="32741" title="logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q504162" start="33354" end="33360" title="Renault Laguna" label="Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q222764" start="33365" end="33371" title="Renault Mégane" label="Mégane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521940" start="33497" end="33522" title="Keyless entry" label="&amp;quot;keyless&amp;quot; entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521940" start="33527" end="33535" title="Keyless ignition" label="ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130811" start="33603" end="33611" title="Renault Avantime" label="Avantime"/>
<link wikidata="Q213853" start="33622" end="33627" title="coupé" label="coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="33628" end="33649" title="multi-purpose vehicle" label="multi-purpose vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q930510" start="33709" end="33718" title="Renault Vel Satis" label="Vel Satis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132584" start="34053" end="34058" title="Renault Modus" label="Modus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309" start="34084" end="34091" title="AvtoVAZ" label="AvtoVAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929048" start="34228" end="34247" title="Turbo-diesel" label="turbo-diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156490" start="34398" end="34403" title="Smart (automobile)" label="Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="34489" end="34496" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156868" start="34590" end="34601" title="Dacia Lodgy" label="Dacia Lodgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q933825" start="34606" end="34618" title="Dacia Dokker" label="Dacia Dokker"/>
<link wikidata="Q926562" start="34676" end="34689" title="Dacia Sandero" label="Dacia Sandero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335686" start="34836" end="34851" title="free trade area" label="free trade area"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104175" start="35260" end="35280" title="Dongfeng Motor Group" label="Dongfeng Motor Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q18816188" start="35290" end="35306" title="Dongfeng Renault" label="Dongfeng Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q917192" start="35424" end="35439" title="Brilliance Auto" label="Brilliance Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925556" start="35575" end="35581" title="Jinbei (marque)" label="Jinbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925556" start="35586" end="35593" title="Jinbei (marque)" label="Huasong"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118763" start="35691" end="35695" title="JMCG" label="JMCG"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788207" start="35731" end="35735" title="JMEV" label="JMEV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381695" start="36022" end="36064" title="SNVI" label="Société Nationale de Véhicules Industriels"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="36145" end="36149" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q950506" start="36571" end="36577" title="Dacia Duster" label="Duster"/>
<link wikidata="Q867211" start="36603" end="36609" title="Renault Koleos" label="Koleos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261566" start="36618" end="36627" title="Mégane Renault Sport" label="Mégane RS"/>
<link wikidata="Q309258" start="36640" end="36644" title="Renault Clio" label="Clio"/>
<link wikidata="Q903839" start="36653" end="36659" title="Renault Captur" label="Captur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826627" start="36697" end="36714" title="Agence des participations de l&amp;#x27;État" label="French government"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767604" start="37043" end="37052" title="B-segment" label="B-segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q932442" start="37155" end="37180" title="Euro6" label="new emissions regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000630" start="37200" end="37228" title="Volkswagen emissions scandal" label="Volkswagen emissions scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266730" start="37281" end="37290" title="C-segment" label="C-segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q671680" start="37391" end="37407" title="judiciary of France" label="Paris prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q320165" start="37518" end="37534" title="Emissions testing" label="emission testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q289953" start="37747" end="37751" title="ADAC" label="ADAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q849485" start="37829" end="37843" title="Renault Espace" label="Renault Espace"/>
<link wikidata="Q932442" start="37860" end="37884" title="European emission limits" label="European emission limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q623279" start="38313" end="38336" title="chief operating officer" label="chief operating officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33262547" start="38362" end="38377" title="Thierry Bolloré" label="Thierry Bolloré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684801" start="38551" end="38572" title="Jean-Dominique Senard" label="Jean-Dominique Senard"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="38686" end="38689" title="chief financial officer" label="CFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q48441071" start="38690" end="38705" title="Clotilde Delbos" label="Clotilde Delbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264974" start="38838" end="38849" title="Luca de Meo" label="Luca de Meo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="39170" end="39187" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35676" start="39334" end="39338" title="Lada" label="Lada"/>
<link wikidata="Q124038384" start="39679" end="39697" title="Ampere (company)" label="subsidiary company"/>
<link wikidata="Q124038384" start="39717" end="39723" title="Ampere (company)" label="Ampère"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802742" start="39870" end="39891" title="Horse project" label="joint venture company"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802742" start="39898" end="39903" title="Horse (company)" label="Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q739000" start="39909" end="39914" title="Geely" label="Geely"/>
<link wikidata="Q247716" start="41005" end="41014" title="Renault 4" label="Renault 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q578088" start="41074" end="41083" title="Renault 8" label="Renault 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333796" start="41237" end="41250" title="Renault Fuego" label="Renault Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521940" start="41281" end="41295" title="Remote_keyless_system" label="keyless entry."/>
<link wikidata="Q682144" start="41586" end="41592" title="TomTom" label="TomTom"/>
<link wikidata="Q504162" start="41610" end="41624" title="Renault Laguna" label="Renault Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="41738" end="41770" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="42160" end="42184" title="National Assembly (France)" label="French National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874799" start="42206" end="42225" title="Volodymyr Zelenskyy" label="Volodymyr Zelenskyy"/>
<link wikidata="Q505344" start="42920" end="42934" title="Marcel Renault" label="Marcel Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q173222" start="43032" end="43039" title="Gordini" label="Gordini"/>
<link wikidata="Q26944" start="43044" end="43050" title="Alpine (car)" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308914" start="43121" end="43134" title="Renault Sport" label="Renault Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="43158" end="43177" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q983687" start="43187" end="43206" title="Renault Alpine A442" label="Renault Alpine A442"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856" start="43250" end="43258" title="rallying" label="rallying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="43266" end="43277" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q548230" start="43380" end="43395" title="Formula Renault" label="Formula Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465453" start="43404" end="43423" title="World Series by Renault" label="Formula Renault 3.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514" start="43532" end="43547" title="Fernando Alonso" label="Fernando Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q42311" start="43549" end="43565" title="Sebastian Vettel" label="Sebastian Vettel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11192" start="43567" end="43581" title="Kimi Räikkönen" label="Kimi Räikkönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="43586" end="43600" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q119822" start="43613" end="43620" title="IndyCar" label="IndyCar"/>
<link wikidata="Q525778" start="43630" end="43640" title="Will Power" label="Will Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261566" start="43765" end="43782" title="Mégane Renault Sport" label="Renault Mégane RS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991010" start="43903" end="43912" title="What Car?" label="What Car?"/>
<link wikidata="Q749927" start="43926" end="43929" title="Evo (magazine)" label="Evo"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="44003" end="44008" title="turbocharger" label="turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q728270" start="44070" end="44082" title="Renault RS01" label="Renault RS01"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="44086" end="44097" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="44200" end="44216" title="Williams-Renault" label="Williams-Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q171329" start="44245" end="44261" title="Benetton Formula" label="Benetton Formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q69835" start="44283" end="44287" title="F1 2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="44310" end="44320" title="Renault F1" label="Renault F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q69844" start="44324" end="44328" title="F1 2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q69880" start="44333" end="44337" title="2005 Formula One season" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q69893" start="44342" end="44346" title="2006 Formula One Season" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q221631" start="44439" end="44461" title="2005 French Grand Prix" label="2005 French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q356719" start="44462" end="44474" title="Carlos Ghosn" label="Carlos Ghosn"/>
<link wikidata="Q173663" start="44857" end="44872" title="Red Bull Racing" label="Red Bull Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424852" start="44992" end="45005" title="Genii Capital" label="Genii Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q98930155" start="45238" end="45252" title="Alpine F1 Team" label="Alpine F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q253554" start="45395" end="45409" title="Viry-Châtillon" label="Viry-Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856" start="45473" end="45481" title="rallying" label="rallying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="45690" end="45706" title="rear wheel drive" label="rear wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q917677" start="45729" end="45732" title="Renault 4CV" label="4CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q578088" start="45738" end="45740" title="Renault R8" label="R8"/>
<link wikidata="Q676767" start="45748" end="45756" title="Renault Dauphine" label="Dauphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407259" start="45827" end="45841" title="Amedee Gordini" label="Amedee Gordini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="45965" end="45977" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q725531" start="45991" end="46008" title="Monte Carlo Rally" label="Monte Carlo Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q26944" start="46044" end="46062" title="Alpine (car maker)" label="Automobiles Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q741857" start="46170" end="46174" title="Alpine A110" label="A110"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852" start="46212" end="46236" title="World Rally Championship" label="World Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299603" start="46516" end="46531" title="Renault 5 Turbo" label="Renault 5 Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977220" start="46619" end="46632" title="off-roading" label="cross-country"/>
<link wikidata="Q181336" start="46661" end="46672" title="Dakar Rally" label="Dakar Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q930782" start="46703" end="46715" title="1982 Paris–Dakar Rally" label="1982 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q913559" start="46726" end="46736" title="Renault 20" label="Renault 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="46737" end="46742" title="Turbocharger" label="Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="46743" end="46746" title="Four-wheel drive" label="4x4"/>
<link wikidata="Q171479" start="46827" end="46836" title="Jean-Louis Schlesser" label="Schlesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505649" start="46845" end="46848" title="Elf Aquitaine" label="Elf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986177" start="46849" end="46856" title="Buggy (automobile)" label="buggies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536609" start="46921" end="46936" title="two-wheel drive" label="two-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q303871" start="46976" end="47003" title="European Rally Championship" label="European Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172455" start="47552" end="47572" title="Boulogne-Billancourt" label="Boulogne-Billancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q174214" start="47926" end="47938" title="Cherie Blair" label="Cherie Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q18589991" start="47940" end="47955" title="Catherine Barba" label="Catherine Barba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405113" start="47960" end="47976" title="Pascale Sourisse" label="Pascale Sourisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q48441071" start="47978" end="47993" title="Clotilde Delbos" label="Clotilde Delbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q849485" start="48128" end="48134" title="Renault Espace" label="Espace"/>
<link wikidata="Q309258" start="48163" end="48167" title="Renault Clio" label="Clio"/>
<link wikidata="Q108380585" start="48196" end="48218" title="Renault Mégane E-Tech Electric" label="Mégane E-Tech Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="48247" end="48253" title="Renault Kangoo" label="Kangoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q402409" start="48322" end="48341" title="Mercedes-Benz Citan" label="Mercedes-Benz Citan"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="48350" end="48365" title="Nissan Townstar" label="Nissan Townstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q903839" start="48369" end="48375" title="Renault Captur" label="Captur"/>
<link wikidata="Q22969024" start="48404" end="48416" title="Renault Duster Oroch" label="Duster Oroch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19960305" start="48464" end="48468" title="Renault Kwid" label="Kwid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465915" start="48497" end="48504" title="Renault Alaskan" label="Alaskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65125527" start="48531" end="48537" title="Renault Triber" label="Triber"/>
<link wikidata="Q56234269" start="48565" end="48571" title="Renault Arkana" label="Arkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q99934822" start="48600" end="48605" title="Renault Kiger" label="Kiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q668565" start="48623" end="48630" title="Renault Taliant" label="Taliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q668565" start="48655" end="48666" title="Dacia Logan" label="Dacia Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111149358" start="48670" end="48677" title="Renault Austral" label="Austral"/>
<link wikidata="Q849485" start="48706" end="48712" title="Renault Espace" label="Espace"/>
<link wikidata="Q118398898" start="48732" end="48738" title="Renault Rafale" label="Rafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q122167780" start="48773" end="48786" title="Renault Scenic E-Tech" label="Scenic E-Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q124516640" start="48815" end="48822" title="Renault Symbioz" label="Symbioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q105095659" start="48851" end="48859" title="Renault 5 E-Tech" label="5 E-Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q27460" start="48887" end="48892" title="Automobile Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668565" start="48953" end="48958" title="Dacia Logan" label="Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q926562" start="48976" end="48983" title="Dacia Sandero" label="Sandero"/>
<link wikidata="Q950506" start="49001" end="49007" title="Dacia Duster" label="Duster"/>
<link wikidata="Q494168" start="49024" end="49039" title="Renault Samsung Motors" label="Renault Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q867211" start="49100" end="49106" title="Renault Koleos" label="Koleos"/>
<link wikidata="Q56234269" start="49165" end="49171" title="Renault Arkana" label="Arkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666883" start="49217" end="49242" title="light commercial vehicles" label="light commercial vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420183" start="49247" end="49253" title="Renault Master" label="Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420183" start="49322" end="49338" title="Nissan Interstar" label="Nissan Interstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140952" start="49342" end="49348" title="Renault Trafic" label="Trafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140952" start="49417" end="49433" title="Nissan Primastar" label="Nissan Primastar"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="49437" end="49443" title="Renault Kangoo" label="Kangoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q402409" start="49512" end="49531" title="Mercedes-Benz Citan" label="Mercedes-Benz Citan"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="49540" end="49555" title="Nissan Townstar" label="Nissan Townstar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49559" end="49566" title="Renault Express (2021-2024)" label="Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q402409" start="49635" end="49654" title="Mercedes-Benz Citan" label="Mercedes-Benz Citan"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="49663" end="49678" title="Nissan Townstar" label="Nissan Townstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q933825" start="49764" end="49770" title="Dacia Dokker" label="Dokker"/>
<link wikidata="Q950506" start="49785" end="49802" title="Dacia Duster" label="Duster Commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="49947" end="49963" title="all-electric car" label="all-electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q850270" start="49964" end="49972" title="concept vehicle" label="concepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990112" start="49988" end="50004" title="Renault Z.E." label="&amp;quot;Z.E.&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q846292" start="50010" end="50023" title="zero emission" label="zero emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="50062" end="50076" title="Renault Kangoo" label="Renault Kangoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914612" start="50157" end="50169" title="Renault Fluence Z.E." label="Fluence Z.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1516380" start="50203" end="50214" title="Renault Zoe" label="Renault Zoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083590" start="50255" end="50261" title="Hybrid electric vehicle" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358732" start="50392" end="50397" title="Renault Eolab" label="Eolab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516380" start="50799" end="50810" title="Renault Zoe" label="Renault Zoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="50842" end="50858" title="all-electric car" label="all-electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="50991" end="51005" title="Groupe Renault" label="Groupe Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="51285" end="51296" title="Renault Kangoo Z.E." label="Kangoo Z.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1781826" start="51319" end="51325" title="Renault Twizy" label="Twitzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123692388" start="51326" end="51343" title="heavy quadricycle" label="heavy quadricycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914612" start="51357" end="51369" title="Renault Fluence Z.E." label="Fluence Z.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="51569" end="51578" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="51583" end="51589" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="51591" end="51599" title="Yokohama" label="Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q832434" start="51793" end="51805" title="Better Place (company)" label="Better Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140665" start="52109" end="52125" title="charging station" label="charging station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914612" start="52178" end="52198" title="Renault Fluence Z.E." label="Renault Fluence Z.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q504162" start="52346" end="52360" title="Renault Laguna" label="Renault Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326624" start="52542" end="52558" title="electric utility" label="electric utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q274591" start="52560" end="52581" title="Électricité de France" label="Électricité de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050566" start="52795" end="52819" title="ESB Group" label="Electricity Supply Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q204234" start="52834" end="52847" title="Milton Keynes" label="Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="52984" end="52996" title="electric car" label="electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q37929123" start="53090" end="53113" title="Electric vehicle infrastructure" label="charging infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="53182" end="53202" title="PHEV Research Center" label="PHEV Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q444172" start="53235" end="53242" title="Bolloré" label="Bolloré"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="53974" end="53981" title="biofuel" label="biofuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569610" start="54517" end="54535" title="autonomous vehicle" label="autonomous vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="54775" end="54782" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734300" start="54820" end="54832" title="coachbuilder" label="coachbuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="54979" end="54990" title="Utilitarianism" label="utilitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045339" start="55149" end="55153" title="Carrozzeria Ghia" label="Ghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632513" start="55247" end="55268" title="Philippe Charbonneaux" label="Philippe Charbonneaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099047" start="55362" end="55375" title="Gaston Juchet" label="Gaston Juchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349129" start="55397" end="55409" title="Robert Opron" label="Robert Opron"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="55546" end="55567" title="computer-aided design" label="computer-aided design"/>
<link wikidata="Q660192" start="55574" end="55602" title="computer-aided manufacturing" label="computer-aided manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550682" start="55623" end="55630" title="UNISURF" label="UNISURF"/>
<link wikidata="Q372584" start="55654" end="55667" title="Pierre Bézier" label="Pierre Bézier"/>
<link wikidata="Q214728" start="55685" end="55697" title="Bézier curve" label="Bézier curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034055" start="55805" end="55823" title="Patrick le Quément" label="Patrick le Quément"/>
<link wikidata="Q237303" start="56363" end="56373" title="Guyancourt" label="Guyancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358350" start="56796" end="56817" title="Laurens van den Acker" label="Laurens van den Acker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380097" start="57778" end="57792" title="Philippe Klein" label="Philippe Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q237303" start="57919" end="57929" title="Guyancourt" label="Guyancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308914" start="58813" end="58839" title="Renault Sport" label="Renault Sport Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q216844" start="58858" end="58866" title="Les Ulis" label="Les Ulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917098" start="58961" end="58973" title="mobility car" label="mobility car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432007" start="59007" end="59022" title="Fleet vehicle" label="business fleets"/>
<link wikidata="Q27460" start="59205" end="59221" title="Automobile Dacia" label="Automobile Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297099" start="60231" end="60274" title="Société de Véhicules Automobiles de Batilly" label="Société de Véhicules Automobiles de Batilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552633" start="60306" end="60311" title="Douai Renault Factory" label="Douai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509312" start="60336" end="60368" title="Maubeuge Construction Automobile" label="Maubeuge Construction Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q26944" start="60467" end="60497" title="Société des Automobiles Alpine" label="Société des Automobiles Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552634" start="60500" end="60505" title="Flins Renault Factory" label="Flins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552637" start="60576" end="60587" title="Sandouville Renault Factory" label="Sandouville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60660" end="60676" title="Cormecánica S.A." label="Cormecánica S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q60788207" start="60686" end="60690" title="JMEV" label="JMEV"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118763" start="60751" end="60755" title="JMCG" label="JMCG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854061" start="60791" end="60803" title="Oyak-Renault" label="Oyak-Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q281059" start="61021" end="61038" title="Renault Argentina" label="Renault Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q917192" start="61123" end="61138" title="Brilliance Auto" label="Brilliance Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312751" start="61161" end="61178" title="Renault do Brasil" label="Renault do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312729" start="61189" end="61203" title="Renault España" label="Renault España"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312733" start="61213" end="61226" title="Renault India Private Limited" label="Renault India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648363" start="61236" end="61297" title="Vilvoorde Renault Factory" label="Renault Industrie Belgique S.A./Renault Industrie België N.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q494168" start="61309" end="61322" title="Renault Korea" label="Renault Korea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61788" end="61799" title="Renault Med" label="Renault Med"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826739" start="61882" end="61896" title="Automotive industry in Mexico" label="Renault México"/>
<link wikidata="Q992313" start="61975" end="61987" title="Renault Pars" label="Renault Pars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62136" end="62156" title="Renault South Africa" label="Renault South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15090956" start="62227" end="62232" title="Revoz" label="Revoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164594" start="62245" end="62251" title="Sofasa" label="Sofasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852268" start="62264" end="62270" title="Somaca" label="Somaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="62796" end="62810" title="Renault Kangoo" label="Renault Kangoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="62811" end="62826" title="Nissan Kubistar" label="Nissan Kubistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420183" start="62828" end="62842" title="Renault Master" label="Renault Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420183" start="62843" end="62859" title="Nissan Interstar" label="Nissan Interstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140952" start="62868" end="62882" title="Renault Trafic" label="Renault Trafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140952" start="62883" end="62899" title="Nissan Primastar" label="Nissan Primastar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702123" start="62985" end="62999" title="Nissan Platina" label="Nissan Platina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="63395" end="63402" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q738470" start="63483" end="63495" title="Nissan Micra" label="Nissan Micra"/>
<link wikidata="Q867211" start="63521" end="63535" title="Renault Koleos" label="Renault Koleos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933280" start="63576" end="63605" title="Knock-down kit" label="completely knocked-down units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884868" start="63675" end="63691" title="Mahindra Renault Limited" label="Mahindra Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q848059" start="63711" end="63734" title="Mahindra &amp;amp; Mahindra" label="Mahindra &amp;amp; Mahindra"/>
<link wikidata="Q668565" start="63764" end="63777" title="Renault Logan" label="Renault Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="63870" end="63880" title="Daimler AG" label="Daimler AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q65445" start="63885" end="63899" title="Dieter Zetsche" label="Dieter Zetsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q739000" start="64153" end="64158" title="Geely" label="Geely"/>
<link wikidata="Q494168" start="64228" end="64248" title="Renault Korea Motors" label="Renault Korea Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632052" start="64288" end="64325" title="Compact Modular Architecture platform" label="Compact Modular Architecture platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q494168" start="64419" end="64432" title="Renault Korea" label="Renault Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="64639" end="64652" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="64653" end="64660" title="Parent company" label="holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q609111" start="64680" end="64691" title="powertrains" label="powertrains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="64703" end="64730" title="Internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q193075" start="64741" end="64755" title="Hybrid vehicle" label="hybrid systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="64890" end="64911" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q27460" start="64995" end="65000" title="Automobile Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="65026" end="65031" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27555283" start="65033" end="65046" title="Lynk &amp;amp; Co" label="Lynk &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q827306" start="65048" end="65054" title="Proton Holdings" label="Proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="65082" end="65088" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="65093" end="65110" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q202708" start="65229" end="65256" title="American Motors Corporation" label="American Motors Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933280" start="65448" end="65451" title="Complete knock down" label="CKD"/>
<link wikidata="Q356068" start="65917" end="65931" title="Kirk Kerkorian" label="Kirk Kerkorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="65965" end="65971" title="Nissan Motor Co., Ltd." label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151648" start="65989" end="66004" title="Rick Wagoner" label="Richard Wagoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q10910065" start="66259" end="66269" title="Bajaj Auto" label="Bajaj Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q152238" start="66329" end="66338" title="Tata Nano" label="Tata Nano"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="66764" end="66778" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="66799" end="66813" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q289362" start="66909" end="66936" title="Cerberus Capital Management" label="Cerberus Capital Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q15678788" start="66977" end="67002" title="Fiat Chrysler Automobiles" label="Fiat Chrysler Automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q748054" start="67128" end="67152" title="European Car of the Year" label="European Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124536" start="67186" end="67196" title="Renault 16" label="Renault 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130825" start="67204" end="67213" title="Renault 9" label="Renault 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q309258" start="67221" end="67233" title="Renault Clio" label="Renault Clio"/>
<link wikidata="Q531589" start="67241" end="67255" title="Renault Scénic" label="Renault Scénic"/>
<link wikidata="Q222764" start="67263" end="67277" title="Renault Mégane" label="Renault Mégane"/>
<link wikidata="Q309258" start="67288" end="67304" title="Renault Clio" label="Renault Clio III"/>
<link wikidata="Q122167780" start="67312" end="67333" title="Renault Scenic E-Tech" label="Renault Scenic E-Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347047" start="67623" end="67650" title="Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism (Italy)" label="Italian Ministry of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q55394244" start="67679" end="67699" title="Corporate Art Awards" label="Corporate Art Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q55394244" start="67720" end="67726" title="pptArt" label="pptArt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13127755" start="68465" end="68472" title="Lozenge (shape)" label="lozenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q154448" start="68694" end="68709" title="Victor Vasarely" label="Victor Vasarely"/>
<link wikidata="Q840045" start="69110" end="69124" title="Renault Trucks" label="Renault Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106547" start="69978" end="69990" title="Gilles Vidal" label="Gilles Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="70455" end="70463" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030011" start="70490" end="70501" title="Wolff Olins" label="Wolff Olins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3172123" start="70750" end="70771" title="Jean-François Porchez" label="Jean-François Porchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q504745" start="71106" end="71120" title="Helvetica Neue" label="Helvetica Neue"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="71501" end="71515" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q325412" start="72543" end="72556" title="Robert Palmer" label="Robert Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809757" start="72575" end="72590" title="Johnny and Mary" label="Johnny and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550111" start="72804" end="72817" title="Martin Taylor (guitarist)" label="Martin Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q55965" start="73042" end="73050" title="Auguste and Louis Lumière" label="Lumières"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="73349" end="73369" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="73419" end="73439" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323689" start="73477" end="73501" title="BFI London Film Festival" label="BFI London Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041462" start="73673" end="73688" title="Tanks in France" label="Tanks in France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162296" wikidata="Q183350" url="?curid=162296" title="Aphid">
<text>Aphids are small sap-sucking insects and members of the superfamily Aphidoidea. Common names include greenfly and blackfly, although individuals within a species can vary widely in color. The group includes the fluffy white woolly aphids. A typical life cycle involves flightless females giving live birth to female nymphs—who may also be already pregnant, an adaptation scientists call telescoping generations—without the involvement of males. Maturing rapidly, females breed profusely so that the number of these insects multiplies quickly. Winged females may develop later in the season, allowing the insects to colonize new plants. In temperate regions, a phase of sexual reproduction occurs in the autumn, with the insects often overwintering as eggs.

The life cycle of some species involves an alternation between two species of host plants, for example between an annual crop and a woody plant. Some species feed on only one type of plant, while others are generalists, colonizing many plant groups. About 5,000 species of aphid have been described, all included in the family Aphididae. Around 400 of these are found on food and fiber crops, and many are serious pests of agriculture and forestry, as well as an annoyance for gardeners. So-called dairying ants have a mutualistic relationship with aphids, tending them for their honeydew and protecting them from predators.

Aphids are among the most destructive insect pests on cultivated plants in temperate regions. In addition to weakening the plant by sucking sap, they act as vectors for plant viruses and disfigure ornamental plants with deposits of honeydew and the subsequent growth of sooty moulds. Because of their ability to rapidly increase in numbers by asexual reproduction and telescopic development, they are a highly successful group of organisms from an ecological standpoint.

Large-scale control of aphids is not easy. Insecticides do not always produce reliable results, because of resistance to several classes of insecticide, and because aphids often feed on the undersides of leaves, and are thus shielded. On a small scale, water jets and soap sprays are quite effective. Natural enemies include predatory ladybugs, hoverfly larvae, parasitic wasps, aphid midge larvae, crab spiders, lacewing larvae, and entomopathogenic fungi. An integrated pest management strategy using biological pest control can work, but is difficult to achieve except in enclosed environments such as greenhouses.

==Etymology==

The name aphid is from Carl Linnaeus&#x27;s modern Latin, most likely from misreading the Middle Greek κόρῐς, koris, &#x27;bug&#x27; as αφῐς, aphis.

==Distribution==

Aphids are distributed worldwide, but are most common in temperate zones. In contrast to many taxa, aphid species diversity is much lower in the tropics than in the temperate zones. They can migrate great distances, mainly through passive dispersal by winds. Winged aphids may also rise up in the day as high as 600 m where they are transported by strong winds. For example, the currant-lettuce aphid, &quot;Nasonovia ribisnigri&quot;, is believed to have spread from New Zealand to Tasmania around 2004 through easterly winds. Aphids have also been spread by human transportation of infested plant materials, making some species nearly cosmopolitan in their distribution.

==Evolution==

===Fossil history===
Aphids, and the closely related adelgids and phylloxerans, probably evolved from a common ancestor some , in the Early Permian period. They probably fed on plants like Cordaitales or Cycadophyta. With their soft bodies, aphids do not fossilize well, and the oldest known fossil is of the species &quot;Triassoaphis cubitus&quot; from the Triassic. They do however sometimes get stuck in plant exudates which solidify into amber. In 1967, when Professor Ole Heie wrote his monograph &quot;Studies on Fossil Aphids&quot;, about sixty species have been described from the Triassic, Jurassic, Cretaceous and mostly the Tertiary periods, with Baltic amber contributing another forty species. The total number of species was small, but increased considerably with the appearance of the angiosperms , as this allowed aphids to specialise, the speciation of aphids going hand-in-hand with the diversification of flowering plants. The earliest aphids were probably polyphagous, with monophagy developing later. It has been hypothesized that the ancestors of the Adelgidae lived on conifers while those of the Aphididae fed on the sap of Podocarpaceae or Araucariaceae that survived extinctions in the late Cretaceous. Organs like the cornicles did not appear until the Cretaceous period. One study alternatively suggests that ancestral aphids may have lived on angiosperm bark and that feeding on leaves may be a derived trait. The Lachninae have long mouth parts that are suitable for living on bark and it has been suggested that the mid-Cretaceous ancestor fed on the bark of angiosperm trees, switching to leaves of conifer hosts in the late Cretaceous. The Phylloxeridae may well be the oldest family still extant, but their fossil record is limited to the Lower Miocene &quot;Palaeophylloxera&quot;.

===Taxonomy===
Late 20th-century reclassification within the Hemiptera reduced the old taxon &quot;Homoptera&quot; to two suborders: Sternorrhyncha (aphids, whiteflies, scales, psyllids, etc.) and Auchenorrhyncha (cicadas, leafhoppers, treehoppers, planthoppers, etc.) with the suborder Heteroptera containing a large group of insects known as the true bugs. The infraorder Aphidomorpha within the Sternorrhyncha varies with circumscription with several fossil groups being especially difficult to place but includes the Adelgoidea, the Aphidoidea and the Phylloxeroidea. Some authors use a single superfamily Aphidoidea within which the Phylloxeridae and Adelgidae are also included while others have Aphidoidea with a sister superfamily Phylloxeroidea within which the Adelgidae and Phylloxeridae are placed. Early 21st-century reclassifications substantially rearranged the families within Aphidoidea: some old families were reduced to subfamily rank (&quot;e.g.&quot;, Eriosomatidae), and many old subfamilies were elevated to family rank. The most recent authoritative classifications have three superfamilies Adelgoidea, Phylloxeroidea and Aphidoidea. The Aphidoidea includes a single large family Aphididae that includes all the ~5000 extant species.

=== Phylogeny ===

==== External ====

Aphids, adelgids, and phylloxerids are very closely related within the suborder Sternorrhyncha, the plant-sucking bugs. They are either placed in the insect superfamily Aphidoidea or into the superfamily Phylloxeroidea which contains the family Adelgidae and the family Phylloxeridae. Like aphids, phylloxera feed on the roots, leaves, and shoots of grape plants, but unlike aphids, do not produce honeydew or cornicle secretions. Phylloxera (&quot;Daktulosphaira vitifoliae&quot;) are insects which caused the Great French Wine Blight that devastated European viticulture in the 19th century. Similarly, adelgids or woolly conifer aphids, also feed on plant phloem and are sometimes described as aphids, but are more properly classified as aphid-like insects, because they have no cauda or cornicles.

The treatment of the groups especially concerning fossil groups varies greatly due to difficulties in resolving relationships. Most modern treatments include the three superfamilies, the Adelogidea, the Aphidoidea, and the Phylloxeroidea within the infraorder Aphidomorpha along with several fossil groups.

====Internal====
The phylogenetic tree, based on Papasotiropoulos 2013 and Kim 2011, with additions from Ortiz-Rivas and Martinez-Torres 2009, shows the internal phylogeny of the Aphididae.

It has been suggested that the phylogeny of the aphid groups might be revealed by examining the phylogeny of their bacterial endosymbionts, especially the obligate endosymbiont &quot;Buchnera&quot;. The results depend on the assumption that the symbionts are strictly transmitted vertically through the generations. This assumption is well supported by the evidence, and several phylogenetic relationships have been suggested on the basis of endosymbiont studies.

==Anatomy==
Most aphids have soft bodies, which may be green, black, brown, pink, or almost colorless. Aphids have antennae with two short, broad basal segments and up to four slender terminal segments. They have a pair of compound eyes, with an ocular tubercle behind and above each eye, made up of three lenses (called triommatidia). They feed on sap using sucking mouthparts called stylets, enclosed in a sheath called a rostrum, which is formed from modifications of the mandible and maxilla of the insect mouthparts.

They have long, thin legs with two-jointed, two-clawed tarsi. The majority of aphids are wingless, but winged forms are produced at certain times of year in many species. Most aphids have a pair of cornicles (siphunculi), abdominal tubes on the dorsal surface of their fifth abdominal segment, through which they exude droplets of a quick-hardening defensive fluid containing triacylglycerols, called cornicle wax. Other defensive compounds can also be produced by some species. Aphids have a tail-like protrusion called a cauda above their rectal apertures. They have lost their Malpighian tubules.

When host plant quality becomes poor or conditions become crowded, some aphid species produce winged offspring (alates) that can disperse to other food sources. The mouthparts or eyes can be small or missing in some species and forms.

==Diet==

Many aphid species are monophagous (that is, they feed on only one plant species). Others, like the green peach aphid, feed on hundreds of plant species across many families. About 10% of species feed on different plants at different times of the year.

A new host plant is chosen by a winged adult by using visual cues, followed by olfaction using the antennae; if the plant smells right, the next action is probing the surface upon landing. The stylus is inserted and saliva secreted, the sap is sampled, the xylem may be tasted and finally, the phloem is tested. Aphid saliva may inhibit phloem-sealing mechanisms and has pectinases that ease penetration. Non-host plants can be rejected at any stage of the probe, but the transfer of viruses occurs early in the investigation process, at the time of the introduction of the saliva, so non-host plants can become infected.

Aphids usually feed passively on sap of phloem vessels in plants, as do many of other hemipterans such as scale insects and cicadas. Once a phloem vessel is punctured, the sap, which is under pressure, is forced into the aphid&#x27;s food canal. Occasionally, aphids also ingest xylem sap, which is a more dilute diet than phloem sap as the concentrations of sugars and amino acids are 1% of those in the phloem. Xylem sap is under negative hydrostatic pressure and requires active sucking, suggesting an important role in aphid physiology. As xylem sap ingestion has been observed following a dehydration period, aphids are thought to consume xylem sap to replenish their water balance; the consumption of the dilute sap of xylem permitting aphids to rehydrate. However, recent data showed aphids consume more xylem sap than expected and they notably do so when they are not dehydrated and when their fecundity decreases. This suggests aphids, and potentially, all the phloem-sap feeding species of the order Hemiptera, consume xylem sap for reasons other than replenishing water balance. Although aphids passively take in phloem sap, which is under pressure, they can also draw fluid at negative or atmospheric pressure using the cibarial-pharyngeal pump mechanism present in their head.

Xylem sap consumption may be related to osmoregulation. High osmotic pressure in the stomach, caused by high sucrose concentration, can lead to water transfer from the hemolymph to the stomach, thus resulting in hyperosmotic stress and eventually to the death of the insect. Aphids avoid this fate by osmoregulating through several processes. Sucrose concentration is directly reduced by assimilating sucrose toward metabolism and by synthesizing oligosaccharides from several sucrose molecules, thus reducing the solute concentration and consequently the osmotic pressure. Oligosaccharides are then excreted through honeydew, explaining its high sugar concentrations, which can then be used by other animals such as ants. Furthermore, water is transferred from the hindgut, where osmotic pressure has already been reduced, to the stomach to dilute stomach content. Eventually, aphids consume xylem sap to dilute the stomach osmotic pressure. All these processes function synergetically, and enable aphids to feed on high-sucrose-concentration plant sap, as well as to adapt to varying sucrose concentrations.

Plant sap is an unbalanced diet for aphids, as it lacks essential amino acids, which aphids, like all animals, cannot synthesise, and possesses a high osmotic pressure due to its high sucrose concentration. Essential amino acids are provided to aphids by bacterial endosymbionts, harboured in special cells, bacteriocytes. These symbionts recycle glutamate, a metabolic waste of their host, into essential amino acids.

==Carotenoids and photoheterotrophy==

Some species of aphids have acquired the ability to synthesise red carotenoids by horizontal gene transfer from fungi. They are the only animals other than two-spotted spider mites and the oriental hornet with this capability. Using their carotenoids, aphids may well be able to absorb solar energy and convert it to a form that their cells can use, ATP. This is the only known example of photoheterotrophy in animals. The carotene pigments in aphids form a layer close to the surface of the cuticle, ideally placed to absorb sunlight. The excited carotenoids seem to reduce NAD to NADH which is oxidized in the mitochondria for energy.

==Reproduction==
The simplest reproductive strategy is for an aphid to have a single host all year round. On this it may alternate between sexual and asexual generations (holocyclic) or alternatively, all young may be produced by parthenogenesis, eggs never being laid (anholocyclic). Some species can have both holocyclic and anholocyclic populations under different circumstances but no known aphid species reproduce solely by sexual means. The alternation of sexual and asexual generations may have evolved repeatedly.

However, aphid reproduction is often more complex than this and involves migration between different host plants. In about 10% of species, there is an alternation between woody (primary hosts) on which the aphids overwinter and herbaceous (secondary) host plants, where they reproduce abundantly in the summer. A few species can produce a soldier caste, other species show extensive polyphenism under different environmental conditions and some can control the sex ratio of their offspring depending on external factors.

When a typical sophisticated reproductive strategy is used, only females are present in the population at the beginning of the seasonal cycle (although a few species of aphids have been found to have both male and female sexes at this time). The overwintering eggs that hatch in the spring result in females, called fundatrices (stem mothers). Reproduction typically does not involve males (parthenogenesis) and results in a live birth (viviparity). The live young are produced by pseudoplacental viviparity, which is the development of eggs, deficient in the yolk, the embryos fed by a tissue acting as a placenta. The young emerge from the mother soon after hatching.

Eggs are parthenogenetically produced without meiosis and the offspring are clonal to their mother, so they are all female (thelytoky). The embryos develop within the mothers&#x27; ovarioles, which then give birth to live (already hatched) first-instar female nymphs. As the eggs begin to develop immediately after ovulation, an adult female can house developing female nymphs which already have parthenogenetically developing embryos inside them (i.e. they are born pregnant). This telescoping of generations enables aphids to increase in number with great rapidity. The offspring resemble their parent in every way except size. Thus, a female&#x27;s diet can affect the body size and birth rate of more than two generations (daughters and granddaughters).

This process repeats itself throughout the summer, producing multiple generations that typically live 20 to 40 days. For example, some species of cabbage aphids (like &quot;Brevicoryne brassicae&quot;) can produce up to 41 generations of females in a season. Thus, one female hatched in spring can theoretically produce billions of descendants, were they all to survive.

In autumn, aphids reproduce sexually and lay eggs. Environmental factors such as a change in photoperiod and temperature, or perhaps a lower food quantity or quality, causes females to parthenogenetically produce sexual females and males. The males are genetically identical to their mothers except that, with the aphids&#x27; X0 sex-determination system, they have one fewer sex chromosome. These sexual aphids may lack wings or even mouthparts. Sexual females and males mate, and females lay eggs that develop outside the mother. The eggs survive the winter and hatch into winged (alate) or wingless females the following spring. This occurs in, for example, the life cycle of the rose aphid (&quot;Macrosiphum rosae&quot;), which may be considered typical of the family. However, in warm environments, such as in the tropics or a greenhouse, aphids may go on reproducing asexually for many years.

Aphids reproducing asexually by parthenogenesis can have genetically identical winged and non-winged female progeny. Control is complex; some aphids alternate during their life-cycles between genetic control (polymorphism) and environmental control (polyphenism) of production of winged or wingless forms. Winged progeny tend to be produced more abundantly under unfavorable or stressful conditions. Some species produce winged progeny in response to low food quality or quantity. e.g. when a host plant is starting to senesce. The winged females migrate to start new colonies on a new host plant. For example, the apple aphid (&quot;Aphis pomi&quot;), after producing many generations of wingless females gives rise to winged forms that fly to other branches or trees of its typical food plant. Aphids that are attacked by ladybugs, lacewings, parasitoid wasps, or other predators can change the dynamics of their progeny production. When aphids are attacked by these predators, alarm pheromones, in particular beta-farnesene, are released from the cornicles. These alarm pheromones cause several behavioral modifications that, depending on the aphid species, can include walking away and dropping off the host plant. Additionally, alarm pheromone perception can induce the aphids to produce winged progeny that can leave the host plant in search of a safer feeding site. Viral infections, which can be extremely harmful to aphids, can also lead to the production of winged offspring. For example, &quot;Densovirus&quot; infection has a negative impact on rosy apple aphid (&quot;Dysaphis plantaginea&quot;) reproduction, but contributes to the development of aphids with wings, which can transmit the virus more easily to new host plants. Additionally, symbiotic bacteria that live inside of the aphids can also alter aphid reproductive strategies based on the exposure to environmental stressors.

In the autumn, host-alternating (heteroecious) aphid species produce a special winged generation that flies to different host plants for the sexual part of the life cycle. Flightless female and male sexual forms are produced and lay eggs. Some species such as &quot;Aphis fabae&quot; (black bean aphid), &quot;Metopolophium dirhodum&quot; (rose-grain aphid), &quot;Myzus persicae&quot; (peach-potato aphid), and &quot;Rhopalosiphum padi&quot; (bird cherry-oat aphid) are serious pests. They overwinter on primary hosts on trees or bushes; in summer, they migrate to their secondary host on a herbaceous plant, often a crop, then the gynoparae return to the tree in autumn. Another example is the soybean aphid (&quot;Aphis glycines&quot;). As fall approaches, the soybean plants begin to senesce from the bottom upwards. The aphids are forced upwards and start to produce winged forms, first females and later males, which fly off to the primary host, buckthorn. Here they mate and overwinter as eggs.

==Ecology==

===Ant mutualism===

Some species of ants farm aphids, protecting them on the plants where they are feeding, and consuming the honeydew the aphids release from the terminations of their alimentary canals. This is a mutualistic relationship, with these dairying ants milking the aphids by stroking them with their antennae. Although mutualistic, the feeding behaviour of aphids is altered by ant attendance. Aphids attended by ants tend to increase the production of honeydew in smaller drops with a greater concentration of amino acids.

Some farming ant species gather and store the aphid eggs in their nests over the winter. In the spring, the ants carry the newly hatched aphids back to the plants. Some species of dairying ants (such as the European yellow meadow ant, &quot;Lasius flavus&quot;) manage large herds of aphids that feed on roots of plants in the ant colony. Queens leaving to start a new colony take an aphid egg to found a new herd of underground aphids in the new colony. These farming ants protect the aphids by fighting off aphid predators. Some bees in coniferous forests collect aphid honeydew to make forest honey.

An interesting variation in ant–aphid relationships involves lycaenid butterflies and &quot;Myrmica&quot; ants. For example, &quot;Niphanda fusca&quot; butterflies lay eggs on plants where ants tend herds of aphids. The eggs hatch as caterpillars which feed on the aphids. The ants do not defend the aphids from the caterpillars, since the caterpillars produce a pheromone which deceives the ants into treating them like ants, and carrying the caterpillars into their nest. Once there, the ants feed the caterpillars, which in return produce honeydew for the ants. When the caterpillars reach full size, they crawl to the colony entrance and form cocoons. After two weeks, the adult butterflies emerge and take flight. At this point, the ants attack the butterflies, but the butterflies have a sticky wool-like substance on their wings that disables the ants&#x27; jaws, allowing the butterflies to fly away without being harmed.

Another ant-mimicking gall aphid, &quot;Paracletus cimiciformis&quot; (Eriosomatinae), has evolved a complex double strategy involving two morphs of the same clone and &quot;Tetramorium&quot; ants. Aphids of the round morph cause the ants to farm them, as with many other aphids. The flat morph aphids are aggressive mimics with a &quot;wolf in sheep&#x27;s clothing&quot; strategy: they have hydrocarbons in their cuticle that mimic those of the ants, and the ants carry them into the brood chamber of the ants&#x27; nest and raise them like ant larvae. Once there, the flat morph aphids behave like predators, drinking the body fluids of ant larvae.

===Bacterial endosymbiosis===

Endosymbiosis with micro-organisms is common in insects, with more than 10% of insect species relying on intracellular bacteria for their development and survival. Aphids harbour a vertically transmitted (from parent to its offspring) obligate symbiosis with &quot;Buchnera aphidicola&quot;, the primary symbiont, inside specialized cells, the bacteriocytes. Five of the bacteria genes have been transferred to the aphid nucleus. The original association is estimated to have occurred in a common ancestor and enabled aphids to exploit a new ecological niche, feeding on phloem-sap of vascular plants. &quot;B. aphidicola&quot; provides its host with essential amino acids, which are present in low concentrations in plant sap. The metabolites from endosymbionts are also excreted in honeydew. The stable intracellular conditions, as well as the bottleneck effect experienced during the transmission of a few bacteria from the mother to each nymph, increase the probability of transmission of mutations and gene deletions. As a result, the size of the &quot;B. aphidicola&quot; genome is greatly reduced, compared to its putative ancestor. Despite the apparent loss of transcription factors in the reduced genome, gene expression is highly regulated, as shown by the ten-fold variation in expression levels between different genes under normal conditions. &quot;Buchnera aphidicola&quot; gene transcription, although not well understood, is thought to be regulated by a small number of global transcriptional regulators and/or through nutrient supplies from the aphid host.

Some aphid colonies also harbour secondary or facultative (optional extra) bacterial symbionts. These are vertically transmitted, and sometimes also horizontally (from one lineage to another and possibly from one species to another). So far, the role of only some of the secondary symbionts has been described; &quot;Regiella insecticola&quot; plays a role in defining the host-plant range, &quot;Hamiltonella defensa&quot; provides resistance to parasitoids but only when it is in turn infected by the bacteriophage APSE, and &quot;Serratia symbiotica&quot; prevents the deleterious effects of heat.

===Predators===
Aphids are eaten by many bird and insect predators. In a study on a farm in North Carolina, six species of passerine bird consumed nearly a million aphids per day between them, the top predators being the American goldfinch, with aphids forming 83% of its diet, and the vesper sparrow. Insects that attack aphids include the adults and larvae of predatory ladybirds, hoverfly larvae, parasitic wasps, aphid midge larvae, &quot;aphid lions&quot; (the larvae of green lacewings), and arachnids such as spiders. Among ladybirds, &quot;Myzia oblongoguttata&quot; is a dietary specialist which only feeds on conifer aphids, whereas &quot;Adalia bipunctata&quot; and &quot;Coccinella septempunctata&quot; are generalists, feeding on large numbers of species. The eggs are laid in batches, each female laying several hundred. Female hoverflies lay several thousand eggs. The adults feed on pollen and nectar but the larvae feed voraciously on aphids; &quot;Eupeodes corollae&quot; adjusts the number of eggs laid to the size of the aphid colony.

Aphids are often infected by bacteria, viruses, and fungi. They are affected by the weather, such as precipitation, temperature and wind. Fungi that attack aphids include &quot;Neozygites fresenii&quot;, &quot;Entomophthora&quot;, &quot;Beauveria bassiana&quot;, &quot;Metarhizium anisopliae&quot;, and entomopathogenic fungi such as &quot;Lecanicillium lecanii&quot;. Aphids brush against the microscopic spores. These stick to the aphid, germinate, and penetrate the aphid&#x27;s skin. The fungus grows in the aphid&#x27;s hemolymph. After about three days, the aphid dies and the fungus releases more spores into the air. Infected aphids are covered with a woolly mass that progressively grows thicker until the aphid is obscured. Often, the visible fungus is not the one that killed the aphid, but a secondary infection.

Aphids can be easily killed by unfavourable weather, such as late spring freezes. Excessive heat kills the symbiotic bacteria that some aphids depend on, which makes the aphids infertile. Rain prevents winged aphids from dispersing, and knocks aphids off plants and thus kills them from the impact or by starvation, but cannot be relied on for aphid control.

====Anti-predator defences====
Most aphids have little protection from predators. Some species interact with plant tissues forming a gall, an abnormal swelling of plant tissue. Aphids can live inside the gall, which provides protection from predators and the elements. A number of galling aphid species are known to produce specialised &quot;soldier&quot; forms, sterile nymphs with defensive features which defend the gall from invasion. For example, Alexander&#x27;s horned aphids are a type of soldier aphid that has a hard exoskeleton and pincer-like mouthparts. A woolly aphid, &quot;Colophina clematis&quot;, has first instar &quot;soldier&quot; nymphs that protect the aphid colony, killing larvae of ladybirds, hoverflies and the flower bug &quot;Anthocoris nemoralis&quot; by climbing on them and inserting their stylets.

Although aphids cannot fly for most of their life cycle, they can escape predators and accidental ingestion by herbivores by dropping off the plant onto the ground. Others species use the soil as a permanent protection, feeding on the vascular systems of roots and remaining underground all their lives. They are often attended by ants, for the honeydew they produce and are carried from plant to plant by the ants through their tunnels.

Some species of aphid, known as &quot;woolly aphids&quot; (Eriosomatinae), excrete a &quot;fluffy wax coating&quot; for protection. The cabbage aphid, &quot;Brevicoryne brassicae&quot;, sequesters secondary metabolites from its host, stores them and releases chemicals that produce a violent chemical reaction and strong mustard oil smell to repel predators. Peptides produced by aphids, Thaumatins, are thought to provide them with resistance to some fungi.

It was common at one time to suggest that the cornicles were the source of the honeydew, and this was even included in the &quot;Shorter Oxford English Dictionary&quot; and the 2008 edition of the &quot;World Book Encyclopedia&quot;. In fact, honeydew secretions are produced from the anus of the aphid, while cornicles mostly produce defensive chemicals such as waxes. There also is evidence of cornicle wax attracting aphid predators in some cases.

Some clones of &quot;Aphis craccivora&quot; are sufficiently toxic to the invasive and dominant predatory ladybird &quot;Harmonia axyridis&quot; to suppress it locally, favouring other ladybird species; the toxicity is in this case narrowly specific to the dominant predator species.

===Parasitoids===
Aphids are abundant and widespread, and serve as hosts to a large number of parasitoids, many of them being very small (c. long) parasitoid wasps.
One species, &quot;Aphis ruborum&quot;, for example, is host to at least 12 species of parasitoid wasps. Parasitoids have been investigated intensively as biological control agents, and many are used commercially for this purpose.

===Plant-aphid interactions===
Plants mount local and systemic defenses against aphid attack. Young leaves in some plants contain chemicals that discourage attack while the older leaves have lost this resistance, while in other plant species, resistance is acquired by older tissues and the young shoots are vulnerable. Volatile products from interplanted onions have been shown to prevent aphid attack on adjacent potato plants by encouraging the production of terpenoids, a benefit exploited in the traditional practice of companion planting, while plants neighboring infested plants showed increased root growth at the expense of the extension of aerial parts. The wild potato, &quot;Solanum berthaultii&quot;, produces an aphid alarm pheromone, (E)-β-farnesene, as an allomone, a pheromone to ward off attack; it effectively repels the aphid &quot;Myzus persicae&quot; at a range of up to 3 millimetres. &quot;S. berthaultii&quot; and other wild potato species have a further anti-aphid defence in the form of glandular hairs which, when broken by aphids, discharge a sticky liquid that can immobilise some 30% of the aphids infesting a plant.

Plants exhibiting aphid damage can have a variety of symptoms, such as decreased growth rates, mottled leaves, yellowing, stunted growth, curled leaves, browning, wilting, low yields, and death. The removal of sap creates a lack of vigor in the plant, and aphid saliva is toxic to plants. Aphids frequently transmit plant viruses to their hosts, such as to potatoes, cereals, sugarbeets, and citrus plants. 
There are two types of virus transmission between plant-aphid interactions: non-circulative transmission and circulative transmission. In non-circulative transmission, the virus attaches itself to the aphids mouthparts and is released when the aphids feed on a different plant. These non-circulatory transmitted viruses promotes rapid dispersion of the vector, or aphids. In circulative transmission, the virus is ingested and passes through the gut lining to enter the hemolymph, where it is then circulated throughout the entire body. After reaching the salivary glands, the virus is then released into the saliva upon transmission sites in plants. Circulatory transmitted viruses allows for long-term feeding by the aphids and increases the chances of being infected with the virus. 
The green peach aphid, &quot;Myzus persicae&quot;, is a vector for more than 110 plant viruses. Cotton aphids (&quot;Aphis gossypii&quot;) often infect sugarcane, papaya and peanuts with viruses. In plants which produce the phytoestrogen coumestrol, such as alfalfa, damage by aphids is linked with higher concentrations of coumestrol.

The coating of plants with honeydew can contribute to the spread of fungi which can damage plants. Honeydew produced by aphids has been observed to reduce the effectiveness of fungicides as well.

A hypothesis that insect feeding may improve plant fitness was floated in the mid-1970s by Owen and Wiegert. It was felt that the excess honeydew would nourish soil micro-organisms, including nitrogen fixers. In a nitrogen-poor environment, this could provide an advantage to an infested plant over an uninfested plant. However, this does not appear to be supported by observational evidence.

==Sociality==
Some aphids show some of the traits of eusociality, joining insects such as ants, bees, and termites. However, there are differences between these sexual social insects and the clonal aphids, which are all descended from a single female parthenogenetically and share an identical genome. About fifty species of aphid, scattered among the closely related, host-alternating lineages Eriosomatinae and Hormaphidinae, have some type of defensive morph. These are gall-creating species, with the colony living and feeding inside a gall that they form in the host&#x27;s tissues. Among the clonal population of these aphids, there may be several distinct morphs and this lays the foundation for a possible specialization of function, in this case, a defensive caste. The soldier morphs are mostly first and second instars with the third instar being involved in &quot;Eriosoma moriokense&quot; and only in &quot;Smythurodes betae&quot; are adult soldiers known. The hind legs of soldiers are clawed, heavily sclerotized and the stylets are robust making it possible to rupture and crush small predators. The larval soldiers are altruistic individuals, unable to advance to breeding adults but acting permanently in the interests of the colony. Another requirement for the development of sociality is provided by the gall, a colonial home to be defended by the soldiers.

The soldiers of gall-forming aphids also carry out the job of cleaning the gall. The honeydew secreted by the aphids is coated in a powdery wax to form &quot;liquid marbles&quot; that the soldiers roll out of the gall through small orifices. Aphids that form closed galls use the plant&#x27;s vascular system for their plumbing: the inner surfaces of the galls are highly absorbent and wastes are absorbed and carried away by the plant.

==Interactions with humans==
===Pest status===
About 5000 species of aphid have been described and of these, some 450 species have colonized food and fiber crops. As direct feeders on plant sap, they damage crops and reduce yields, but they have a greater impact by being vectors of plant viruses. The transmission of these viruses depends on the movements of aphids between different parts of a plant, between nearby plants, and further afield. In this respect, the probing behavior of an aphid tasting a host is more damaging than lengthy aphid feeding and reproduction by stay-put individuals. The movement of aphids influences the timing of virus epidemics. They are major pests of greenhouse crops and species often encountered in greenhouses include: green peach aphid (&quot;Myzus persicae&quot;), cotton or melon aphid (&quot;Aphis gossypii&quot;), potato aphid (&quot;Macrosiphum euphorbiae&quot;), foxglove aphid (&quot;Aulacorthum solani&quot;) and chrysanthemum aphid (&quot;Macrosiphoniella sanborni&quot;) and others, which cause leaf yellowing, distorted leaves, and plant stunting; the excreted honeydew is a growing medium for a number of fungal pathogens including black sooty molds from the genera &quot;Capnodium&quot;, &quot;Fumago&quot;, and &quot;Scorias&quot; which then infect leaves and inhibit growth by reducing photosynthesis.

Aphids, especially during large outbreaks, have been known to trigger allergic inhalant reactions in sensitive humans.

Dispersal can be by walking or flight, appetitive dispersal, or by migration. Winged aphids are weak fliers, lose their wings after a few days and only fly by day. Dispersal by flight is affected by the impact, air currents, gravity, precipitation, and other factors, or dispersal may be accidental, caused by the movement of plant materials, animals, farm machinery, vehicles, or aircraft.

===Control===
Insecticide control of aphids is difficult, as they breed rapidly, so even small areas missed may enable the population to recover promptly. Aphids may occupy the undersides of leaves where spray misses them, while systemic insecticides do not move satisfactorily into flower petals. Finally, some aphid species are resistant to common insecticide classes including carbamates, organophosphates, and pyrethroids.

For small backyard infestations, spraying plants thoroughly with a strong water jet every few days may be sufficient protection. An insecticidal soap solution can be an effective household remedy to control aphids, but it only kills aphids on contact and has no residual effect. Soap spray may damage plants, especially at higher concentrations or at temperatures above ; some plant species are sensitive to soap sprays.

Aphid populations can be sampled using yellow-pan or Moericke traps. These are yellow containers with water that attract aphids. Aphids respond positively to green and their attraction to yellow may not be a true colour preference but related to brightness. Their visual receptors peak in sensitivity from 440 to 480 nm and are insensitive in the red region. Moericke found that aphids avoided landing on white coverings placed on soil and were repelled even more by shiny aluminium surfaces. Integrated pest management of various species of aphids can be achieved using biological insecticides based on fungi such as &quot;Lecanicillium lecanii&quot;, &quot;Beauveria bassiana&quot; or &quot;Isaria fumosorosea&quot;. Fungi are the main pathogens of aphids; Entomophthorales can quickly cut aphid numbers in nature.

Aphids may also be controlled by the release of natural enemies, in particular lady beetles and parasitoid wasps. However, since adult lady beetles tend to fly away within 48 hours after release, without laying eggs, repeated applications of large numbers of lady beetles are needed to be effective. For example, one large, heavily infested rose bush may take two applications of 1500 beetles each.

The ability to produce allomones such as farnesene to repel and disperse aphids and to attract their predators has been experimentally transferred to transgenic &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; plants using an Eβf synthase gene in the hope that the approach could protect transgenic crops. Eβ farnesene has however found to be ineffective in crop situations although stabler synthetic forms help improve the effectiveness of control using fungal spores and insecticides through increased uptake caused by movements of aphids.

===In human culture===
Aphids are familiar to farmers and gardeners, mainly as pests. Peter Marren and Richard Mabey record that Gilbert White described an invading &quot;army&quot; of black aphids that arrived in his village of Selborne, Hampshire, England, in August 1774 in &quot;great clouds&quot;, covering every plant, while in the unusually hot summer of 1783, White found that honeydew was so abundant as to &quot;deface and destroy the beauties of my garden&quot;, though he thought the aphids were consuming rather than producing it.

Infestation of the Chinese sumac (&quot;Rhus chinensis&quot;) by Chinese sumac aphids (&quot;Schlechtendalia chinensis&quot;) can create &quot;Chinese galls&quot; which are valued as a commercial product. As &quot;Galla Chinensis&quot;, they are used in traditional Chinese medicine to treat coughs, diarrhea, night sweats, dysentery and to stop intestinal and uterine bleeding. Chinese galls are also an important source of tannins.

==See also==
* Aeroplankton
* Economic entomology
* Pineapple gall

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==


* Aphids of southeastern U.S. woody ornamentals
* &quot;Acyrthosiphon pisum&quot;, MetaPathogen – facts, life cycle, life cycle image
* Sequenced Genome of Pea Aphid, Agricultural Research Service
* Insect Olfaction of Plant Odour: Colorado Potato Beetle and Aphid Studies
* Asian woolly hackberry aphid, Center for Invasive Species Research

On the University of Florida / Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences &quot;Featured Creatures&quot; website:
* &quot;Aphis gossypii&quot;, melon or cotton aphid
* &quot;Aphis nerii&quot;, oleander aphid
* &quot;Hyadaphis coriandri&quot;, coriander aphid
* &quot; Longistigma caryae&quot;, giant bark aphid
* &quot;Myzus persicae&quot;, green peach aphid
* &quot;Sarucallis kahawaluokalani&quot;, crapemyrtle aphid
* &quot;Shivaphis celti&quot;, an Asian woolly hackberry aphid
* &quot;Toxoptera citricida&quot;, brown citrus aphid</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="0" end="6" title="Aphid" label="Aphids"/>
<link wikidata="Q76626" start="17" end="20" title="sap" label="sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="29" end="35" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="56" end="67" title="Taxonomic rank" label="superfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="68" end="78" title="Aphid" label="Aphidoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="101" end="109" title="Aphid" label="greenfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="114" end="122" title="Aphid" label="blackfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q846666" start="224" end="237" title="Eriosomatinae" label="woolly aphids"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="295" end="305" title="Viviparity" label="live birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q258362" start="316" end="322" title="Nymph (biology)" label="nymphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="347" end="355" title="Pregnancy" label="pregnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696816" start="387" end="410" title="telescoping generations" label="telescoping generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q213713" start="445" end="453" title="Developmental biology" label="Maturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="639" end="648" title="Temperate climate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="669" end="688" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="703" end="709" title="autumn" label="autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="751" end="754" title="egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q757163" start="890" end="901" title="woody plant" label="woody plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354085" start="1085" end="1094" title="Aphididae" label="Aphididae"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="1129" end="1133" title="Crop" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147096" start="1138" end="1148" title="fiber crop" label="fiber crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1181" end="1192" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="1197" end="1205" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q758780" start="1235" end="1243" title="gardener" label="gardener"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="1265" end="1268" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="1277" end="1288" title="mutualism (biology)" label="mutualistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q751760" start="1338" end="1346" title="Honeydew (secretion)" label="honeydew"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="1372" end="1380" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="1541" end="1548" title="Vector (epidemiology)" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495434" start="1553" end="1564" title="plant virus" label="plant virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731945" start="1654" end="1665" title="sooty mould" label="sooty mould"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="1727" end="1747" title="asexual reproduction" label="asexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="1899" end="1910" title="Insecticide" label="Insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610615" start="1963" end="1973" title="Pesticide resistance" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327" start="2191" end="2199" title="Coccinellidae" label="ladybugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q217905" start="2201" end="2209" title="hoverfly" label="hoverfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398438" start="2218" end="2232" title="parasitic wasp" label="parasitic wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779604" start="2235" end="2253" title="Aphidoletes aphidimyza" label="aphid midge larvae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12023" start="2255" end="2266" title="crab spider" label="crab spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712875" start="2269" end="2277" title="lacewing" label="lacewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497558" start="2290" end="2312" title="entomopathogenic fungus" label="entomopathogenic fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q525309" start="2317" end="2343" title="integrated pest management" label="integrated pest management"/>
<link wikidata="Q116890" start="2359" end="2382" title="biological pest control" label="biological pest control"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="2461" end="2471" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="2513" end="2526" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="2669" end="2690" title="Cosmopolitan distribution" label="distributed worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="2715" end="2729" title="temperate zone" label="temperate zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="2752" end="2756" title="taxa" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="2803" end="2810" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q778143" start="2889" end="2906" title="Biological dispersal" label="passive dispersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967238" start="3066" end="3086" title="Nasonovia ribisnigri" label="Nasonovia ribisnigri"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3126" end="3137" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="3141" end="3149" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="3203" end="3238" title="Invasive species" label="been spread by human transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="3295" end="3307" title="Cosmopolitan distribution" label="cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562960" start="3400" end="3408" title="Adelgidae" label="adelgids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671139" start="3413" end="3425" title="Phylloxeridae" label="phylloxerans"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="3451" end="3466" title="Common descent" label="common ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q642169" start="3481" end="3494" title="Cisuralian" label="Early Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q422417" start="3536" end="3547" title="Cordaitales" label="Cordaitales"/>
<link wikidata="Q157114" start="3551" end="3562" title="Cycadophyta" label="Cycadophyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="3639" end="3645" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3670" end="3690" title="Triassoaphis cubitus" label="Triassoaphis cubitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="3706" end="3714" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="3790" end="3795" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q52382215" start="3821" end="3829" title="Ole Engel Heie" label="Ole Heie"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="3947" end="3955" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="3957" end="3967" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="3983" end="3991" title="Tertiary" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q516481" start="4006" end="4018" title="Baltic amber" label="Baltic amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="4148" end="4158" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281331" start="4324" end="4335" title="polyphagous" label="polyphagous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281331" start="4342" end="4351" title="monophagy" label="monophagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562960" start="4421" end="4430" title="Adelgidae" label="Adelgidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="4440" end="4447" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q157160" start="4496" end="4509" title="Podocarpaceae" label="Podocarpaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q217697" start="4513" end="4526" title="Araucariaceae" label="Araucariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="4772" end="4785" title="derived trait" label="derived trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582895" start="4791" end="4800" title="Lachninae" label="Lachninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326689" start="5121" end="5134" title="Lower Miocene" label="Lower Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5141" end="5157" title="Palaeophylloxera" label="Palaeophylloxera"/>
<link wikidata="Q621840" start="5299" end="5313" title="Sternorrhyncha" label="Sternorrhyncha"/>
<link wikidata="Q209602" start="5335" end="5341" title="scale insect" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q519259" start="5343" end="5351" title="Psylloidea" label="psyllids"/>
<link wikidata="Q202890" start="5363" end="5378" title="Auchenorrhyncha" label="Auchenorrhyncha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947892" start="5380" end="5386" title="cicada" label="cicada"/>
<link wikidata="Q244452" start="5389" end="5399" title="leafhopper" label="leafhopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q999560" start="5402" end="5412" title="treehopper" label="treehopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570985" start="5415" end="5426" title="planthopper" label="planthopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q27191" start="5453" end="5464" title="Heteroptera" label="Heteroptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q26371" start="5514" end="5523" title="true bugs" label="true bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671139" start="5804" end="5817" title="Phylloxeridae" label="Phylloxeridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q846666" start="6139" end="6152" title="Eriosomatidae" label="Eriosomatidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354085" start="6370" end="6379" title="Aphididae" label="Aphididae"/>
<link wikidata="Q367315" start="6486" end="6498" title="phylloxera" label="phylloxerids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307559" start="6668" end="6682" title="Phylloxeroidea" label="Phylloxeroidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q751760" start="6862" end="6870" title="honeydew (secretion)" label="honeydew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405737" start="6874" end="6882" title="cornicle" label="cornicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599224" start="6975" end="6999" title="Great French Wine Blight" label="Great French Wine Blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q253140" start="7025" end="7036" title="viticulture" label="viticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="7737" end="7746" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531856" start="7891" end="7903" title="endosymbiont" label="endosymbiont"/>
<link wikidata="Q383453" start="7949" end="7957" title="Buchnera (bacterium)" label="Buchnera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834381" start="8034" end="8056" title="Vertical transmission (symbiont)" label="transmitted vertically"/>
<link wikidata="Q942537" start="8454" end="8466" title="compound eye" label="compound eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629472" start="8616" end="8622" title="stylet (anatomy)" label="stylet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233438" start="8655" end="8662" title="Rostrum (anatomy)" label="rostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q920112" start="8706" end="8714" title="Mandible (insect mouthpart)" label="mandible"/>
<link wikidata="Q350956" start="8719" end="8726" title="Maxilla (arthropod mouthpart)" label="maxilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133438" start="8809" end="8814" title="Arthropod leg" label="tarsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405737" start="8952" end="8974" title="cornicle" label="cornicles (siphunculi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q186319" start="9130" end="9145" title="triacylglycerol" label="triacylglycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q725889" start="9334" end="9352" title="Malpighian tubule system" label="Malpighian tubules"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708806" start="9467" end="9472" title="alate" label="alate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="9766" end="9774" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q76626" start="10511" end="10514" title="sap" label="sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q185138" start="10518" end="10524" title="phloem" label="phloem"/>
<link wikidata="Q122811" start="10757" end="10762" title="xylem" label="xylem"/>
<link wikidata="Q909456" start="11809" end="11823" title="osmoregulation" label="osmoregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q320607" start="12216" end="12231" title="oligosaccharide" label="oligosaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="12254" end="12262" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766006" start="12535" end="12542" title="hindgut" label="hindgut"/>
<link wikidata="Q245282" start="12936" end="12956" title="essential amino acid" label="essential amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q193135" start="13031" end="13047" title="osmotic pressure" label="osmotic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="13064" end="13071" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531856" start="13145" end="13158" title="endosymbionts" label="endosymbionts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878492" start="13188" end="13200" title="bacteriocyte" label="bacteriocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q191907" start="13406" end="13416" title="carotenoid" label="carotenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="13421" end="13445" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="13451" end="13456" title="Fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335549" start="13495" end="13519" title="two-spotted spider mites" label="two-spotted spider mites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427593" start="13528" end="13543" title="oriental hornet" label="oriental hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="13689" end="13692" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473042" start="13728" end="13744" title="photoheterotroph" label="photoheterotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q190156" start="13762" end="13770" title="carotene" label="carotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="13921" end="13925" title="NADH" label="NADH"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="13951" end="13963" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="14116" end="14122" title="Sexual reproduction" label="sexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="14207" end="14222" title="parthenogenesis" label="parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="14224" end="14227" title="egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q757163" start="14671" end="14676" title="Woody plant" label="woody"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="14728" end="14738" title="Herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770571" start="14883" end="14894" title="polyphenism" label="polyphenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="15413" end="15428" title="parthenogenesis" label="parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="15459" end="15469" title="viviparity" label="viviparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="15739" end="15746" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291674" start="15817" end="15826" title="thelytoky" label="thelytoky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358866" start="15874" end="15883" title="ovarioles" label="ovarioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="15939" end="15945" title="instar" label="instar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696816" start="16176" end="16202" title="telescoping generations" label="telescoping of generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634837" start="16625" end="16646" title="Brevicoryne brassicae" label="Brevicoryne brassicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="16865" end="16873" title="oviparity" label="lay eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q259028" start="16917" end="16928" title="photoperiod" label="photoperiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="16933" end="16944" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q607251" start="17151" end="17178" title="X0 sex-determination system" label="X0 sex-determination system"/>
<link wikidata="Q667636" start="17200" end="17214" title="sex chromosome" label="sex chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q513359" start="17489" end="17499" title="Biological life cycle" label="life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q838294" start="17507" end="17517" title="rose aphid" label="rose aphid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="17644" end="17651" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="17657" end="17667" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="17757" end="17772" title="parthenogenesis" label="parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="17934" end="17946" title="Polymorphism (biology)" label="polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770571" start="17975" end="17986" title="polyphenism" label="polyphenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070979" start="18244" end="18251" title="senesce" label="senesce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382963" start="18340" end="18351" title="apple aphid" label="apple aphid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327" start="18549" end="18557" title="Coccinellidae" label="ladybugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q156438" start="18559" end="18568" title="Neuroptera" label="lacewings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398438" start="18570" end="18585" title="parasitoid wasp" label="parasitoid wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q104102588" start="18737" end="18751" title="Farnesene" label="beta-farnesene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405737" start="18775" end="18783" title="cornicle" label="cornicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259352" start="19230" end="19240" title="Ambidensovirus" label="Densovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747160" start="19659" end="19671" title="heteroecious" label="heteroecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532970" start="19892" end="19903" title="Aphis fabae" label="Aphis fabae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583201" start="19936" end="19958" title="Metopolophium dirhodum" label="Metopolophium dirhodum"/>
<link wikidata="Q668208" start="19991" end="20005" title="Myzus persicae" label="Myzus persicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330572" start="20044" end="20062" title="Rhopalosiphum padi" label="Rhopalosiphum padi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657935" start="20322" end="20335" title="soybean aphid" label="soybean aphid"/>
<link wikidata="Q79190" start="20578" end="20587" title="buckthorn" label="buckthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="20679" end="20682" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="20806" end="20818" title="Rectum" label="terminations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="20828" end="20845" title="Gastrointestinal tract" label="alimentary canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="20857" end="20881" title="Mutualism (biology)" label="mutualistic relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q204664" start="20955" end="20963" title="antenna (biology)" label="antennae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061241" start="21396" end="21413" title="yellow meadow ant" label="yellow meadow ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="21711" end="21714" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="21719" end="21736" title="coniferous forest" label="coniferous forest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21769" end="21781" title="Honey#Honeydew honey" label="forest honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q158717" start="21845" end="21865" title="Lycaenidae" label="lycaenid butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q134468" start="21876" end="21883" title="Myrmica" label="Myrmica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971626" start="21915" end="21929" title="Niphanda fusca" label="Niphanda fusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="22018" end="22029" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="22147" end="22156" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="22431" end="22437" title="Cocoon (silk)" label="cocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046465" start="22723" end="22736" title="ant mimicry" label="ant-mimicking"/>
<link wikidata="Q10617188" start="22755" end="22778" title="Paracletus cimiciformis" label="Paracletus cimiciformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132570" start="22889" end="22900" title="Tetramorium" label="Tetramorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692283" start="23021" end="23038" title="aggressive mimicry" label="aggressive mimics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164496" start="23052" end="23081" title="wolf in sheep&amp;#x27;s clothing" label="wolf in sheep&amp;#x27;s clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531856" start="23399" end="23412" title="Endosymbiosis" label="Endosymbiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="23418" end="23432" title="micro-organism" label="micro-organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="23643" end="23652" title="symbiosis" label="symbiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q383453" start="23664" end="23683" title="Buchnera aphidicola" label="Buchnera aphidicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878492" start="23743" end="23756" title="bacteriocytes" label="bacteriocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="23941" end="23957" title="ecological niche" label="ecological niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="24568" end="24588" title="transcription factor" label="transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="24613" end="24628" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="24787" end="24805" title="gene transcription" label="gene transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q16989032" start="25291" end="25311" title="Regiella insecticola" label="Regiella insecticola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936284" start="25371" end="25391" title="Hamiltonella defensa" label="Hamiltonella defensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="25477" end="25490" title="bacteriophage" label="bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992527" start="25507" end="25526" title="Serratia symbiotica" label="Serratia symbiotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="25668" end="25682" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="25699" end="25713" title="Passerine" label="passerine bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075861" start="25797" end="25815" title="American goldfinch" label="American goldfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q776555" start="25862" end="25876" title="vesper sparrow" label="vesper sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q217905" start="25959" end="25967" title="hoverfly" label="hoverfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="25986" end="25990" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779604" start="25993" end="26004" title="aphid midge" label="aphid midge"/>
<link wikidata="Q623727" start="26052" end="26067" title="green lacewings" label="green lacewings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="26092" end="26098" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q970279" start="26124" end="26144" title="Myzia oblongoguttata" label="Myzia oblongoguttata"/>
<link wikidata="Q233024" start="26225" end="26242" title="Adalia bipunctata" label="Adalia bipunctata"/>
<link wikidata="Q159543" start="26259" end="26284" title="Coccinella septempunctata" label="Coccinella septempunctata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758301" start="26542" end="26559" title="Eupeodes corollae" label="Eupeodes corollae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="26661" end="26669" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="26671" end="26676" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="26733" end="26746" title="precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="26764" end="26768" title="wind" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26809" end="26828" title="Neozygites fresenii" label="Neozygites fresenii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532108" start="26842" end="26855" title="Entomophthora" label="Entomophthora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345333" start="26869" end="26887" title="Beauveria bassiana" label="Beauveria bassiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q134941" start="26901" end="26923" title="Metarhizium anisopliae" label="Metarhizium anisopliae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511477" start="26972" end="26993" title="Lecanicillium lecanii" label="Lecanicillium lecanii"/>
<link wikidata="Q485675" start="27157" end="27166" title="hemolymph" label="hemolymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q224107" start="27951" end="27955" title="gall" label="gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="28345" end="28356" title="exoskeleton" label="exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069045" start="28361" end="28367" title="pincer (biology)" label="pincer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10457194" start="28407" end="28425" title="Colophina clematis" label="Colophina clematis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10413188" start="28573" end="28593" title="Anthocoris nemoralis" label="Anthocoris nemoralis"/>
<link wikidata="Q846666" start="29148" end="29161" title="Eriosomatinae" label="Eriosomatinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634837" start="29246" end="29267" title="Brevicoryne brassicae" label="Brevicoryne brassicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="29381" end="29398" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q910958" start="29410" end="29421" title="mustard oil" label="mustard oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q24775038" start="29477" end="29486" title="Thaumatin" label="Thaumatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145790" start="29678" end="29711" title="Shorter Oxford English Dictionary" label="Shorter Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565203" start="29752" end="29775" title="World Book Encyclopedia" label="World Book Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q425522" start="29958" end="29984" title="Kairomone" label="attracting aphid predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q14085342" start="30022" end="30038" title="Aphis craccivora" label="Aphis craccivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q499627" start="30122" end="30139" title="Harmonia axyridis" label="Harmonia axyridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q595663" start="30380" end="30390" title="parasitoid" label="parasitoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398438" start="30433" end="30448" title="parasitoid wasp" label="parasitoid wasp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30470" end="30483" title="Aphis ruborum" label="Aphis ruborum"/>
<link wikidata="Q426694" start="31145" end="31154" title="terpenoid" label="terpenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935508" start="31208" end="31226" title="companion planting" label="companion planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027039" start="31370" end="31389" title="Solanum berthaultii" label="Solanum berthaultii"/>
<link wikidata="Q104102588" start="31438" end="31447" title="farnesene" label="farnesene"/>
<link wikidata="Q424556" start="31455" end="31463" title="allomone" label="allomone"/>
<link wikidata="Q668208" start="31535" end="31549" title="Myzus persicae" label="Myzus persicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495434" start="32148" end="32159" title="plant virus" label="plant virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="32189" end="32195" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="32199" end="32205" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="32208" end="32217" title="sugarbeet" label="sugarbeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="32224" end="32237" title="citrus" label="citrus plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324240" start="32448" end="32458" title="Insect mouthparts" label="mouthparts"/>
<link wikidata="Q485675" start="32710" end="32719" title="hemolymph" label="hemolymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q134938" start="32796" end="32811" title="salivary glands" label="salivary glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q668208" start="33056" end="33070" title="Myzus persicae" label="Myzus persicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="33179" end="33188" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="33190" end="33196" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="33201" end="33207" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q908865" start="33265" end="33275" title="coumestrol" label="coumestrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="34008" end="34019" title="eusociality" label="eusociality"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="34061" end="34068" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="34249" end="34255" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q846666" start="34350" end="34363" title="Eriosomatinae" label="Eriosomatinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16527867" start="34368" end="34381" title="Hormaphidinae" label="Hormaphidinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q48969641" start="35492" end="35506" title="liquid marbles" label="liquid marbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="36044" end="36051" title="vector (disease)" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="36458" end="36468" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q668208" start="36554" end="36568" title="Myzus persicae" label="Myzus persicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557995" start="36606" end="36620" title="Aphis gossypii" label="Aphis gossypii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274988" start="36649" end="36671" title="Macrosiphum euphorbiae" label="Macrosiphum euphorbiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871755" start="36702" end="36720" title="Aulacorthum solani" label="Aulacorthum solani"/>
<link wikidata="Q10574440" start="36759" end="36784" title="Macrosiphoniella sanborni" label="Macrosiphoniella sanborni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070670" start="36995" end="37004" title="Capnodium" label="Capnodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10500030" start="37018" end="37024" title="Fumago" label="Fumago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435343" start="37042" end="37049" title="Scorias" label="Scorias"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="37112" end="37126" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="37655" end="37666" title="Insecticide" label="Insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="37870" end="37890" title="systemic insecticide" label="systemic insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610615" start="37971" end="38010" title="insecticide resistance" label="resistant to common insecticide classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q422899" start="38021" end="38030" title="carbamate" label="carbamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q411097" start="38033" end="38048" title="organophosphate" label="organophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q745766" start="38055" end="38065" title="pyrethroid" label="pyrethroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037262" start="38201" end="38218" title="insecticidal soap" label="insecticidal soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q88294094" start="38544" end="38552" title="Volker Moericke" label="Moericke"/>
<link wikidata="Q525309" start="38984" end="39010" title="Integrated pest management" label="Integrated pest management"/>
<link wikidata="Q10614986" start="39184" end="39202" title="Isaria fumosorosea" label="Isaria fumosorosea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257561" start="39250" end="39266" title="Entomophthorales" label="Entomophthorales"/>
<link wikidata="Q116890" start="39328" end="39372" title="Biological pest control" label="controlled by the release of natural enemies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327" start="39388" end="39400" title="lady beetles" label="lady beetles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398438" start="39405" end="39420" title="parasitoid wasp" label="parasitoid wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q104102588" start="39750" end="39759" title="farnesene" label="farnesene"/>
<link wikidata="Q430117" start="39859" end="39869" title="transgenic" label="transgenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="39876" end="39896" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q111191772" start="40322" end="40334" title="Peter Marren" label="Peter Marren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327578" start="40339" end="40352" title="Richard Mabey" label="Richard Mabey"/>
<link wikidata="Q772840" start="40365" end="40378" title="Gilbert White" label="Gilbert White"/>
<link wikidata="Q748117" start="40465" end="40473" title="Selborne" label="Selborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="40475" end="40493" title="Hampshire, England" label="Hampshire, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q163116" start="40821" end="40835" title="Rhus chinensis" label="Rhus chinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10663703" start="40874" end="40899" title="Schlechtendalia chinensis" label="Schlechtendalia chinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="41035" end="41063" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35805" start="41073" end="41078" title="cough" label="cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="41081" end="41089" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="41105" end="41114" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="41206" end="41212" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443083" start="41231" end="41243" title="Aeroplankton" label="Aeroplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333460" start="41246" end="41265" title="Economic entomology" label="Economic entomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195442" start="41268" end="41282" title="Pineapple gall" label="Pineapple gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="41680" end="41701" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969547" start="41704" end="41747" title="Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences" label="Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162297" wikidata="Q166280" url="?curid=162297" title="S.A. (corporation)">
<text>The abbreviation S.A. or SA designates a type of limited company in certain countries, most of which have a Romance language as their official language and operate a derivative of the 1804, Napoleonic, civil law. Originally, shareholders could be anonymous and collect dividends by surrendering coupons attached to their share certificates. Dividends were paid to whomever held the certificate. Since share certificates could be transferred privately, corporate management would not necessarily know who owned its shares – nor did anyone but the holders.

As with bearer bonds, anonymous unregistered share ownership and dividend collection enabled money laundering, tax evasion, and concealed business transactions in general, so governments passed laws to audit the practice. Nowadays, shareholders of S.A.s are not anonymous, though shares can still be held by a holding company to obscure the beneficiary.

==Variations==
===Abbreviation===
S.A. can be an abbreviation of:
* in Galician and European Portuguese (used in Portugal, Timor Leste, Macao, and Lusophone Africa)
** Equivalent as in Chinese for Macau
* in Brazilian Portuguese (used in Brazil)
* in Asturian and Leonese
* in Catalan
* in French (as used in French-speaking countries such as France (including French Polynesia, and New Caledonia) and Monaco; also in partially Francophone countries and/or nations with French as one of their official languages like Belgium (where it is equivalent to a ), Luxembourg (also identifiable in Luxembourgish as ), Switzerland (where it is equivalent to an or a ), as well as Haiti, Lebanon, and such African countries as Egypt, Tunisia, Morocco, Mauritania, Senegal, Ivory Coast, and Algeria)
* in Canadian French
* in Swiss Italian (in Italy replaced by , S.p.A., since 1942)
* or in Spanish
** Mexican law also takes into account the variability of the corporate stock, resulting in most S.A. turning into (S.A. de C.V.), or (S.A.B. de C.V.) for publicly traded companies.
** Mexico also has , which is analogous to the limited liability company.
* in Polish
* in Romanian

&quot;SA&quot; is part of the name of lots of corporations named after an acronym: some examples are Cepsa, originally , &quot;Spanish petroleum company, S.A.&quot;; Sabena, originally , &quot;Belgian S.A. of exploitation of air navigation&quot;.

===Literal meaning===
It is equivalent in literal meaning and function to:
* (N.V.) in Dutch
* (P.T. Tbk.) in Indonesia
* (Bhd.) in Malaysia
* (A.Ş.) or &quot;Anonim Ortaklık&quot; (A.O.) in Turkish
* (C.A.) in Ecuador 
* (C.A.) in Venezuela 

* (, A.E.) in Greek is usually translated into S.A. in English and foreign languages.

===Function===
It is equivalent in function to:
* in Albanian
* , () in Arabic
* (d.d.) in Croatian and Bosnian
* , (АД) in Bulgarian
* , (АД) in Macedonian
* (a.s.) in Czech
* (A/S) in Danish
* (S.A.E.) or (, , abbreviated ) in Egypt
* (Oy) in Finnish
* (AS) in Estonian
* (AG) in German
* (Rt) in Hungarian
* (Hf) in Icelandic
* Private Limited (Pvt. Ltd.) in India and Pakistan
* Public limited company (plc) in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Malta, and several Commonwealth countries
* (K.K.) or in Japan
* (J) or in Korea
* in Laos
* (AB) in Lithuanian
* (AS) in Latvian
* (AS) in Norwegian
* (SA) in Polish
* , (AO) in Russian
* , (d.d.), or , (a.d.) in Serbian
* Private Limited (Pte. Ltd.) in Singapore
* (a.s.) in Slovak
* (d.d.) in Slovene
* (AB) in Swedish
* Incorporated in the Philippines (formerly used Spanish S.A., corporate structures were Americanized during the US colonial period)
* , (AT) in Ukrainian
* Publicly traded company (&quot;public company&quot;) or Incorporated (Inc.) in the United States, though the former term does not appear in the names of business entities
* (C.A.) in Andorra
* or (S.A.C.; ) in Cambodia
* in Vietnam
* in Chinese

== See also ==
* Président-directeur général (France)
* AG
* 

== References ==

==External links==
* Global Witness on Anonymous Companies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q166280" start="17" end="21" title="S.A. (corporation)" label="S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q166280" start="25" end="27" title="S.A. (corporation)" label="SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q33685" start="49" end="64" title="limited company" label="limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="108" end="124" title="Romance languages" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="202" end="211" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="225" end="236" title="shareholder" label="shareholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="269" end="277" title="dividend" label="dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q11794832" start="295" end="301" title="coupon (finance)" label="coupon"/>
<link wikidata="Q855349" start="321" end="339" title="stock certificate" label="share certificates"/>
<link wikidata="Q259038" start="564" end="575" title="bearer bond" label="bearer bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="649" end="665" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="667" end="678" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="866" end="881" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="982" end="990" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q922399" start="995" end="1014" title="European Portuguese" label="European Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1024" end="1032" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="1034" end="1045" title="Timor Leste" label="Timor Leste"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="1047" end="1052" title="Macao" label="Macao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360686" start="1058" end="1074" title="Lusophone Africa" label="Lusophone Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q750553" start="1119" end="1139" title="Brazilian Portuguese" label="Brazilian Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1149" end="1155" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q29507" start="1162" end="1170" title="Asturian language" label="Asturian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34108" start="1175" end="1182" title="Leonese language" label="Leonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="1188" end="1195" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1201" end="1207" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="1220" end="1245" title="Francophonie" label="French-speaking countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1254" end="1260" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="1272" end="1288" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="1294" end="1307" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="1313" end="1319" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1428" end="1435" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="1468" end="1478" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="1501" end="1514" title="Luxembourgish" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1521" end="1532" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="1582" end="1587" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="1589" end="1596" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1628" end="1633" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="1635" end="1642" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1644" end="1651" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="1653" end="1663" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="1665" end="1672" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="1674" end="1685" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="1691" end="1698" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="1705" end="1720" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q672147" start="1726" end="1739" title="Swiss Italian" label="Swiss Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1792" end="1799" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1803" end="1810" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="1955" end="1980" title="Public company" label="publicly traded companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q149789" start="2029" end="2054" title="limited liability company" label="limited liability company"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="2061" end="2067" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="2073" end="2081" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="2157" end="2164" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q608819" start="2184" end="2189" title="Cepsa" label="Cepsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q141146" start="2249" end="2255" title="Sabena" label="Sabena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2418" end="2423" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="2441" end="2450" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="2463" end="2471" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="2522" end="2529" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="2542" end="2549" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="2563" end="2572" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="2589" end="2594" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="2715" end="2723" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2734" end="2740" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="2753" end="2761" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="2766" end="2773" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="2786" end="2795" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="2808" end="2818" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="2831" end="2836" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="2848" end="2854" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2891" end="2896" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="2907" end="2914" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="2925" end="2933" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2944" end="2950" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="2961" end="2970" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="2981" end="2990" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3024" end="3029" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="3034" end="3042" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225895" start="3045" end="3067" title="Public limited company" label="Public limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3081" end="3095" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="3097" end="3104" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="3106" end="3111" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3125" end="3137" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="3163" end="3168" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="3181" end="3186" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="3192" end="3196" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="3207" end="3217" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="3228" end="3235" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="3246" end="3255" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="3266" end="3272" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="3285" end="3292" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="3320" end="3327" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="3361" end="3370" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="3383" end="3389" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="3402" end="3409" title="Slovenian language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="3420" end="3427" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="3430" end="3442" title="Corporation" label="Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3450" end="3461" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042084" start="3541" end="3559" title="Insular Government of the Philippine Islands" label="US colonial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="3573" end="3582" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="3585" end="3608" title="Publicly traded company" label="Publicly traded company"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="3641" end="3653" title="Corporation" label="Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="3768" end="3775" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="3795" end="3803" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="3809" end="3816" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="3822" end="3829" title="Standard Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q428322" start="3848" end="3884" title="Président-directeur général (France)" label="Président-directeur général (France)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084735" start="3887" end="3889" title="Aktiengesellschaft" label="AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108981" start="3933" end="3947" title="Global Witness" label="Global Witness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162300" wikidata="Q173242" url="?curid=162300" title="Woodcut">
<text>Woodcut is a relief printing technique in printmaking. An artist carves an image into the surface of a block of wood—typically with gouges—leaving the printing parts level with the surface while removing the non-printing parts. Areas that the artist cuts away carry no ink, while characters or images at surface level carry the ink to produce the print. The block is cut along the wood grain (unlike wood engraving, where the block is cut in the end-grain). The surface is covered with ink by rolling over the surface with an ink-covered roller (brayer), leaving ink upon the flat surface but not in the non-printing areas.

Multiple colours can be printed by keying the paper to a frame around the woodblocks (using a different block for each colour). The art of carving the woodcut can be called xylography, but this is rarely used in English for images alone, although that term and &quot;xylographic&quot; are used in connection with block books, which are small books containing text and images in the same block. They became popular in Europe during the latter half of the 15th century. A single-sheet woodcut is a woodcut presented as a single stand alone image or print, as opposed to a book illustration.

Since its origins in China, the practice of woodcut has spread around the world from Europe to other parts of Asia, and to Latin America.

==Division of labour==
In both Europe and East Asia, traditionally the artist only designed the woodcut, and the block-carving was left to specialist craftsmen, called or &quot;block-cutters&quot;, some of whom became well known in their own right. Among these, the best-known are the 16th-century Hieronymus Andreae (who also used &quot;Formschneider&quot; as his surname), Hans Lützelburger and Jost de Negker, all of whom ran workshops and also operated as printers and publishers. The in turn handed the block on to specialist printers. There were further specialists who made the blank blocks.

This is why woodcuts are sometimes described by museums or books as &quot;designed by&quot; rather than &quot;by&quot; an artist; but most authorities do not use this distinction. The division of labour had the advantage that a trained artist could adapt to the medium relatively easily, without needing to learn the use of woodworking tools.

There were various methods of transferring the artist&#x27;s drawn design onto the block for the cutter to follow. Either the drawing would be made directly onto the block (often whitened first), or a drawing on paper was glued to the block. Either way, the artist&#x27;s drawing was destroyed during the cutting process. Other methods were used, including tracing.

In both Europe and East Asia in the early 20th century, some artists began to do the whole process themselves. In Japan, this movement was called , as opposed to , a movement that retained traditional methods. In the West, many artists used the easier technique of linocut instead.

==Methods of printing==
Compared to intaglio techniques like etching and engraving, only low pressure is required to print. As a relief method, it is only necessary to ink the block and bring it into firm and even contact with the paper or cloth to achieve an acceptable print. In Europe, a variety of woods including boxwood and several nut and fruit woods like pear or cherry were commonly used; in Japan, the wood of the cherry species &quot;Prunus serrulata&quot; was preferred.

There are three methods of printing to consider:

* Stamping: Used for many fabrics and most early European woodcuts (1400–40). These were printed by putting the paper/fabric on a table or other flat surface with the block on top, and pressing or hammering the back of the block.
* Rubbing: Apparently the most common method for Far Eastern printing on paper at all times. Used for European woodcuts and block-books later in the fifteenth century, and very widely for cloth. Also used for many Western woodcuts from about 1910 to the present. The block goes face up on a table, with the paper or fabric on top. The back is rubbed with a &quot;hard pad, a flat piece of wood, a burnisher, or a leather frotton&quot;. A traditional Japanese tool used for this is called a &quot;baren&quot;. Later in Japan, complex wooden mechanisms were used to help hold the woodblock perfectly still and to apply proper pressure in the printing process. This was especially helpful once multiple colours were introduced and had to be applied with precision atop previous ink layers.
* Printing in a press: presses only seem to have been used in Asia in relatively recent times. Printing-presses were used from about 1480 for European prints and block-books, and before that for woodcut book illustrations. Simple weighted presses may have been used in Europe before the print-press, but firm evidence is lacking. A deceased Abbess of Mechelen in 1465 had &quot;unum instrumentum ad imprintendum scripturas et ymagines ... cum 14 aliis lapideis printis&quot;—&quot;an instrument for printing texts and pictures ... with 14 stones for printing&quot;. This is probably too early to be a Gutenberg-type printing press in that location.

==History==

Woodcut originated in China in antiquity as a method of printing on textiles and later on paper. The earliest woodblock printed fragments to survive are from China, from the Han dynasty (before 220), and are of silk printed with flowers in three colours. &quot;In the 13th century the Chinese technique of blockprinting was transmitted to Europe.&quot; Paper arrived in Europe, also from China via al-Andalus, slightly later, and was being manufactured in Italy by the end of the thirteenth century, and in Burgundy and Germany by the end of the fourteenth.

In Europe, woodcut is the oldest technique used for old master prints, developing about 1400, by using, on paper, existing techniques for printing. One of the more ancient single-leaf woodcuts on paper that can be seen today is &quot;The Fire Madonna&quot; (&quot;Madonna del Fuoco&quot;, in the Italian language), in the Cathedral of Forlì, in Italy. Initially religious subjects, often very small indeed, were by far the most common. Many were sold to pilgrims at their destination, and glued to walls in homes, inside the lids of boxes, and sometimes even included in bandages over wounds, which was superstitiously believed to help healing. 

The explosion of sales of cheap woodcuts in the middle of the century led to a fall in standards, and many popular prints were very crude. The development of hatching followed on rather later than engraving. Michael Wolgemut was significant in making German woodcuts more sophisticated from about 1475, and Erhard Reuwich was the first to use cross-hatching (far harder to do than engraving or etching). Both of these produced mainly book-illustrations, as did various Italian artists who were also raising standards there at the same period. At the end of the century Albrecht Dürer brought the Western woodcut to a level that, arguably, has never been surpassed, and greatly increased the status of the &quot;single-leaf&quot; woodcut (i.e. an image sold separately). He briefly made it equivalent in quality and status to engravings, before he turned to these himself. 

In the first half of the 16th century, high quality woodcuts continued to be produced in Germany and Italy, where Titian and other artists arranged for some to be made. Much of the interest was in developing the chiaroscuro woodcut, using multiple blocks printed in different colours. 

Because woodcuts and movable type are both relief-printed, they can easily be printed together. Consequently, woodcut was the main medium for book illustrations until the late sixteenth century. The first woodcut book illustration dates to about 1461, only a few years after the beginning of printing with movable type, printed by Albrecht Pfister in Bamberg. Woodcut was used less often for individual (&quot;single-leaf&quot;) fine-art prints from about 1550 until the late nineteenth century, when interest revived. It remained important for popular prints until the nineteenth century in most of Europe, and later in some places.

The art reached a high level of technical and artistic development in East Asia and Iran. Woodblock printing in Japan is called &quot;moku-hanga&quot; and was introduced in the seventeenth century for both books and art. The popular &quot;floating world&quot; genre of &quot;ukiyo-e&quot; originated in the second half of the seventeenth century, with prints in monochrome or two colours. Sometimes these were hand-coloured after printing. Later, prints with many colours were developed. Japanese woodcut became a major artistic form, although at the time it was accorded a much lower status than painting. It continued to develop through to the twentieth century.

==White-line woodcut==

This technique just carves the image in mostly thin lines, similar to a rather crude engraving. The block is printed in the normal way, so that most of the print is black with the image created by white lines. This process was invented by the sixteenth-century Swiss artist Urs Graf, but became most popular in the nineteenth and twentieth century, often in a modified form where images used large areas of white-line contrasted with areas in the normal black-line style. This was pioneered by Félix Vallotton.

==Japonism==

In the 1860s, just as the Japanese themselves were becoming aware of Western art in general, Japanese prints began to reach Europe in considerable numbers and became very fashionable, especially in France. They had a great influence on many artists, notably Édouard Manet, Pierre Bonnard, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Edgar Degas, Paul Gauguin, Vincent van Gogh, Félix Vallotton and Mary Cassatt. In 1872, Jules Claretie dubbed the trend &quot;Le Japonisme&quot;.

Though the Japanese influence was reflected in many artistic media, including painting, it did lead to a revival of the woodcut in Europe, which had been in danger of extinction as a serious art medium. Most of the artists above, except for Félix Vallotton and Paul Gauguin, in fact used lithography, especially for coloured prints. See below for Japanese influence in illustrations for children&#x27;s books.

Artists, notably Edvard Munch and Franz Masereel, continued to use the medium, which in Modernism came to appeal because it was relatively easy to complete the whole process, including printing, in a studio with little special equipment. The German Expressionists used woodcut a good deal.

==Colour==
Coloured woodcuts first appeared in ancient China. The oldest known are three Buddhist images dating to the 10th century. European woodcut prints with coloured blocks were invented in Germany in 1508, and are known as chiaroscuro woodcuts (see below). However, colour did not become the norm, as it did in Japan in the &quot;ukiyo-e&quot; and other forms.

In Europe and Japan, colour woodcuts were normally only used for prints rather than book illustrations. In China, where the individual print did not develop until the nineteenth century, the reverse is true, and early colour woodcuts mostly occur in luxury books about art, especially the more prestigious medium of painting. The first known example is a book on ink-cakes printed in 1606, and colour technique reached its height in books on painting published in the seventeenth century. Notable examples are Hu Zhengyan&#x27;s &quot;Treatise on the Paintings and Writings of the Ten Bamboo Studio&quot; of 1633, and the &quot;Mustard Seed Garden Painting Manual&quot; published in 1679 and 1701.
In Japan colour technique, called nishiki-e in its fully developed form, spread more widely, and was used for prints, from the 1760s on. Text was nearly always monochrome, as were images in books, but the growth of the popularity of &quot;ukiyo-e&quot; brought with it demand for ever-increasing numbers of colours and complexity of techniques. By the nineteenth century most artists worked in colour. The stages of this development were:

*&quot;Sumizuri-e&quot; (墨摺り絵, &quot;ink printed pictures&quot;) – monochrome printing using only black ink
*&quot;Benizuri-e&quot; (紅摺り絵, &quot;crimson printed pictures&quot;) – red ink details or highlights added by hand after the printing process；green was sometimes used as well
*&quot;Tan-e&quot; (丹絵) – orange highlights using a red pigment called &quot;tan&quot;
*&quot;Aizuri-e&quot; (藍摺り絵, &quot;indigo printed pictures&quot;), &quot;Murasaki-e&quot; (紫絵, &quot;purple pictures&quot;), and other styles that used a single colour in addition to, or instead of, black ink
*&quot;Urushi-e&quot; (漆絵) – a method that used glue to thicken the ink, emboldening the image; gold, mica and other substances were often used to enhance the image further. &quot;Urushi-e&quot; can also refer to paintings using lacquer instead of paint; lacquer was very rarely if ever used on prints.
*&quot;Nishiki-e&quot; (錦絵, &quot;brocade pictures&quot;) – a method that used multiple blocks for separate portions of the image, so a number of colours could achieve incredibly complex and detailed images; a separate block was carved to apply only to the portion of the image designated for a single colour. Registration marks called &quot;kentō&quot; (見当) ensured correspondence between the application of each block.

A number of different methods of colour printing using woodcut (technically Chromoxylography) were developed in Europe in the 19th century. In 1835, George Baxter patented a method using an intaglio line plate (or occasionally a lithograph), printed in black or a dark colour, and then overprinted with up to twenty different colours from woodblocks. Edmund Evans used relief and wood throughout, with up to eleven different colours, and latterly specialized in illustrations for children&#x27;s books, using fewer blocks but overprinting non-solid areas of colour to achieve blended colours. Artists such as Randolph Caldecott, Walter Crane and Kate Greenaway were influenced by the Japanese prints now available and fashionable in Europe to create a suitable style, with flat areas of colour.
&lt;br&gt;

In the 20th century, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner of the Die Brücke group developed a process of producing coloured woodcut prints using a single block applying different colours to the block with a brush &quot;à la poupée&quot; and then printing (halfway between a woodcut and a monotype). A remarkable example of this technique is the 1915 &quot;Portrait of Otto Müller&quot; woodcut print from the collection of the British Museum.

===Gallery of Asian woodcuts===
==Chiaroscuro woodcuts==
Chiaroscuro woodcuts are old master prints in woodcut using two or more blocks printed in different colours; they do not necessarily feature strong contrasts of light and dark. They were first produced to achieve similar effects to chiaroscuro drawings. After some early experiments in book-printing, the true chiaroscuro woodcut conceived for two blocks was probably first invented by Lucas Cranach the Elder in Germany in 1508 or 1509, though he backdated some of his first prints and added tone blocks to some prints first produced for monochrome printing, swiftly followed by Hans Burgkmair. Despite Giorgio Vasari&#x27;s claim for Italian precedence in Ugo da Carpi, it is clear that his, the first Italian examples, date to around 1516.

Other printmakers to use the technique include Hans Baldung and Parmigianino. In the German states the technique was in use largely during the first decades of the sixteenth century, but Italians continued to use it throughout the century, and later artists like Hendrik Goltzius sometimes made use of it. In the German style, one block usually had only lines and is called the &quot;line block&quot;, whilst the other block or blocks had flat areas of colour and are called &quot;tone blocks&quot;. The Italians usually used only tone blocks, for a very different effect, much closer to the chiaroscuro drawings the term was originally used for, or to watercolour paintings.

The Swedish printmaker Torsten Billman (1909–1989) developed during the 1930s and 1940s a variant chiaroscuro technique with several gray tones from ordinary printing ink. The art historian Gunnar Jungmarker (1902–1983) at Stockholm&#x27;s Nationalmuseum called this technique &quot;grisaille woodcut&quot;. It is a time-consuming printing process, exclusively for hand printing, with several grey-wood blocks aside from the black-and-white key block.

== Modern woodcut printing in Mexico ==

Woodcut printmaking became a popular form of art in Mexico during the early to mid 20th century. The medium in Mexico was used to convey political unrest and was a form of political activism, especially after the Mexican Revolution (1910–1920). In Europe, Russia, and China, woodcut art was being used during this time as well to spread leftist politics such as socialism, communism, and anti-fascism. In Mexico, the art style was made popular by José Guadalupe Posada, who was known as the father of graphic art and printmaking in Mexico and is considered the first Mexican modern artist. He was a satirical cartoonist and an engraver before and during the Mexican Revolution and he popularized Mexican folk and indigenous art. He created the woodcut engravings of the iconic skeleton (&quot;calaveras&quot;) figures that are prominent in Mexican arts and culture today (such as in Disney Pixar&#x27;s Coco). See La Calavera Catrina for more on Posada&#x27;s &quot;calaveras&quot;.

In 1921, Jean Charlot, a French printmaker moved to Mexico City. Recognizing the importance of Posada&#x27;s woodcut engravings, he started teaching woodcut techniques in Coyoacán&#x27;s open-air art schools. Many young Mexican artists attended these lessons including the Fernando Leal.

After the Mexican Revolution, the country was in political and social upheaval - there were worker strikes, protests, and marches. These events needed cheap, mass-produced visual prints to be pasted on walls or handed out during protests. Information needed to be spread quickly and cheaply to the general public. Many people were still illiterate during this time and there was push after the Revolution for widespread education. In 1910 when the Revolution began, only 20% of Mexican people could read. Art was considered to be highly important in this cause and political artists were using journals and newspapers to communicate their ideas through illustration. &quot;El Machete&quot; (1924–29) was a popular communist journal that used woodcut prints. The woodcut art served well because it was a popular style that many could understand.

Artists and activists created collectives such as the Taller de Gráfica Popular (TGP) (1937–present) and The Treintatreintistas (1928–1930) to create prints (many of them woodcut prints) that reflected their socialist and communist values. The TGP attracted artists from all around the world including African American printmaker Elizabeth Catlett, whose woodcut prints later influenced the art of social movements in the US in the 1960s and 1970s. The Treintatreintistas even taught workers and children. The tools for woodcut are easily attainable and the techniques were simple to learn. It was considered an art for the people.

Mexico at this time was trying to discover its identity and develop itself as a unified nation. The form and style of woodcut aesthetic allowed a diverse range of topics and visual culture to look unified. Traditional, folk images and avant-garde, modern images, shared a similar aesthetic when it was engraved into wood. An image of the countryside and a traditional farmer appeared similar to the image of a city. This symbolism was beneficial for politicians who wanted a unified nation. The physical actions of carving and printing woodcuts also supported the values many held about manual labour and supporting workers&#x27; rights.

=== Current woodcut practices in Mexico ===
Today, in Mexico the activist woodcut tradition is still alive. In Oaxaca, a collective called the &quot;Asamblea De Artistas Revolucionarios De Oaxaca&quot; (ASARO) was formed during the 2006 Oaxaca protests. They are committed to social change through woodcut art. Their prints are made into wheat-paste posters which are secretly put up around the city. Artermio Rodriguez is another artist who lives in Tacambaro, Michoacán who makes politically charged woodcut prints about contemporary issues.

==Famous works in woodcut==

Europe
* Dürer&#x27;s Rhinoceros
* Emblem books
* Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse
* &quot;Hypnerotomachia Poliphili&quot;
* &quot;Just So Stories&quot;
* Lubok prints
* Nuremberg Chronicle
Japan (&quot;Ukiyo-e&quot;)
* &quot;Takiyasha the Witch and the Skeleton Spectre&quot;
* &quot;The Dream of the Fisherman&#x27;s Wife&quot;
* &quot;Thirty-six Views of Mount Fuji&quot; (includes &quot;The Great Wave off Kanagawa&quot;)

==Notable artists==

==Stonecut==

In parts of the world (such as the arctic) where wood is rare and expensive, the woodcut technique is used with stone as the medium for the engraved image.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Notes==
==References==
*Bartrum, Giulia; &quot;German Renaissance Prints, 1490–1550&quot;; British Museum Press, 1995, .
* David Landau &amp; Peter Parshall, &quot;The Renaissance Print&quot;, Yale, 1996, .

==External links==

*Ukiyo-e from the Metropolitan Museum of Art Timeline of Art History
*Woodcut in Europe from the Metropolitan Museum of Art Timeline of Art History
*Italian Renaissance Woodcut Book Illustration from the Metropolitan Museum of Art Timeline of Art History
*Prints &amp; People: A Social History of Printed Pictures, an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on woodcuts
*Museum of Modern Art information on printing techniques and examples of prints.
*Woodcut in early printed books (online exhibition from the Library of Congress)
*A collection of woodcuts images can be found at the University of Houston Digital Library ()
* &quot;Meditations, or the Contemplations of the Most Devout&quot; is a 15th-century publication that is considered the first Italian illustrated book, using early woodcut techniques.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="0" end="7" title="Woodcut" label="Woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921059" start="13" end="28" title="relief printing" label="relief printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q271588" start="42" end="53" title="printmaking" label="printmaking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="132" end="138" title="Chisel#Gouge" label="gouges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423948" start="381" end="391" title="wood grain" label="wood grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259197" start="400" end="414" title="wood engraving" label="wood engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958553" start="546" end="552" title="brayer" label="brayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q950683" start="938" end="948" title="block book" label="block book"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="1095" end="1115" title="Woodcut" label="single-sheet woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306138" start="1172" end="1177" title="old master print" label="print"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753298" start="1652" end="1670" title="Hieronymus Andreae" label="Hieronymus Andreae"/>
<link wikidata="Q691938" start="1729" end="1746" title="Hans Lützelburger" label="Hans Lützelburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291113" start="1751" end="1765" title="Jost de Negker" label="Jost de Negker"/>
<link wikidata="Q816871" start="2278" end="2289" title="woodworking" label="woodworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q752633" start="2930" end="2937" title="linocut" label="linocut"/>
<link wikidata="Q194177" start="2984" end="2992" title="intaglio (printmaking)" label="intaglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="3009" end="3016" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="3021" end="3030" title="engraving" label="engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q158703" start="3266" end="3273" title="boxwood" label="boxwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q165321" start="3393" end="3409" title="Prunus serrulata" label="Prunus serrulata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125932" start="4208" end="4213" title="Baren (printing tool)" label="baren"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="4594" end="4608" title="Printing-press" label="Printing-press"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="4850" end="4858" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8958" start="5100" end="5109" title="Johannes Gutenberg" label="Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="5336" end="5347" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="5560" end="5570" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306138" start="5773" end="5789" title="old master print" label="old master print"/>
<link wikidata="Q13367" start="6056" end="6061" title="Forlì" label="Forlì"/>
<link wikidata="Q10489441" start="6475" end="6488" title="popular print" label="popular print"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734755" start="6526" end="6534" title="hatching" label="hatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="6565" end="6574" title="engraving" label="engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q262771" start="6576" end="6592" title="Michael Wolgemut" label="Michael Wolgemut"/>
<link wikidata="Q722999" start="6675" end="6689" title="Erhard Reuwich" label="Erhard Reuwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="6762" end="6769" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580" start="6937" end="6951" title="Albrecht Dürer" label="Albrecht Dürer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="7356" end="7362" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="7454" end="7473" title="chiaroscuro woodcut" label="chiaroscuro woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="7550" end="7562" title="movable type" label="movable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q88470" start="7860" end="7876" title="Albrecht Pfister" label="Albrecht Pfister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936" start="7880" end="7887" title="Bamberg" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="8248" end="8252" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192525" start="8254" end="8281" title="Woodblock printing in Japan" label="Woodblock printing in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185905" start="8439" end="8446" title="ukiyo-e" label="ukiyo-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q10770146" start="8526" end="8536" title="monochrome" label="monochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="9115" end="9120" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q688304" start="9128" end="9136" title="Urs Graf" label="Urs Graf"/>
<link wikidata="Q123740" start="9348" end="9363" title="Félix Vallotton" label="Félix Vallotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="9638" end="9651" title="Édouard Manet" label="Édouard Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26408" start="9653" end="9667" title="Pierre Bonnard" label="Pierre Bonnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q82445" start="9669" end="9694" title="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec" label="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="9696" end="9707" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37693" start="9709" end="9721" title="Paul Gauguin" label="Paul Gauguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="9723" end="9739" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q123740" start="9741" end="9756" title="Félix Vallotton" label="Félix Vallotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q173223" start="9761" end="9773" title="Mary Cassatt" label="Mary Cassatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="10131" end="10142" title="lithography" label="lithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q41406" start="10271" end="10283" title="Edvard Munch" label="Edvard Munch"/>
<link wikidata="Q559297" start="10288" end="10302" title="Franz Masereel" label="Franz Masereel"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="10342" end="10351" title="Modernism" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="10503" end="10516" title="Expressionist" label="Expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q219540" start="10774" end="10785" title="chiaroscuro" label="chiaroscuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430363" start="11423" end="11434" title="Hu Zhengyan" label="Hu Zhengyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683337" start="11645" end="11654" title="nishiki-e" label="nishiki-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895971" start="12166" end="12176" title="Benizuri-e" label="Benizuri-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828843" start="12428" end="12436" title="Aizuri-e" label="Aizuri-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422166" start="12637" end="12645" title="Urushi-e" label="Urushi-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q11236878" start="12859" end="12866" title="lacquer" label="lacquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683337" start="12940" end="12949" title="Nishiki-e" label="Nishiki-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113928" start="13431" end="13447" title="Chromoxylography" label="Chromoxylography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536805" start="13504" end="13517" title="George Baxter (printer)" label="George Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q194177" start="13545" end="13553" title="Intaglio printing" label="intaglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="13584" end="13594" title="lithograph" label="lithograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4529602" start="13706" end="13718" title="Edmund Evans" label="Edmund Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364488" start="13964" end="13982" title="Randolph Caldecott" label="Randolph Caldecott"/>
<link wikidata="Q660917" start="13984" end="13996" title="Walter Crane" label="Walter Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q204936" start="14001" end="14015" title="Kate Greenaway" label="Kate Greenaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q751880" start="14073" end="14084" title="Japonism" label="fashionable"/>
<link wikidata="Q229272" start="14183" end="14204" title="Ernst Ludwig Kirchner" label="Ernst Ludwig Kirchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q152778" start="14212" end="14222" title="Die Brücke" label="Die Brücke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115807" start="14366" end="14377" title="à la poupée" label="à la poupée"/>
<link wikidata="Q156218" start="14435" end="14443" title="monotype" label="monotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q317041" start="14515" end="14526" title="Otto Mueller" label="Otto Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="14574" end="14588" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306138" start="14673" end="14689" title="old master print" label="old master print"/>
<link wikidata="Q191748" start="15034" end="15057" title="Lucas Cranach the Elder" label="Lucas Cranach the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q313163" start="15228" end="15242" title="Hans Burgkmair" label="Hans Burgkmair"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="15252" end="15266" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967967" start="15306" end="15318" title="Ugo da Carpi" label="Ugo da Carpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q271588" start="15398" end="15409" title="printmaking" label="printmakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q164696" start="15439" end="15451" title="Hans Baldung" label="Hans Baldung"/>
<link wikidata="Q9348" start="15456" end="15468" title="Parmigianino" label="Parmigianino"/>
<link wikidata="Q165367" start="15655" end="15671" title="Hendrik Goltzius" label="Hendrik Goltzius"/>
<link wikidata="Q50030" start="16045" end="16065" title="watercolour painting" label="watercolour painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576169" start="16092" end="16107" title="Torsten Billman" label="Torsten Billman"/>
<link wikidata="Q842858" start="16309" end="16323" title="Nationalmuseum" label="Nationalmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="16776" end="16794" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q732526" start="17010" end="17031" title="José Guadalupe Posada" label="José Guadalupe Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="17221" end="17239" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5815826" start="17466" end="17470" title="Coco (2017 film)" label="Coco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084690" start="17477" end="17496" title="La Calavera Catrina" label="La Calavera Catrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q432546" start="17556" end="17568" title="Jean Charlot" label="Jean Charlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="17599" end="17610" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q661315" start="17718" end="17726" title="Coyoacán" label="Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406720" start="17820" end="17833" title="Fernando Leal (artist)" label="Fernando Leal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390547" start="18736" end="18761" title="Taller de Gráfica Popular" label="Taller de Gráfica Popular"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076337" start="18787" end="18809" title="¡30-30!" label="The Treintatreintistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q290331" start="19012" end="19029" title="Elizabeth Catlett" label="Elizabeth Catlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="19441" end="19450" title="aesthetic" label="aesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090887" start="20186" end="20206" title="2006 Oaxaca protests" label="2006 Oaxaca protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q748518" start="20537" end="20560" title="Dürer&amp;#x27;s Rhinoceros" label="Dürer&amp;#x27;s Rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128336" start="20563" end="20574" title="Emblem book" label="Emblem book"/>
<link wikidata="Q618854" start="20578" end="20609" title="Apocalypse (Dürer)" label="Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q914235" start="20618" end="20643" title="Hypnerotomachia Poliphili" label="Hypnerotomachia Poliphili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247723" start="20658" end="20673" title="Just So Stories" label="Just So Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q982897" start="20682" end="20687" title="Lubok" label="Lubok"/>
<link wikidata="Q907934" start="20697" end="20716" title="Nuremberg Chronicle" label="Nuremberg Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185905" start="20730" end="20737" title="Ukiyo-e" label="Ukiyo-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678417" start="20753" end="20797" title="Takiyasha the Witch and the Skeleton Spectre" label="Takiyasha the Witch and the Skeleton Spectre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717022" start="20812" end="20850" title="The Dream of the Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Wife" label="The Dream of the Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q227494" start="20865" end="20895" title="Thirty-six Views of Mount Fuji" label="Thirty-six Views of Mount Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q252485" start="20918" end="20945" title="The Great Wave off Kanagawa" label="The Great Wave off Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="21024" end="21030" title="arctic" label="arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656247" start="21205" end="21220" title="Giulia Bartrum" label="Bartrum, Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="21427" end="21453" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="21506" end="21532" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="21992" end="22011" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162302" wikidata="Q177578" url="?curid=162302" title="Lelio Sozzini">
<text>Lelio Francesco Maria Sozzini (; 29 January 1525 – 4 May 1562), often known in English by his Latinized name Laelius Socinus ( ), was an Italian Renaissance humanist and theologian, and, alongside his nephew Fausto Sozzini, founder of the Nontrinitarian Christian belief system known as Socinianism. His doctrine was developed among the Polish Brethren in the Polish Reformed Church between the 16th and 17th centuries, and embraced by the Unitarian Church of Transylvania during the same period.

==Life==
Lelio Sozzini was born and raised in Siena, capital city of the Republic of Siena. His family descended from Sozzo, a banker at Percenna (Buonconvento), whose second son, Mino Sozzi, settled as a notary at Siena in 1304. Mino Sozzi&#x27;s grandson, Sozzino (d. 1403), was the founder of a line of patrician jurists and canonists, Mariano Sozzini the Elder (1397–1467) being the first and the most famous, and traditionally regarded as the first freethinker in the Sozzini family.

Lelio (who spelled his surname &quot;Sozzini&quot;, Latinized as &quot;Socinus&quot;) was the sixth son of Mariano Sozzini the Younger (1482–1556) by his wife Camilla Salvetti, and was educated as a jurist under his father&#x27;s eye at Bologna. He told Philipp Melanchthon that his desire to reach the &quot;fontes juris&quot; led him to Biblical research, and hence to rejection of &quot;the idolatry of Rome&quot;.

Lelio Sozzini gained some knowledge of Hebrew and Arabic (he gave a manuscript of the Quran to Bibliander) as well as Greek, but was never a laborious student. His father supplied him with means and, on coming of age, he repaired to the Republic of Venice, home to the headquarters of the Protestant churches in medieval Italy. A tradition—first published by Christopher Sandius in his book &quot;Bibliotheca antitrinitariorum&quot; (1684) and Andrzej Wiszowaty in his book &quot;Narratio Compendiosa&quot; (1668)—and amplified by subsequent writers makes him a leading spirit in theological conferences called the &quot;Collegia Vicentina&quot; at Vicenza between the years 1546 and 1547.

At this period, the standpoint of Sozzini was that of evangelical reform of the Christian faith; he exhibits a singular union of enthusiastic piety with subtle theological speculation. At Chiavenna in 1547 he came under the influence of Paolo Ricci &quot;Camillo Renato&quot; of Sicily, a gentle Christian mystic whose teaching at many points resembled that of the early Quakers. Pursuing his religious travels throughout early modern Europe, his family name and his personal charm ensured him a welcome in the Old Swiss Confederacy, the kingdoms of France and England, and the Republic of the Netherlands.

===1548–1554===
Returning to Switzerland at the close of 1548, with commendatory letters to the Swiss Protestant churches from Nicolas Meyer, envoy from Wittenberg to Italy, we find him at Geneva, Basel (with Sebastian Münster), and Zürich (lodging with Konrad Pelikan) between the years 1549–1550. He was next at Wittenberg (July 1550–June 1551), first as Melanchthon&#x27;s guest, then with professor Johann Forster, for the improvement of his knowledge of Hebrew. From Wittenberg he returned to Zürich (end of 1551), after visiting Vienna in the Holy Roman Empire, then Prague and Kraków in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

Political events drew him back to Italy in June 1552; with two visits to Siena. In the Republic of Siena, freedom of speech was for the moment possible, owing to the siege of Siena (1552–1559) and shaking off of the Spanish yoke. This brought him into contact with his young nephew Fausto. Lelio was at Padua (not Geneva, as is often said) at the date of Michael Servetus&#x27;s execution (27 October 1553), burned at the stake with the accusation of heresy. Thence he made his way to Basel (January 1554), Geneva (April), and Zürich (May), where he took up his abode.

John Calvin, like Melanchthon, received Sozzini with open arms. Melanchthon (though a phrase in one of his letters has been strangely misconstrued) never regarded him with theological suspicion. To Calvin&#x27;s keen glance Sozzini&#x27;s over-speculative tendency and the genuineness of his religious nature were equally apparent. A passage often quoted (apart from the context) in one of Calvin&#x27;s letters (1 January 1552) has been viewed as a rapture of amicable intercourse; but, while more than once uneasy apprehensions arose in Calvin&#x27;s mind, there was no breach of correspondence or of kindliness. Of all the Protestant Reformers, Heinrich Bullinger was Sozzini&#x27;s closest intimate, his warmest and wisest friend. Sozzini&#x27;s theological difficulties turned on the resurrection of the body, predestination, the ground of salvation (on these points he corresponded with Calvin), the doctrinal basis of the original gospel (his queries to Bullinger), the nature of repentance (to Rudolph Gualther), and the sacraments (to Johann Wolff). It was the fate of the Spanish theologian Michael Servetus that directed his mind to focus on the doctrine of the Trinity.

At Geneva (April 1554) he made, incautious remarks on the common doctrine, emphasized in a subsequent letter to Martinengo, the Italian pastor. Bullinger, at the instance of correspondents (including Calvin), questioned Sozzini as to his faith, and received from him an explicitly orthodox confession (reduced to writing on 15 July 1555), with a frank reservation of the right of further inquiry.

A month before this Sozzini had been sent with Martino Muralto to Basel, to secure Ochino as pastor of the Italian church at Zürich; and it is clear that in their subsequent intercourse the minds of Sozzini and Ochino (a thinker of the same type as Camillo, with finer dialectic skill) acted powerfully on each other in the radical discussion of theological problems.

===1555–1562===
In 1555, Lelio turned 30 years old. From 1556 following the death of his father, who left him nothing by will, Sozzini was involved in pecuniary anxieties. With influential introductions (one from Calvin) he visited in 1558 the courts of Vienna and Kraków to obtain support for an appeal to the reigning duke at Florence for the realization of his own and the family estates. Curiously enough Melanchthon&#x27;s letter introducing Sozzini to Maximilian II invokes as an historic parallel the hospitable reception rendered by the Emperor Constantine to Athanasius when he fled from Egypt to Trier.

Well received out of Italy, Sozzini could do nothing at home, and apparently did not proceed beyond Venice. The Inquisition had its eye on the family; his brother Cornelio Sozzini was imprisoned at Rome; his brothers Celso Sozzini and Camillo and his nephew Fausto were &quot;reputati Luterani,&quot; suspected of Lutheranism, and Camillo Sozzini had fled from Siena. In August 1559 Sozzini returned to Zürich, where his brief career was closed by his death on 4 May 1562, at his lodging in the house of Hans Wyss, a silk-weaver.

==Legacy==

No authentic portrait of him exists; alleged likenesses on medals, etc., are spurious. The news of his uncle&#x27;s death reached Fausto at Lyons through Antonio Maria Besozzo. Repairing to Zürich Fausto got his uncle&#x27;s few papers, comprising very little connected writing but a good many notes.

Fausto continually gave credit to his uncle for many of his ideas, in particular noting:

# Fausto derived from Lelio in conversations (1552–1553) the germ of his theory of salvation;
# Fausto derived many interpretations of specific Bible verses from Lelio. For example, Lelio&#x27;s reading (1561) of &quot;In the Beginning&quot; in John 1:1 as &quot;the beginning of the gospel&quot; was taken up in Fausto&#x27;s interpretation which denied the pre-existence of Christ. Likewise Lelio&#x27;s interpretation of &quot;Before Abraham was I am&quot; John 8:58 as relating to the resurrection of Abraham was taken up by Fausto.

==Works==
Sozzini’s extant writings are:

*&quot;De sacramentis dissertatio&quot; (1555), On the sacrament. four parts
*&quot;De resurrectione&quot; On resurrection (a fragment 1549?)
*&quot;Brevis explicatio in primum Iohannis caput&quot; Short explanation of John 1. published posthumously by Ferenc David in &quot;De falsa et vera unius Dei Patri, filii, et spiritus sancti&quot; 1568, Alba Iulia. This is often confused with the similarly titled &quot;Brevis explicatio in primum Iohannis caput&quot; (Amsterdam 1565)
*&quot;Confessio Fidei&quot; (Zurich July 1555)
An extensive correspondence in Latin and Italian exists, consisting of 53 letters from and to Sozzini with Bullinger, Calvin and B. Amerbach.

==Notes==
==See also==

*Arianism
*Catholic Inquisition
*English Dissenters
*Heresy in Christianity
*History of Christian theology
*Polish Brethren
*Racovian Catechism
*Remonstrants
*Unitarianism

==References==
* Marian Hillar, Laelius and Faustus Socinus : Founders of Socinianism, Their Lives and Theology, in &quot;The Journal from the Radical Reformation. A Testimony to Biblical Unitarianism.&quot; (Part I, Vol. 10, No. 2, 2002; Part II, Vol. 10, No. 3, 2002)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q177578" start="0" end="29" title="Lelio Sozzini" label="Lelio Francesco Maria Sozzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="94" end="108" title="Latinized name" label="Latinized name"/>
<link wikidata="Q177578" start="109" end="124" title="Lelio Sozzini" label="Laelius Socinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="137" end="144" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="145" end="165" title="Renaissance humanist" label="Renaissance humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="170" end="180" title="Christian theology" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q505037" start="208" end="222" title="Fausto Sozzini" label="Fausto Sozzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q584205" start="239" end="263" title="Nontrinitarianism" label="Nontrinitarian Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="264" end="277" title="belief system" label="belief system"/>
<link wikidata="Q848929" start="287" end="298" title="Socinianism" label="Socinianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q749576" start="337" end="352" title="Polish Brethren" label="Polish Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209974" start="360" end="382" title="Polish Reformed Church" label="Polish Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q582355" start="440" end="472" title="Unitarian Church of Transylvania" label="Unitarian Church of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="544" end="549" title="Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q736727" start="571" end="588" title="Republic of Siena" label="Republic of Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q91119" start="645" end="657" title="Buonconvento" label="Buonconvento"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="952" end="963" title="freethinker" label="freethinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="1040" end="1049" title="Latinisation of names" label="Latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="1225" end="1232" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q76325" start="1242" end="1261" title="Philipp Melanchthon" label="Philipp Melanchthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="1327" end="1344" title="Biblical studies" label="Biblical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q840665" start="1382" end="1390" title="idolatry" label="idolatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="1394" end="1398" title="Papacy" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1446" end="1452" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1457" end="1463" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="1493" end="1498" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q115851" start="1502" end="1512" title="Bibliander" label="Bibliander"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1525" end="1530" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1644" end="1662" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480041" start="1719" end="1733" title="Italy in the Middle Ages" label="medieval Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966057" start="1766" end="1785" title="Christopher Sandius" label="Christopher Sandius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903506" start="1804" end="1833" title="Bibliotheca antitrinitariorum" label="Bibliotheca antitrinitariorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q515761" start="1851" end="1868" title="Andrzej Wiszowaty" label="Andrzej Wiszowaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q117039124" start="2028" end="2046" title="Collegia Vicentina" label="Collegia Vicentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="2056" end="2063" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q40131" start="2286" end="2295" title="Chiavenna" label="Chiavenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935143" start="2335" end="2346" title="Paolo Ricci" label="Paolo Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="2377" end="2383" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="2394" end="2410" title="Christian mysticism" label="Christian mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="2469" end="2476" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483107" start="2520" end="2539" title="early modern Europe" label="early modern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="2609" end="2630" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="2648" end="2654" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2659" end="2666" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="2676" end="2703" title="Dutch Republic" label="Republic of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027541" start="2833" end="2846" title="Nicolas Meyer" label="Nicolas Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837" start="2859" end="2869" title="Wittenberg" label="Wittenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="2895" end="2901" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="2903" end="2908" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q61073" start="2915" end="2932" title="Sebastian Münster" label="Sebastian Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="2939" end="2945" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q116548" start="2960" end="2974" title="Konrad Pelikan" label="Konrad Pelikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q91368" start="3109" end="3123" title="Johann Forster" label="Johann Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="3241" end="3247" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="3255" end="3272" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="3279" end="3285" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="3290" end="3296" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="3304" end="3334" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="3443" end="3460" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3553" end="3565" title="Kingdom of Spain" label="Spanish yoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q505037" start="3619" end="3625" title="Fausto Paolo Sozzini" label="Fausto"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="3640" end="3645" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q185914" start="3692" end="3708" title="Michael Servetus" label="Michael Servetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="3788" end="3794" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="3907" end="3918" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123839" start="4555" end="4573" title="Heinrich Bullinger" label="Heinrich Bullinger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4696" end="4720" title="Resurrection#Christianity" label="resurrection of the body"/>
<link wikidata="Q193203" start="4722" end="4736" title="predestination" label="predestination"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="4752" end="4761" title="Salvation in Christianity" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q492807" start="4836" end="4851" title="The gospel" label="original gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313970" start="4894" end="4904" title="Repentance in Christianity" label="repentance"/>
<link wikidata="Q120138" start="4909" end="4925" title="Rudolph Gualther" label="Rudolph Gualther"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="4936" end="4946" title="sacraments" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q214522" start="4951" end="4963" title="Johann Wolff" label="Johann Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q185914" start="5008" end="5024" title="Michael Servetus" label="Michael Servetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="5080" end="5087" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777183" start="5535" end="5550" title="Martino Muralto" label="Martino Muralto"/>
<link wikidata="Q822924" start="5571" end="5577" title="Ochino" label="Ochino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="6185" end="6193" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q150862" start="6315" end="6328" title="Maximilian II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="6402" end="6421" title="Emperor Constantine" label="Emperor Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="6425" end="6435" title="Athanasius" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="6463" end="6468" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="6583" end="6594" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16854247" start="6634" end="6650" title="Cornelio Sozzini" label="Cornelio Sozzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058465" start="6688" end="6701" title="Celso Sozzini" label="Celso Sozzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16228523" start="6802" end="6817" title="Camillo Sozzini" label="Camillo Sozzini"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7651" end="7659" title="John 1:1" label="John 1:1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203161" start="7765" end="7788" title="pre-existence of Christ" label="pre-existence of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348167" start="7855" end="7859" title="ego eimi" label="I am"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="8333" end="8343" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="8682" end="8690" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="8692" end="8712" title="Catholic Inquisition" label="Catholic Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="8714" end="8732" title="English Dissenters" label="English Dissenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="8734" end="8756" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="Heresy in Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775678" start="8758" end="8787" title="History of Christian theology" label="History of Christian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q749576" start="8789" end="8804" title="Polish Brethren" label="Polish Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568595" start="8806" end="8824" title="Racovian Catechism" label="Racovian Catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q284561" start="8826" end="8838" title="Remonstrants" label="Remonstrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="8840" end="8852" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarianism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162303" wikidata="Q19188924" url="?curid=162303" title="President of Iceland">
<text>The president of Iceland () is the head of state of Iceland. The incumbent is Halla Tómasdóttir, who won the 2024 presidential election. 

The president is elected to a four-year term by popular vote, is not term-limited, and has limited powers. 

Historically, while first-term elections have often been hard-fought, an incumbent president who decides to run again for office has usually run unopposed, or they have won re-election with an overwhelming majority of the vote when opposed. The 2012 election was a notable exception to this, where incumbent Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson won with only 52.78% of the vote.

Iceland was the first country to have an elected female head of state when Vigdís Finnbogadóttir assumed Iceland&#x27;s presidency on 1 August 1980.

The presidential residence is situated in Bessastaðir in Garðabær, near the capital city Reykjavík.

==Origin==
When Iceland became a republic in 1944 by the passing of a new constitution the position of King of Iceland was simply replaced by the president of Iceland. A transitional provision of the new constitution stipulated that the first president be elected by the Parliament.

===Etymology===
The term for &quot;president&quot; in Icelandic is &quot;forseti&quot;. The word &quot;forseti&quot; means &quot;one who sits foremost&quot; (&quot;sá sem fremst situr&quot;) in Old Norse/Icelandic or literally &quot;fore-sitter&quot;. It is the name of one of the Æsir, the god of justice and reconciliation in Norse mythology. He is generally identified with Fosite, a god of the Frisians.

==Powers and duties==
===Executive powers===
====Cabinet====
The president appoints ministers to the Cabinet of Iceland, determines their number and division of assignments. Ministers are not able to resign and must be discharged by the president. The ministers are delegated the president&#x27;s executive powers and are solely responsible for their actions.

In the aftermath of general elections, the president has the role to designate a party leader (the one that the president considers most likely to be able to form a majority coalition government) to formally start negotiations to form a government. Sveinn Björnsson and Ásgeir Ásgeirsson played highly active roles in the formation of governments, attempting to set up governments that suited their political preferences, whereas Kristján Eldjárn and Vigdís Finnbogadóttir were passive and neutral as to individuals and parties comprising the government.

====State Council====
The president and the Cabinet meet in the State Council. The Cabinet must inform the president of important matters of the state and drafted bills. During meetings the Cabinet may also suggest convening, adjourning or dissolving the Parliament.

====Prosecution and pardoning====
The president can decide that the prosecution for an offense be discontinued and can also grant pardon and amnesty.

===Legislative powers===
Article 2 of the constitution states that the president and the Parliament jointly exercise the legislative power. The president signs bills passed by the Parliament into law and can choose not to sign them, thus in effect vetoing them. Bills vetoed by the president still take effect, should the Parliament not withdraw them, but they must be confirmed in a referendum. Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson (who served 1996–2016) is the only president to have vetoed legislation from Parliament, having done so only on three occasions (2004, 2010, 2011). This power was originally intended to be used only in extremely extenuating circumstances.

The president has the power to submit bills and resolutions to the Parliament which it must take under consideration. Should the Parliament not be in session, the president can issue provisional laws which must conform with the constitution. Provisional laws become void if the Parliament does not confirm them when it convenes. No president has ever submitted bills nor resolutions, nor issued provisional laws.

Article 30 of the constitution states that the president can grant exceptions from laws. No president has yet exercised this authority.

====Parliament====
The president convenes the Parliament after general elections and formally dissolves it. They can temporarily adjourn its sessions and move them if they deems so necessary. Furthermore, the president opens all regular sessions of the Parliament each year.

===Ceremonial duties===
The president is the designated grand master of the Order of the Falcon.

==Detailed powers==
Source:
==Compensation==
The president receives a monthly salary of 2,480,341 ISK. Article 9 of the constitution states the salary cannot be lowered for an incumbent president.

==Residence==
Article 12 of the constitution states that the president shall reside in or near Reykjavík. Since inception the official residence of the president has been Bessastaðir which is in Álftanes.

==Eligibility==
Articles 4 and 5 of the constitution set the following qualifications for holding the presidency:
* meet the qualifications specified for members of the Althingi
* be at least thirty-five years old
* have at least 1,500 commendations

==Succession==
Articles 7 and 8 of the constitution state that when the president dies, resigns or is otherwise unable to perform their duties, such as when they are abroad or sick, the prime minister, the president of the Parliament and the president of the Supreme Court shall collectively assume the power of the office until the president can resume their duties or a new president has been elected. Their meetings are led by the president of the Parliament where they vote on any presidential decision.

The above also occurs as an interregnum between the expiration of the previous president&#x27;s term at midnight on 1 August and the inauguration of their successor.

If the office of the president becomes vacant because of death or resignation, a new president shall be elected by the general public to a four-year term ending on 1 August in the fourth year after the elections. Sveinn Björnsson remains the only president to die in office in 1952, triggering a presidential election one year ahead of schedule.

==Removal==
Article 11 of the constitution lays out the process by which the president can be removed from office. It states that the president does not bear responsibility for the actions of their government and that they can not be prosecuted without consent of the Parliament. A referendum instigated by the Parliament with 3/4 support must approve of their removal. Once the Parliament has approved of the referendum, the president must temporarily step aside until the results of the referendum are known. The referendum must be held within two months of the vote, and, should the removal be rejected by the people, then the Parliament must immediately be dissolved and a new general election held.

A removal from office has not occurred since the founding of the republic.

==List==
There have been seven presidents since the establishment of the republic.

Term: 1 &quot;appointed&quot; · 2 &quot;died in office&quot; · 3 &quot;uncontested&quot;

==Timeline==


==Notes==
==See also==
*List of rulers of Iceland
*List of spouses and partners of Icelandic presidents

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="4" end="24" title="President of Iceland" label="president of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="35" end="48" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="52" end="59" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24494577" start="78" end="95" title="Halla Tómasdóttir" label="Halla Tómasdóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q106749042" start="109" end="135" title="2024 Icelandic presidential election" label="2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q189797" start="689" end="710" title="Vigdís Finnbogadóttir" label="Vigdís Finnbogadóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q634146" start="806" end="817" title="Bessastaðir" label="Bessastaðir"/>
<link wikidata="Q186142" start="821" end="829" title="Garðabær" label="Garðabær"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="853" end="862" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680331" start="889" end="906" title="1944 Icelandic constitutional referendum" label="became a republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567" start="968" end="983" title="Monarchy of Iceland" label="King of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62548" start="1252" end="1259" title="forseti" label="forseti"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1343" end="1352" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="1353" end="1362" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="1430" end="1434" title="Æsir" label="Æsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q106416" start="1547" end="1555" title="Frisians" label="Frisians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354110" start="1659" end="1677" title="Cabinet of Iceland" label="Cabinet of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207206" start="2168" end="2184" title="Sveinn Björnsson" label="Sveinn Björnsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217848" start="2189" end="2206" title="Ásgeir Ásgeirsson" label="Ásgeir Ásgeirsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q310396" start="2349" end="2365" title="Kristján Eldjárn" label="Kristján Eldjárn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189797" start="2370" end="2391" title="Vigdís Finnbogadóttir" label="Vigdís Finnbogadóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="2873" end="2879" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="3142" end="3146" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q57284" start="3290" end="3312" title="Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson" label="Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394282" start="4456" end="4475" title="Order of the Falcon" label="Order of the Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131473" start="4576" end="4579" title="Icelandic króna" label="ISK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="4771" end="4780" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q634146" start="4847" end="4858" title="Bessastaðir" label="Bessastaðir"/>
<link wikidata="Q139045" start="4871" end="4879" title="Álftanes" label="Álftanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190022" start="5319" end="5333" title="Prime Minister of Iceland" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="5356" end="5366" title="Althing" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q135356" start="5392" end="5405" title="Supreme Court of Iceland" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q22771585" start="5670" end="5681" title="interregnum" label="interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207206" start="6022" end="6038" title="Sveinn Björnsson" label="Sveinn Björnsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="6438" end="6448" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="6837" end="6853" title="general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622070" start="7061" end="7075" title="List of heads of state and government who died in office" label="died in office"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811908" start="7092" end="7103" title="Uncontested election" label="uncontested"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511881" start="7150" end="7175" title="List of rulers of Iceland" label="List of rulers of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24961999" start="7177" end="7229" title="List of spouses and partners of Icelandic presidents" label="List of spouses and partners of Icelandic presidents"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162305" wikidata="Q1090654" url="?curid=162305" title="Phalacridae">
<text>The Phalacridae are a family of beetles commonly called the shining flower beetles, They are often found in composite flowers. They are oval-shaped, usually tan, and about 2 mm in length. Most species feed on fungus, although a number feed on flower heads.

Worldwide there are about 638 species in 52 genera. The oldest possible record of the family is a specimen from Spanish amber, dating to the Albian stage of the Early Cretaceous.

==Taxonomy==

This family includes the following subfamily:
* &quot;Phaenocephalinae&quot; Matthews, 1899
* &quot;Phalacrinae&quot; Leach, 1815

Genera within this family include:

* &quot;Phaenocephalus&quot;-group
** &quot;Phaenocephalus&quot; 
** &quot;Phalacrinus&quot; 
** &quot;Ranomafanacrinus&quot; 
* &quot;Stilbus&quot;-group
** &quot;Acylomus&quot; 
** &quot;Nesiotus&quot; 
** &quot;Stilbus&quot; 
** &quot;Xanthocomus&quot; 
* &quot;Pseudolibrus&quot;-group
** &quot;Litostilbus&quot; 
** &quot;Megistopalpus&quot; 
** &quot;Pseudolibrus&quot; 
* &quot;Phalacrus&quot;-group
** &quot;Phalacropsis&quot; 
** &quot;Phalacrus&quot; 
* &quot;Olibroporus&quot;-group
** &quot;Austroporus&quot; 
** &quot;Olibroporus&quot; 
** &quot;Platyphalacrus&quot; 
** &quot;Pycinus&quot; 
* &quot;Ochrolitus&quot;-group
** &quot;Ochrolitus&quot; 
** &quot;Sveculus&quot; 
* &quot;Olibrus&quot;-group
** &quot;Olibrus&quot; 
** &quot;Tolyphus&quot; 
* &quot;Olibrosoma&quot;-group
** &quot;Antennogasmus&quot; 
** &quot;Malagasmus&quot; 
** &quot;Olibrosoma&quot; 
* &quot;Litochropus&quot;-group
** &quot;Litochropus&quot; 
** &quot;Neolitochrus&quot; 
* Genera &quot;incertae sedis&quot;
** &quot;Apallodes&quot; 
** &quot;Augasmus&quot; 
** &quot;Entomocnemus&quot; 
** &quot;Eulitrus&quot; 
** &quot;Grouvelleus&quot; 
** &quot;Litochrus&quot; 
** &quot;Malagophytus&quot; 
** &quot;Paracylomus&quot; 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1090654" start="4" end="15" title="Phalacridae" label="Phalacridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="32" end="38" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090654" start="60" end="83" title="Phalacridae" label="shining flower beetles,"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="370" end="383" title="Spanish amber" label="Spanish amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q301728" start="399" end="405" title="Albian" label="Albian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="506" end="522" title="Phaenocephalinae" label="Phaenocephalinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="552" end="563" title="Phalacrinae" label="Phalacrinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="663" end="677" title="Phaenocephalus" label="Phaenocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="694" end="705" title="Phalacrinus" label="Phalacrinus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="722" end="738" title="Ranomafanacrinus" label="Ranomafanacrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18510865" start="783" end="791" title="Acylomus" label="Acylomus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18586055" start="808" end="816" title="Nesiotus" label="Nesiotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15635817" start="833" end="840" title="Stilbus" label="Stilbus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="857" end="868" title="Xanthocomus" label="Xanthocomus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="918" end="929" title="Litostilbus" label="Litostilbus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="946" end="959" title="Megistopalpus" label="Megistopalpus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="976" end="988" title="Pseudolibrus" label="Pseudolibrus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1035" end="1047" title="Phalacropsis" label="Phalacropsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18116087" start="1064" end="1073" title="Phalacrus (beetle)" label="Phalacrus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1122" end="1133" title="Austroporus" label="Austroporus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1150" end="1161" title="Olibroporus" label="Olibroporus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1178" end="1192" title="Platyphalacrus" label="Platyphalacrus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1209" end="1216" title="Pycinus" label="Pycinus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1264" end="1274" title="Ochrolitus" label="Ochrolitus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1291" end="1299" title="Sveculus" label="Sveculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15635812" start="1344" end="1351" title="Olibrus" label="Olibrus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1368" end="1376" title="Tolyphus" label="Tolyphus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1424" end="1437" title="Antennogasmus" label="Antennogasmus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1454" end="1464" title="Malagasmus" label="Malagasmus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1481" end="1491" title="Olibrosoma" label="Olibrosoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1540" end="1551" title="Litochropus" label="Litochropus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1568" end="1580" title="Neolitochrus" label="Neolitochrus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1633" end="1642" title="Apallodes" label="Apallodes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1659" end="1667" title="Augasmus" label="Augasmus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1684" end="1696" title="Entomocnemus" label="Entomocnemus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1713" end="1721" title="Eulitrus" label="Eulitrus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1738" end="1749" title="Grouvelleus" label="Grouvelleus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1766" end="1775" title="Litochrus" label="Litochrus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1792" end="1804" title="Malagophytus" label="Malagophytus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1821" end="1832" title="Paracylomus" label="Paracylomus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162307" wikidata="Q774348" url="?curid=162307" title="Conspiracy of One">
<text>Conspiracy of One is the sixth studio album by American rock band the Offspring, released on November 14, 2000, by Columbia Records. By the time of its release, the band had come out in support of peer-to-peer file sharing, claiming it would not hurt sales. &quot;Conspiracy of One&quot; was originally planned to be released directly on their website before retail, until Columbia Records threatened to sue and the album ended up as a physical release. The album was the last to feature drummer Ron Welty, who was fired from the band in 2003 and went on to form his own band Steady Ground.

&quot;Conspiracy of One&quot; debuted at number nine on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, selling over 125,000 copies in its first week of sales, and spawned the singles &quot;Original Prankster&quot;, &quot;Want You Bad&quot;, and &quot;Million Miles Away&quot;. Although not as successful as their previous album &quot;Americana&quot; (1998), it was later certified platinum by the RIAA in the United States.

==Background and recording==
The Offspring spent much of 1999 on tour promoting the &quot;Americana&quot; album. They also appeared at the infamous Woodstock 1999, where their performance was broadcast live on pay-per-view television. After some time off, the members reconvened in early 2000 to begin work on new material, nine songs of which were in the demo phase at the time. Frontman Dexter Holland told &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; in May 2000 that, &quot;we came home last Christmas and we kind of took a month just trying to recoup and we started thinking, &#x27;Well, do we want to get started on another record right away?&#x27;. &quot;We&#x27;re all pretty excited about the way things have gone so I spent a couple of months trying to come up with some new material and then [started] jamming out these demos.&quot; The Offspring entered the studio to begin recording sessions for &quot;Conspiracy of One&quot; in June 2000. For the recording of the album, the band tapped Brendan O&#x27;Brien as its producer and recorded the album at NRG studios in North Hollywood, California over a two-month period.

==Reception==

&quot;Conspiracy of One&quot; was released on November 14, 2000, and peaked at number 9 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 album chart. Five weeks after its release, the album was certified gold and platinum. The album was also successful in Canada, selling 25,231 copies in its first week and debuting at #4 on the Canadian Albums Chart. The album was certified 2× Platinum by the CRIA in February 2007.

Liana Jonas of AllMusic described &quot;Conspiracy of One&quot; as the Offspring&#x27;s &quot;most musically mature collection to date&quot;. Jonas praised the music as &quot;tight arrangements, vocal interplay and refined guitar work&quot; and claims the band injected &quot;elements of hip hop, rap metal, and Nirvana-like grunge into a few songs&quot;. The album received a rating of three and a half out of five stars, while producing three singles, &quot;Original Prankster&quot;, &quot;Want You Bad&quot; and &quot;Million Miles Away&quot;, that earned the Offspring its commercial success. So far, the album holds a score of 60 out of 100 from Metacritic based on &quot;mixed or average reviews&quot;. The album was included at number 13 on &quot;Rock Sound&quot;″s &quot;The 51 Most Essential Pop Punk Albums of All Time&quot; list.

==Track listing==

== Chart performance ==

===Weekly charts===

=== Year-end charts ===

==Certifications==







==Personnel==

===The Offspring===
* Dexter Holland – lead and backing vocals, rhythm guitar
* Noodles – lead guitar, backing vocals
* Greg K. – bass, backing vocals
* Ron Welty – drums

===Additional personnel===
*Redman – additional vocals on &quot;Original Prankster&quot;
*Chris &quot;X-13&quot; Higgins – backing vocals

===Production===
*Brendan O&#x27;Brien – producer, mixing
*Justin Beope – design
*Billy Bowers – engineer
*Nick DiDia – engineer
*David Dominguez – assistant engineer
*Karl Egsieker – mixing
*Ryan Williams – mixing
*Sean Evans – art direction
*Alan Forbes – illustrations
*Ross Garfield – drum technician
*Sarkis Kaloustian – design
*Steve Masi – guitar technician
*Eddy Schreyer – mastering

==References==
===Notes===
===Sources===

===Bibliography===


==External links==

* &quot;Conspiracy of One&quot; at YouTube (streamed copy where licensed)
* Official page for the album</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="31" end="43" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="66" end="79" title="the Offspring" label="the Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="115" end="131" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373485" start="197" end="222" title="peer-to-peer file sharing" label="peer-to-peer file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471276" start="496" end="505" title="Ron Welty" label="Ron Welty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111429" start="576" end="589" title="Steady Ground" label="Steady Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="652" end="680" title="Billboard 200" label="US &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711988" start="768" end="786" title="Original Prankster" label="Original Prankster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267329" start="800" end="812" title="Want You Bad" label="Want You Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525997" start="830" end="848" title="Million Miles Away (The Offspring song)" label="Million Miles Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q179137" start="913" end="922" title="Americana (The Offspring album)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="950" end="968" title="RIAA certification" label="certified platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="976" end="980" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q179137" start="1094" end="1103" title="Americana (The Offspring album)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935455" start="1152" end="1166" title="Woodstock 1999" label="Woodstock 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="1214" end="1226" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q317095" start="1393" end="1407" title="Dexter Holland" label="Dexter Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1419" end="1432" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q707504" start="1986" end="2006" title="Brendan O&amp;#x27;Brien (music producer)" label="Brendan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319697" start="2064" end="2091" title="North Hollywood, Los Angeles, California" label="North Hollywood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="2231" end="2256" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418776" start="2450" end="2471" title="Canadian Albums Chart" label="Canadian Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q550619" start="2516" end="2520" title="Canadian Recording Industry Association" label="CRIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="2555" end="2563" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="2828" end="2835" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q856872" start="2837" end="2846" title="rap metal" label="rap metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="2852" end="2859" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="2865" end="2871" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711988" start="3000" end="3018" title="Original Prankster" label="Original Prankster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267329" start="3032" end="3044" title="Want You Bad" label="Want You Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525997" start="3061" end="3079" title="Million Miles Away (The Offspring song)" label="Million Miles Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="3191" end="3201" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q317095" start="3535" end="3549" title="Dexter Holland" label="Dexter Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335614" start="3593" end="3600" title="Noodles (musician)" label="Noodles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465689" start="3633" end="3640" title="Greg K." label="Greg K."/>
<link wikidata="Q2471276" start="3666" end="3675" title="Ron Welty" label="Ron Welty"/>
<link wikidata="Q313138" start="3713" end="3719" title="Redman (rapper)" label="Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642141" start="3775" end="3805" title="Chris Higgins (musician)" label="Chris &amp;quot;X-13&amp;quot; Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q707504" start="3842" end="3862" title="Brendan O&amp;#x27;Brien (music producer)" label="Brendan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241384" start="3931" end="3941" title="Nick DiDia" label="Nick DiDia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706634" start="4068" end="4079" title="Alan Forbes" label="Alan Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="4335" end="4342" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162309" wikidata="Q7415384" url="?curid=162309" title="Curculionidae">
<text>The Curculionidae are a family of weevils, commonly called snout beetles or true weevils. They are one of the largest animal families with 6,800 genera and 83,000 species described worldwide. They are the sister group to the family Brentidae.

They include the bark beetles as the subfamily Scolytinae, which are modified in shape in accordance with their wood-boring lifestyle. They do not much resemble other weevils, so they were traditionally considered a distinct family, Scolytidae. The family also includes the ambrosia beetles, of which the present-day subfamily Platypodinae was formerly considered the distinct family Platypodidae.

==Description==
Adult Curculionidae can be recognised by the well-developed, downwards-curved snout (rostrum) possessed by many species, though the rostrum is sometimes short (e.g. Entiminae). They have elbowed antennae that end in clubs, and the first antennal segment often fits into a groove in the side of the rostrum. The body tends to be robust, convex, heavily sclerotised and covered in scales or bristles. Curculionidae range in size from 1–35 mm long, usually being 5–15 mm long. Most Curculionidae are sexually dimorphic with females (compared to males) having antennae positioned more basally and a longer, thinner rostrum.

Larval Curculionidae are C-shaped and lightly sclerotised, with minute antennae, robust mandibles and no legs.

Most weevils feed on plants as larvae and adults, and they include important pests of cultivated plants that chew holes in fruits, nuts and other parts. The long rostrum possessed by most adult weevils is used by females to help lay eggs (oviposit) inside plant tissue. Some feed on rotten wood or bark (e.g. Cossoninae and Cryptorhynchinae), and some are wood-borers that feed on ambrosia fungi (Platypodinae and some Scolytinae).
Although pesticide resistance hasn&#x27;t historically been an issue with these insects, recently a mutation was discovered in association with the voltage-gated sodium channel in the species &quot;Sitophilus zeamais&quot;, indicating there is a lot to learn about how these insects adapt to changing environments.
==Behavior==
When disturbed, adult curculionids often play dead by lying motionless on their backs.

Many species of weevils are common household and garden pests, but don&#x27;t harm people, pets, or buildings. Their presence is more of a temporary nuisance, usually to plants and their fruits in their larval stage. In tropical areas they have larger effects, specifically several species in the genera &quot;Conotrachelus&quot; and &quot;Copturus&quot;.

==Phylogeny and systematics==
The phylogeny of the group is complex; with so many species, a spirited debate exists about the relationships between subfamilies and genera. A 1997 analysis attempted to construct a phylogeny based mainly on larval characteristics.

Recent work on the phylogenetic relationships in weevils mentions the two subfamily groups Adelognatha (&quot;short-nosed weevils&quot;, subfamily Entiminae) and Phanerognatha (&quot;long-nosed weevils&quot;, subfamilies of Curculionidae other than Entiminae) for the species of Curculionidae.

Almost two dozen subfamilies are recognized by some authors even when merging those that are certainly invalid. Others, however, recognize a lesser number – the only subfamilies that are almost universally considered valid are the Baridinae, Cossoninae, Curculioninae, Cyclominae, Entiminae, Molytinae, Platypodinae, and Scolytinae. The various proposed taxonomic schemes typically recognize as many additional subfamilies again, but little agreement is seen between authorities about which. In particular, the delimitation of the Molytinae has proven difficult.

The timeline for current and extant weevil speciation and diversification is consistent with the radiation of gymnosperms during the Mesozoic period.

The subfamilies considered valid by at least some authors today:
* Bagoinae (sometimes in Molytinae)
* Baridinae
* Brachycerinae (disputed; sometimes placed at family level)
* Ceutorhynchinae (sometimes in Baridinae)
* Conoderinae (sometimes in Baridinae)
* Cossoninae
* Cryptorhynchinae (sometimes in Curculioninae)
** &quot;Acalles&quot;
* Curculioninae – flower weevils, acorn and nut weevils

* Cyclominae
* Dryophthorinae (sometimes placed at family level)
* Entiminae – broad-nosed weevils
* Hyperinae (sometimes in Molytinae)
* Lixinae (sometimes in Molytinae)
* Mesoptiliinae (sometimes in Molytinae)
* Molytinae
* Orobitidinae (sometimes in Baridinae)
* Platypodinae – typical ambrosia beetles, &quot;higher&quot; Curculionidaes
* Raymondionyminae (sometimes in Brachycerinae)
* Scolytinae – bark beetles
* Xiphaspidinae (sometimes in Baridinae)

== See also ==

* Black vine weevil
* Boll weevil
* Pecan weevil
* Wheat weevil
* &quot;Hylobius&quot;
* &quot;Orthorhinus cylindrirostris&quot;
* &quot;Premnotrypes&quot;
* &quot;Scolytoplatypus&quot;
* Pests and diseases of roses

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7415384" start="4" end="17" title="Curculionidae" label="Curculionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q383963" start="34" end="40" title="weevil" label="weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415384" start="59" end="72" title="Curculionidae" label="snout beetles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415384" start="76" end="88" title="Curculionidae" label="true weevils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000017" start="232" end="241" title="Brentidae" label="Brentidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q720458" start="261" end="272" title="bark beetle" label="bark beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q164280" start="281" end="290" title="subfamily" label="subfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q720458" start="291" end="301" title="Scolytinae" label="Scolytinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q20972612" start="518" end="533" title="ambrosia beetle" label="ambrosia beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q164280" start="561" end="570" title="subfamily" label="subfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392058" start="571" end="583" title="Platypodinae" label="Platypodinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233438" start="744" end="751" title="Rostrum (anatomy)" label="rostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q204664" start="854" end="862" title="Antenna (biology)" label="antennae"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="1156" end="1174" title="Sexual dimorphism" label="sexually dimorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032385" start="1748" end="1759" title="Woodboring beetle" label="wood-borers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842442" start="1773" end="1787" title="ambrosia fungi" label="ambrosia fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272137" start="2022" end="2040" title="Maize weevil" label="Sitophilus zeamais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098451" start="2193" end="2202" title="Apparent death" label="play dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162347" start="2550" end="2563" title="Conotrachelus" label="Conotrachelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14923165" start="2580" end="2588" title="Copturus" label="Copturus"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="2631" end="2640" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932939" start="3008" end="3017" title="Entiminae" label="Entiminae"/>
<link wikidata="Q164280" start="3173" end="3184" title="subfamilies" label="subfamilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789026" start="3387" end="3396" title="Baridinae" label="Baridinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036607" start="3398" end="3408" title="Cossoninae" label="Cossoninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936307" start="3410" end="3423" title="Curculioninae" label="Curculioninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5795317" start="3425" end="3435" title="Cyclominae" label="Cyclominae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932939" start="3437" end="3446" title="Entiminae" label="Entiminae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938881" start="3448" end="3457" title="Molytinae" label="Molytinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392058" start="3459" end="3471" title="Platypodinae" label="Platypodinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q720458" start="3477" end="3487" title="Scolytinae" label="Scolytinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="3510" end="3519" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938881" start="3687" end="3696" title="Molytinae" label="Molytinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="3830" end="3840" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12008994" start="3938" end="3946" title="Bagoinae" label="Bagoinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789026" start="3974" end="3983" title="Baridinae" label="Baridinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q17264548" start="3986" end="3999" title="Brachycerinae" label="Brachycerinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947139" start="4047" end="4062" title="Ceutorhynchinae" label="Ceutorhynchinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15720708" start="4090" end="4101" title="Conoderinae" label="Conoderinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036607" start="4129" end="4139" title="Cossoninae" label="Cossoninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935924" start="4142" end="4158" title="Cryptorhynchinae" label="Cryptorhynchinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822475" start="4197" end="4204" title="Acalles" label="Acalles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936307" start="4213" end="4226" title="Curculioninae" label="Curculioninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5795317" start="4270" end="4280" title="Cyclominae" label="Cyclominae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261625" start="4283" end="4297" title="Dryophthorinae" label="Dryophthorinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932939" start="4335" end="4344" title="Entiminae" label="Entiminae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144140" start="4369" end="4378" title="Hyperinae" label="Hyperinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934055" start="4406" end="4413" title="Lixinae" label="Lixinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q17778428" start="4441" end="4454" title="Mesoptiliinae" label="Mesoptiliinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938881" start="4482" end="4491" title="Molytinae" label="Molytinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4494" end="4506" title="Orobitidinae" label="Orobitidinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392058" start="4534" end="4546" title="Platypodinae" label="Platypodinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q20972612" start="4557" end="4572" title="ambrosia beetle" label="ambrosia beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30243514" start="4611" end="4627" title="Raymondionyminae" label="Raymondionyminae"/>
<link wikidata="Q720458" start="4659" end="4669" title="Scolytinae" label="Scolytinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4687" end="4700" title="Xiphaspidinae" label="Xiphaspidinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q585566" start="4745" end="4762" title="Black vine weevil" label="Black vine weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q217336" start="4765" end="4776" title="Boll weevil" label="Boll weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194665" start="4779" end="4791" title="Curculio caryae" label="Pecan weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q217350" start="4794" end="4806" title="Wheat weevil" label="Wheat weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615833" start="4815" end="4823" title="Hylobius" label="Hylobius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104908" start="4838" end="4865" title="Orthorhinus cylindrirostris" label="Orthorhinus cylindrirostris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860934" start="4880" end="4892" title="Premnotrypes" label="Premnotrypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14923824" start="4907" end="4922" title="Scolytoplatypus" label="Scolytoplatypus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420237" start="4931" end="4958" title="Pests and diseases of roses" label="Pests and diseases of roses"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162311" wikidata="Q207206" url="?curid=162311" title="Sveinn Björnsson">
<text>Sveinn Björnsson (; 27 February 1881 – 25 January 1952) was the first president of Iceland, serving from 1944 to 1952.

==Background, education and legal career==
Sveinn was born in Copenhagen, Denmark, as the son of Björn Jónsson (editor and later minister) and Elísabet Sveinsdóttir. Sveinn graduated from the Latin School in Reykjavík in 1900 and obtained a law degree from the University of Copenhagen 1907. He was licensed to practice before the &quot;upper courts&quot; in 1907 and before the Superior Court in 1920, and served as public prosecutor in Reykjavík 1907–1920 and 1924–1926. From 29 September 1919 to 31 December the same year, he served as prosecutor at the National Upper Court.

He was a freemason, and one of the founders of Edda Freemasonic Lodge in Reykjavik. He served as Grandmaster of the Icelandic Order of Freemasons.

== Political and diplomatic career ==
Sveinn was a member of the Reykjavík City Council 1912–1920 and its chairman 1918–1920. He was elected to the Althing for Reykjavík 1914–15 and 1919–20. After Iceland&#x27;s independence from Denmark in 1918 he acted as minister to Denmark during 1920–1924 and 1926–1940.

== Regent and President ==
Although Iceland had become a sovereign state in 1918, its foreign affairs had been conducted by Denmark until the beginning of the Second World War. The German occupation of Denmark in April 1940, however, resulted the Icelandic king, Christian X, who resided in Denmark, being unable to perform his constitutional functions for Iceland and Sveinn was elected Regent of Iceland three times between 1941 and 1943, assuming all the prerogatives in Icelandic affairs held by the King. In July 1941, United States troops occupied Iceland on the invitation of Sveinn&#x27;s government and remained, in reduced numbers, after the war; their continued presence provoked the main controversy of the nation&#x27;s postwar foreign policy.

Sveinn was elected president by the Althing on the inauguration of the republic of Iceland in 1944. His first term was only one year, since the people of Iceland were to elect their president directly for the first time in 1945. Shortly after the creation of the republic, Sveinn called on Icelandic embassies to send him all books on diplomatic protocol that they could find, so that he could follow the right customs as head of state. Foreign diplomats often remarked on how strict Sveinn was in following diplomatic protocol in his interactions with them, perhaps too strict.

Sveinn was re-elected as president in 1945 and 1949 without opposition. He set new precedent and went outside of the formal powers given to the president after the 1949 parliamentary elections when he said that he would form a government if the parties could not agree on forming in four months&#x27; time. He claimed to have these powers according to the constitution, but historian (and later president) Guðni Th. Jóhannesson rejected that these powers are set in the constitution.

Sveinn had poor relations with the Danish King, Christian X, after Iceland became a republic. The King maintained that the Icelanders had given him false assurances in 1940 that the relationship between Iceland and Denmark would return to normal after the Nazi occupation had ended; something that Sveinn denied. For this reason, Sveinn did not go on an official visit to Denmark following the creation of the republic. Christian X died in 1947. But, due to poor health, Sveinn was unable to visit Denmark during the final part of his tenure as president.

The nation formally became a member of NATO on 30 March 1949, amid domestic controversy and riots. On 5 May 1951, a defence agreement was signed with the United States. American troops returned to Iceland as the Iceland Defence Force, and remained throughout the Cold War. The US withdrew the last of its forces on 30 September 2006. Sveinn died in Reykjavík in January 1952, more than one year before his third term of office was due to expire. He is the only president of Iceland, as of 2024, to die in office. Sveinn had been in poor health since 1949.

== Business activities ==
Sveinn was one of the founders of Eimskipafélag Íslands, the main shipping company in Iceland, in 1914 and its chairman 1914–1920 and 1924–1926. He was the founder of the insurance company Brunabótafélag Íslands (Icelandic Fire Insurance Company) and its director from its foundation in 1916 until 1920. He was also one of the founders of the insurance company Sjóvátryggingafélag Íslands (Icelandic Maritime Insurance Company) in 1918 and its chairman in 1918–1920 and 1924–1926. Sveinn was one of the founders of the Icelandic Red Cross on 10 December 1924 and its first chairman, serving until 1926.

== Family ==

On 2 September 1908 he married Georgia Björnsson, born Hansen (born 18 January 1884, died 18 September 1957). They had six children: Björn (1909), Anna Catherine Aagot (1911), Henrik (1914), Sveinn Christen (1916), Ólafur (1919), Elísabet (1922). His eldest son Björn Sveinsson Björnsson served in the Nazi German military as a part of the Waffen-SS in World War II.

His granddaughter, Brynhildur Georgía Björnsson, is the subject of the historical novel (&quot;The Woman at 1000°&quot;), written by Hallgrímur Helgason and published in 2011. The novel makes extensive reference to Sveinn and other members of the family. His great grandson is Henrik Björnsson, singer and lead guitarist in the shoegaze rock band Singapore Sling. His great granddaughter is Georgía Olga Kristiansen, the first female referee to officiate in the highest competitive tier men&#x27;s basketball league in Iceland.

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207206" start="0" end="16" title="Sveinn Björnsson" label="Sveinn Björnsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="70" end="90" title="president of Iceland" label="president of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="182" end="192" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q879667" start="217" end="230" title="Björn Jónsson" label="Björn Jónsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076673" start="312" end="337" title="Menntaskólinn í Reykjavík" label="Latin School in Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="381" end="405" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424458" start="816" end="845" title="Icelandic Order of Freemasons" label="Icelandic Order of Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186175" start="913" end="935" title="Reykjavík City Council" label="Reykjavík City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147167" start="1008" end="1017" title="Reykjavík (Althing constituency)" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1318" end="1334" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q819136" start="1347" end="1368" title="occupation of Denmark" label="occupation of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567" start="1406" end="1420" title="Kingdom of Iceland" label="Icelandic king"/>
<link wikidata="Q156617" start="1422" end="1433" title="Christian X of Denmark" label="Christian X"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="1547" end="1553" title="Regent" label="Regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1683" end="1696" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="1697" end="1703" title="United States Armed Forces" label="troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050460" start="1704" end="1712" title="Occupation of Iceland" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="1988" end="2007" title="republic of Iceland" label="republic of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508765" start="2853" end="2865" title="Constitution of Iceland" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q24045706" start="2903" end="2924" title="Guðni Th. Jóhannesson" label="Guðni Th. Jóhannesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3578" end="3582" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481304" start="3606" end="3636" title="1949 anti-NATO riot in Iceland" label="domestic controversy and riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656151" start="3751" end="3772" title="Iceland Defence Force" label="Iceland Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="3802" end="3810" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="3888" end="3897" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920326" start="4156" end="4177" title="Eimskipafélag Íslands" label="Eimskipafélag Íslands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4311" end="4333" title="Brunabótafélag Íslands" label="Brunabótafélag Íslands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4483" end="4510" title="Sjóvátryggingafélag Íslands" label="Sjóvátryggingafélag Íslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="4651" end="4660" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174034" start="5002" end="5027" title="Björn Sveinnson Björnsson" label="Björn Sveinsson Björnsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="5080" end="5089" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q365955" start="5241" end="5260" title="Hallgrímur Helgason" label="Hallgrímur Helgason"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523117" start="5455" end="5470" title="Singapore Sling (band)" label="Singapore Sling"/>
<link wikidata="Q45038325" start="5499" end="5523" title="Georgía Olga Kristiansen" label="Georgía Olga Kristiansen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162312" wikidata="Q1132631" url="?curid=162312" title="Mechanical wave">
<text>In physics, a mechanical wave is a wave that is an oscillation of matter, and therefore transfers energy through a material medium. 
(Vacuum is, from classical perspective, a non-material medium, where electromagnetic waves propagate.) 

While waves can move over long distances, the movement of the medium of transmission—the material—is limited. Therefore, the oscillating material does not move far from its initial equilibrium position. Mechanical waves can be produced only in media which possess elasticity and inertia. There are three types of mechanical waves: transverse waves, longitudinal waves, and surface waves. Some of the most common examples of mechanical waves are water waves, sound waves, and seismic waves.

Like all waves, mechanical waves transport energy. This energy propagates in the same direction as the wave. A wave requires an initial energy input; once this initial energy is added, the wave travels through the medium until all its energy is transferred. In contrast, electromagnetic waves require no medium, but can still travel through one.

==Transverse wave==

A transverse wave is the form of a wave in which particles of medium vibrate about their mean position perpendicular to the direction of the motion of the wave.

To see an example, move an end of a Slinky (whose other end is fixed) to the left-and-right of the Slinky, as opposed to to-and-fro. Light also has properties of a transverse wave, although it is an electromagnetic wave.

==Longitudinal wave==

Longitudinal waves cause the medium to vibrate parallel to the direction of the wave. It consists of multiple compressions and rarefactions. The rarefaction is the farthest distance apart in the longitudinal wave and the compression is the closest distance together. The speed of the longitudinal wave is increased in higher index of refraction, due to the closer proximity of the atoms in the medium that is being compressed. Sound is a longitudinal wave.

==Surface waves==

This type of wave travels along the surface or interface between two media. An example of a surface wave would be waves in a pool, or in an ocean, lake, or any other type of water body. There are two types of surface waves, namely Rayleigh waves and Love waves.

Rayleigh waves, also known as &quot;ground roll&quot;, are waves that travel as ripples with motion similar to those of waves on the surface of water. Such waves are much slower than body waves, at roughly 90% of the velocity of for a typical homogeneous elastic medium. Rayleigh waves have energy losses only in two dimensions and are hence more destructive in earthquakes than conventional bulk waves, such as P-waves and S-waves, which lose energy in all three directions.

A Love wave is a surface wave having horizontal waves that are shear or transverse to the direction of propagation. They usually travel slightly faster than Rayleigh waves, at about 90% of the body wave velocity, and have the largest amplitude.

==Examples==
*Seismic waves
*Sound waves
*Wind waves on seas and lakes
*Vibration

==See also==
*Acoustics
*Ultrasound
*Underwater acoustics

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132631" start="14" end="29" title="Mechanical wave" label="mechanical wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="35" end="39" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="66" end="72" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q334265" start="115" end="130" title="transmission medium" label="material medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="202" end="223" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="502" end="512" title="Elasticity (physics)" label="elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q122508" start="517" end="524" title="inertia" label="inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q691978" start="569" end="584" title="transverse wave" label="transverse wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q626707" start="587" end="604" title="longitudinal wave" label="longitudinal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q889796" start="611" end="623" title="surface wave" label="surface wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q186167" start="713" end="726" title="seismic waves" label="seismic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="772" end="778" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="792" end="802" title="Wave propagation" label="propagates"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="1000" end="1021" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118802" start="1295" end="1301" title="Slinky" label="Slinky"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="1392" end="1397" title="Light" label="Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="1931" end="1936" title="Sound" label="Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q901882" start="2028" end="2037" title="interface (matter)" label="interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351144" start="2212" end="2225" title="Rayleigh wave" label="Rayleigh wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307937" start="2231" end="2240" title="Love wave" label="Love wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q186167" start="2427" end="2436" title="body wave (seismology)" label="body wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="2606" end="2616" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208908" start="2656" end="2662" title="P-wave" label="P-wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053186" start="2668" end="2674" title="S-wave" label="S-wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q186167" start="2981" end="2993" title="Seismic wave" label="Seismic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="2996" end="3001" title="Sound" label="Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q165848" start="3009" end="3018" title="Wind wave" label="Wind wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695508" start="3039" end="3048" title="Vibration" label="Vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="3064" end="3073" title="Acoustics" label="Acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="3075" end="3085" title="Ultrasound" label="Ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292425" start="3087" end="3107" title="Underwater acoustics" label="Underwater acoustics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162314" wikidata="Q217848" url="?curid=162314" title="Ásgeir Ásgeirsson">
<text>Ásgeir Ásgeirsson (; 13 May 1894 – 15 September 1972) was the second president of Iceland; he served from 1952 to 1968. He was a Freemason and served as grand master of the Icelandic Order of Freemasons. He also served as the prime minister of Iceland from 3 June 1932 to 28 July 1934 for the Progressive Party. Ásgeir is the only person in Iceland to date to serve both as president and prime minister.

== Early life and education ==
Educated as a theologian, Ásgeir graduated with honours from the University of Iceland in Reykjavík in 1915, but was considered too young to be ordained as a minister. He married Dóra Þórhallsdóttir in 1917. Dóra was the daughter of Þórhallur Bjarnarson (1855–1916), 6th Bishop of Iceland (1908–1916). Her brother was Tryggvi Þórhallsson, who was the 5th Prime Minister of Iceland (1927–1932).

== Political and business career ==
Ásgeir was elected to the Althing in 1923 at the age of 29 for the Progressive Party. He spoke as the speaker of the Althing at Þingvellir on the occasion of the Althing&#x27;s 1,000th anniversary celebrations in 1930, and became Minister of Finance of Iceland in 1931, and Prime Minister in 1932. He left the Progressive Party in 1934, but stood for election as an independent for a while until he joined the Social Democratic Party, and remained in the Althing until he was elected president in 1952. From 1938 and until he was elected president, he was the director of Útvegsbanki Íslands, an Icelandic bank which later merged with three other banks and became Íslandsbanki (which later became Glitnir).

== President of Iceland ==
Ásgeir was elected the second President of Iceland in a closely contested election in 1952, which had been called upon early due to the death of Sveinn Björnsson, Iceland&#x27;s first president. Ásgeir&#x27;s main opponent, Bjarni Jónsson, minister in the Reykjavík Cathedral, had the endorsement of the governing parties in Iceland, the Independence Party and the Progressive Party. Still Ásgeir managed to receive 46.7% of the vote, compared to Bjarni&#x27;s 44.1%. The third candidate, Gísli Sveinsson, a former MP for the Independence Party, got 6.0%.

Ásgeir was the first Icelandic president to go to Denmark on an official visit. He also visited Norway, Canada, the United States of America and Israel.

Ásgeir was re-elected unopposed in 1956, 1960, and 1964. Shortly after his fourth term started, his wife, Dóra, died from leukemia. In 1968, Ásgeir decided not to seek re-election. It was widely expected that his son-in-law, Gunnar Thoroddsen would be elected as his successor. However, even though Gunnar started as the frontrunner (according to opinion polls), he lost the election to Kristján Eldjárn.

== Awards ==
In 1955, Ásgeir was awarded the Grand Cross Special Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany (&quot;Sonderstufe des Großkreuzes des Verdienstordens der Bundesrepublik Deutschland&quot;).

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217848" start="0" end="17" title="Ásgeir Ásgeirsson" label="Ásgeir Ásgeirsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="69" end="89" title="president of Iceland" label="president of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="129" end="138" title="Freemason" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424458" start="173" end="202" title="Icelandic Order of Freemasons" label="Icelandic Order of Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190022" start="226" end="251" title="prime minister of Iceland" label="prime minister of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046777" start="293" end="310" title="Progressive Party (Iceland)" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="450" end="460" title="theology" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q196559" start="501" end="522" title="University of Iceland" label="University of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="526" end="535" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="594" end="602" title="Minister (Christianity)" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320349" start="615" end="634" title="Dóra Þórhallsdóttir" label="Dóra Þórhallsdóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q16421471" start="669" end="689" title="Þórhallur Bjarnarson" label="Þórhallur Bjarnarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403733" start="707" end="724" title="Bishop of Iceland" label="Bishop of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q562058" start="754" end="773" title="Tryggvi Þórhallsson" label="Tryggvi Þórhallsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190022" start="791" end="816" title="Prime Minister of Iceland" label="Prime Minister of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="893" end="900" title="Althing" label="Althing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046777" start="934" end="951" title="Progressive Party of Iceland" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424173" start="969" end="976" title="Speaker of the Parliament of Iceland" label="speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370" start="995" end="1005" title="Þingvellir" label="Þingvellir"/>
<link wikidata="Q50041105" start="1097" end="1127" title="Minister of Finance of Iceland" label="Minister of Finance of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190022" start="1141" end="1155" title="Prime Minister of Iceland" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753703" start="1277" end="1300" title="Social Democratic Party (Iceland)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1439" end="1458" title="Útvegsbanki Íslands" label="Útvegsbanki Íslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15614925" start="1531" end="1543" title="Íslandsbanki" label="Íslandsbanki"/>
<link wikidata="Q291823" start="1564" end="1571" title="Glitnir (bank)" label="Glitnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="1632" end="1652" title="President of Iceland" label="President of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207206" start="1747" end="1763" title="Sveinn Björnsson" label="Sveinn Björnsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270853" start="1858" end="1877" title="Reykjavík Cathedral" label="Reykjavík Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q218303" start="1940" end="1958" title="Independence Party (Iceland)" label="Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2091" end="2106" title="Gísli Sveinsson" label="Gísli Sveinsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="2209" end="2216" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="2255" end="2261" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2263" end="2269" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2275" end="2299" title="United States of America" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2304" end="2310" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="2435" end="2443" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q984037" start="2538" end="2555" title="Gunnar Thoroddsen" label="Gunnar Thoroddsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q310396" start="2700" end="2716" title="Kristján Eldjárn" label="Kristján Eldjárn"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="2797" end="2846" title="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162318" wikidata="Q310396" url="?curid=162318" title="Kristján Eldjárn">
<text>Kristján Eldjárn (; 6 December 1916 – 14 September 1982) was the third president of Iceland, serving from 1968 to 1980.

==Biography==
Kristján was born in Tjörn, Svarfaðardal, Iceland. His parents were Þórarinn Kr. Eldjárn, a teacher in Tjörn, and Sigrún Sigurhjartardóttir. He graduated in archaeology from the University of Copenhagen and taught at the University of Iceland. In 1957 he was awarded a doctorate for his research into pagan burials in Iceland. He was a teacher at the Akureyri Grammar School and the College of Navigation in Reykjavík, becoming a curator at the National Museum of Iceland in 1945 and its Director in 1947, a position he held until the 1968 presidential election.

Between 1966 and 1968, he hosted a series of educational TV programs on the (then new) Icelandic National Television (RÚV); on the program,he showed the audience some of the National Museum&#x27;s artefacts and explained their historical context. These programs became quite popular, making him a well known and respected popular figure. This no doubt gave him the incentive needed to run in the 1968 presidential election as a politically non-affiliated candidate.

Starting as the underdog in the 1968 presidential election, running against Ambassador Gunnar Thoroddsen who initially had a 70% lead in the opinion polls, Kristján won 65.6% of the vote on a 92.2% voter turnout. He was re-elected unopposed in 1972 and 1976. In 1980 he decided not to run for another term, wanting to devote his remaining years entirely to continuing his lifelong academic work.

President Kristján Eldjárn died following heart surgery in Cleveland, Ohio on 13 September 1982.

His son Þórarinn Eldjárn is one of Iceland&#x27;s most popular authors, specializing in short stories, but also writing poetry and an occasional novel. His daughter Sigrún Eldjárn is also an author and illustrator of several children&#x27;s books. Þórarinn&#x27;s son, Ari Eldjárn, is Iceland&#x27;s most prominent stand-up comedian.

==References==
== Further reading ==

==External links==
*Presidential biography and speeches</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q310396" start="0" end="16" title="Kristján Eldjárn" label="Kristján Eldjárn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="71" end="91" title="president of Iceland" label="president of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q151128" start="177" end="184" title="Danish Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="292" end="303" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="313" end="337" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q196559" start="356" end="377" title="University of Iceland" label="University of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="436" end="441" title="Old Norse religion" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701979" start="486" end="509" title="Akureyri Junior College" label="Akureyri Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q626963" start="580" end="606" title="National Museum of Iceland" label="National Museum of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792592" start="670" end="696" title="1968 Icelandic presidential election" label="1968 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q608708" start="817" end="820" title="RÚV" label="RÚV"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="1139" end="1153" title="independent (politics)" label="non-affiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="1242" end="1252" title="Ambassador" label="Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q984037" start="1253" end="1270" title="Gunnar Thoroddsen" label="Gunnar Thoroddsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="1364" end="1377" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="1622" end="1637" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q335832" start="1669" end="1685" title="Þórarinn Eldjárn" label="Þórarinn Eldjárn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1826" end="1840" title="Sigrún Eldjárn" label="Sigrún Eldjárn"/>
<link wikidata="Q35676701" start="1930" end="1941" title="Ari Eldjárn" label="Ari Eldjárn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162319" wikidata="Q189797" url="?curid=162319" title="Vigdís Finnbogadóttir">
<text>Vigdís Finnbogadóttir (; born 15 April 1930) is an Icelandic politician who served as the fourth president of Iceland from 1980 to 1996, the first woman to hold the position and the first in the world to be democratically elected president of a country. Having served for 16 years, she was also the longest-serving elected female head of state in history. Vigdís is a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador and a member of the Club of Madrid.

==Early life and career==
Vigdís was born on 15 April 1930 in Reykjavík. Her father was a civil engineer, and her mother was a nurse who headed the national nurses association. The following year, her younger brother Þorvaldur was born; he did not survive to adulthood, as he drowned in Hreðavatn. Vigdís enrolled at the University of Grenoble in 1949, later switching to the Sorbonne. She studied English and French literature, giving special emphasis to plays, and she graduated in 1953.

Vigdís was married in 1954. The same year, she began acting, co-founding a theatre group. She also worked on the translation of several French plays. She enrolled at the University of Copenhagen in 1957, where she studied theatre history until the following year. She was divorced in 1963. Vigdís participated in the anti-military rallies that took place in the 1960s and 1970s, protesting the United States military presence in Iceland. Vigdís adopted a daughter in 1972, making her the first single woman in Iceland to adopt a child.

Vigdís taught French lessons on television for RÚV beginning in 1972, making her a well known figure throughout the nation. In the same year, she was appointed the artistic director of the Reykjavík Theatre Company. She became a member of the Advisory Committee on Cultural Affairs in the Nordic Countries in 1976, and she became the organisation&#x27;s chair in 1978. She continued in all of these positions until she became President of Iceland in 1980. Other jobs she held early in life included her work as a French teacher at several colleges, including at the University of Iceland, and her work as a tour guide with the Icelandic Tourist Bureau in the summers. She eventually became the head of the Icelandic Tourist Bureau.

==Presidency (1980–1996)==
Vigdís ran in the 1980 presidential election. During her campaign, her anti-military position and her opposition to a United States presence in Iceland led to allegations that she was sympathetic to communism. Vigdís ran for president to prove that women were able to lead political campaigns, and she did not expect to win. Despite this, Vigdís won the election on 29 June 1980. The vote was split between four candidates, and she prevailed with 33.6% of the vote. Vigdís was the first woman to ever be democratically elected as a head of state in any country, taking office on 1 August 1980 as the fourth president of Iceland. The number of women in the Althing increased significantly after her election.

Vigdís was re-elected without opposition in the 1984 presidential election. She oversaw the Reykjavík Summit on 11–12 October 1986 between American president Ronald Reagan and Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev, which is credited with improving relations between the countries and bringing the Cold War closer to an end. In the 1988 presidential election, Vigdís became the first incumbent president of Iceland to face a challenger in the presidential election. The challenger fared poorly, and Vigdís won with 92.7% of the vote. She was again re-elected without opposition in 1992.

Though the presidency is mostly ceremonial, Vigdís became an active president, using the role to represent the nation and to inform the national identity through cultural initiatives. Vigdís is an environmentalist, and she used her presidency as a platform to advocate for environmental issues. She led a campaign for reforestation in Iceland, and she called for the prevention of topsoil loss. Vigdís is also a pacifist, and she describes herself as a &quot;peace person&quot;. She was also an advocate for gay rights as president.

The decision Vigdís considered &quot;the most difficult episode&quot; of her career took place in 1994 during the debate on joining the European Economic Area. A strong opposition existed against European integration in Iceland, but Vigdís supported the European Union and European integration, and she refused to use her presidential veto to block Iceland&#x27;s association with the European Economic Area. Vigdís decided not to run for a fifth term as president, and her tenure ended in August 1996. She served for 16 years. To date, she is the longest-serving female elected head of state in recorded history.

==Post-presidency==
Vigdís became the founding chair of the Council of Women World Leaders in 1996, and she was first chair of the World Commission on the Ethics in Scientific Knowledge and Technology from 1997 to 2001. Since 1998, Vigdís has served as UNESCO&#x27;s Goodwill Ambassador for languages. She is also a member of the Fondation Chirac&#x27;s honour committee.

Vigdís continued her peace advocacy after her tenure as president ended. In 2016, she expressed her desire for the United States and Russia to visit Iceland to resolve their differences through discussion as they did during the Reykjavík Summit. She has described the relations between the two countries as a new Cold War.

Vigdís is a member of the Club of Madrid.

== Honours ==
===National honours===
** Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the Falcon (1 August 1980)

===Foreign honours===
** Knight of the Order of the Elephant (25 February 1981)
** Knight with Collar of the Royal Order of the Seraphim (8 October 1981; collar 1987)
** Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of St. Olav (1982)
** Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the White Rose (1982)
** Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion (18 September 1985)
** Knight Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Charles III (11 September 1985)
** Honorary Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath (25 June 1990)

===Honorary degrees===
*Université Bordeaux Montaigne, (former Université Bordeaux 3), France (1987)
*University of Trondheim, Norway (1993)

== See also ==

* List of the first women holders of political offices

==References==

==External links==

*Official CV
*Video interview by the Nordic Culture Fund 
*Video interview by the School of Humanities of the University of Iceland 
*Video message for the Women in Parliaments Global Forum </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189797" start="0" end="21" title="Vigdís Finnbogadóttir" label="Vigdís Finnbogadóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="97" end="117" title="president of Iceland" label="president of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q378422" start="368" end="394" title="UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador" label="UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426861" start="415" end="429" title="Club of Madrid" label="Club of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="494" end="503" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582652" start="522" end="536" title="civil engineer" label="civil engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q536424" start="719" end="728" title="Hreðavatn" label="Hreðavatn"/>
<link wikidata="Q945876" start="753" end="775" title="University of Grenoble" label="University of Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q41497113" start="804" end="816" title="Sorbonne University" label="the Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="1093" end="1117" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q608708" start="1507" end="1510" title="RÚV" label="RÚV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319506" start="1649" end="1674" title="Reykjavík Theatre Company" label="Reykjavík Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="1886" end="1906" title="President of Iceland" label="President of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q196559" start="2026" end="2047" title="University of Iceland" label="University of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132340" start="2238" end="2264" title="1980 Icelandic presidential election" label="1980 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="2752" end="2765" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="2876" end="2883" title="Althing" label="Althing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586598" start="2977" end="3003" title="1984 Icelandic presidential election" label="1984 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036702" start="3021" end="3037" title="Reykjavík Summit" label="Reykjavík Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="3087" end="3100" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="3122" end="3139" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="3223" end="3231" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481964" start="3257" end="3283" title="1988 Icelandic presidential election" label="1988 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="3710" end="3726" title="environmentalist" label="environmentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q815818" start="3831" end="3844" title="reforestation" label="reforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247456" start="3894" end="3906" title="topsoil loss" label="topsoil loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="3925" end="3933" title="pacifist" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="4021" end="4031" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="4183" end="4205" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="4243" end="4263" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4301" end="4315" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="4320" end="4340" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="4382" end="4386" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176528" start="4722" end="4752" title="Council of Women World Leaders" label="Council of Women World Leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="4915" end="4921" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583669" start="4929" end="4948" title="Goodwill Ambassador" label="Goodwill Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075419" start="4992" end="5008" title="Jacques Chirac Foundation for Sustainable Development and Cultural Dialogue" label="Fondation Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426861" start="5385" end="5399" title="Club of Madrid" label="Club of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394282" start="5473" end="5492" title="Order of the Falcon" label="Order of the Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q976544" start="5549" end="5570" title="Order of the Elephant" label="Order of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331130" start="5619" end="5646" title="Royal Order of the Seraphim" label="Royal Order of the Seraphim"/>
<link wikidata="Q94345" start="5711" end="5728" title="Order of St. Olav" label="Order of St. Olav"/>
<link wikidata="Q94437" start="5770" end="5793" title="Order of the White Rose" label="Order of the White Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471215" start="5830" end="5859" title="Order of the Netherlands Lion" label="Order of the Netherlands Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q751275" start="5921" end="5941" title="Order of Charles III" label="Order of Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="5998" end="6015" title="Order of the Bath" label="Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q13342" start="6056" end="6085" title="Bordeaux Montaigne University" label="Université Bordeaux Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6119" end="6125" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q314536" start="6134" end="6157" title="Norwegian University of Science and Technology" label="University of Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="6159" end="6165" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643065" start="6192" end="6244" title="List of the first women holders of political offices" label="List of the first women holders of political offices"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162320" wikidata="Q57284" url="?curid=162320" title="Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson">
<text>Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson (; born 14 May 1943) is an Icelandic politician who was the fifth president of Iceland, serving from 1996 to 2016. He was previously a member of the Icelandic Parliament for the People&#x27;s Alliance and served as Minister of Finance from 1988 to 1991.

Since the end of his presidency, Ólafur has been serving as Chairman of the Arctic Circle, a non-profit organization, and as Chairman of the International Renewable Energy Agency&#x27;s Global Commission on the Geopolitics of Energy Transformation.

==Early life==
Ólafur was born in Ísafjörður, the son of barber Grímur Kristgeirsson and housewife Svanhildur Ólafsdóttir Hjartar. He matriculated from Menntaskólinn í Reykjavík in 1962. From 1962 to 1970 he studied at the University of Manchester, obtaining a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics and political science in 1965 and a Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) degree in political science in 1970, thus becoming the first Icelander to earn a PhD in this field. He became a lecturer in political science at the University of Iceland in 1970, then a Professor of Political Science at the same university in 1973. He was the university&#x27;s first Professor of Political Science.

==Political career==
As part of the left-wing People&#x27;s Alliance, Ólafur was a Member of Althing for Reykjavík from 1978 to 1983. During this time, from 1980 to 1983, he was Chairman of the People&#x27;s Alliance parliamentary group. Subsequently, he was Chairman of the People&#x27;s Alliance executive committee from 1983 to 1987; additionally, from 1983 to 1985 he was editor of a newspaper, &quot;Þjóðviljinn&quot;. From 1981 to 1984, he was also a member of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, serving again briefly from 1995 to 1996. In 1984, with three other left-wing intellectuals, he took part in a debate with economist Milton Friedman, who was in Iceland to give a lecture on the &quot;tyranny of the status quo&quot; at the University of Iceland.

Ólafur was chairman and later President of Parliamentarians for Global Action (PGA) from 1984 to 1990, serving on their council until 1996. In 1986, he received the Indira Gandhi Prize on behalf of the PGA. From 1987 to 1995, he was Leader of the People&#x27;s Alliance. During this time, he served as Minister of Finance from 1988 to 1991. As Minister of Finance, he &quot;was subjected to the idea that the rating agencies were the golden judges of financial health.&quot; He was re-elected as a Member of Althing for Reykjanes from 1991 to 1996.

==Presidency (1996–2016)==
===1996 election===
In the 1996 presidential election, he was elected with 41.4% of the votes cast.

===Re-election 2004===
In the 2004 presidential election, Ólafur was re-elected with 85.6% of the valid votes cast, but that election also saw a record number of empty/invalid ballots (21.2%) and an exceptionally low turnout of 62.9% (usually 80–90%), both of which have been interpreted as dissent with the president&#x27;s decision not to sign a controversial media law. Since then, the issue of a constitutional amendment to revoke the veto power of the president has been raised by the Independence Party. Some have also wanted to rest that power with the people themselves, who could then force referendums to be held on laws by – for instance – collecting a certain number of signatures.

===Re-election 2008===
On 1 January 2008, in his new year&#x27;s address, Ólafur announced his intention to seek a fourth term in office later in 2008. Because there was no challenger, he was automatically re-elected and sworn in for another term on 1 August 2008.

===Crisis of 2008 statements===
In the aftermath of the 2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis, Ólafur criticized other countries for lack of help to Iceland.

In early November, the President attended a traditional informal lunch with all ambassadors to Iceland, held by the senior Danish ambassador. According to a confidential memo from the Norwegian embassy, quoted in the Norwegian newspaper Klassekampen, the President said: &quot;The North Atlantic is important to Scandinavia, the US and Britain. This is a fact these countries now seem to ignore. Then, Iceland should rather get some new friends&quot;. He praised Norway and the Faroe Islands for their swift decision to grant major loans to Iceland. He also said Iceland should rather invite Russia to use the Keflavík Air Base. According to the memo, an &quot;amazed and smiling&quot; Russian ambassador said Russia did not have any need for this. Ólafur also criticised the International Monetary Fund for the system&#x27;s flaws and for its mistreatment of Iceland. He said it was part of Icelandic political mentality to &quot;fight alone&quot; rather than being threatened into submission, and that he expected Iceland to overcome the crisis sooner than the US and Britain by showing initiative and international activity in new fields. The memo underlined that the President of Iceland has no political power and that no other government official had presented similar points of view &quot;to the same degree&quot;. The Danish ambassador to Iceland, Lasse Reimann, confirmed to the daily &quot;Politiken&quot; that the lunch had taken place, but declined to discuss on the President&#x27;s comments.

On 5 January 2010, the President of Iceland vetoed a measure of the Icelandic government to repay the governments of Britain and the Netherlands for their bailouts of customers of private Icelandic banks (no such bailout was required under Icelandic law, though on 26 May 2010 the EFTA found it was required by the terms of Iceland&#x27;s membership of the EEA). The President&#x27;s veto was upheld by the people of Iceland when they voted upon the measure in March 2010. This dispute is known as Icesave dispute.

On 20 February 2011, the President of Iceland again vetoed an effort by the Icelandic government to repay (in installments over a period of years) the governments of Britain and the Netherlands. In a referendum held on 9 April 2011, Icelanders rejected for a second time a proposal to pay $5 billion to Britain and the Netherlands. Nearly 60% of Icelanders rejected the proposal put forward by the government. The President&#x27;s veto was thus upheld by the people.
===2012 election===
Ólafur Ragnar announced on 4 March 2012, that he would be seeking a fifth term as the President of Iceland in the 2012 presidential election. He received 52.78% of votes cast in the election, which took place on 30 June.

===2016 election and Panama Papers controversy===
In a statement to the country on 1 January 2016, Ólafur Ragnar announced that he would not run in the 2016 presidential election, wanting &quot;to transfer the responsibilities of the president onto other shoulders&quot;. He later withdrew the statement and decided in April to run again, citing political unrest after the fallout of the Panama Papers leak, which implicated Prime Minister Sigmundur Davíð Gunnlaugsson and led to his resignation after large anti-government protests. After Guðni Th. Jóhannesson and Davíð Oddsson announced their candidacies, he again changed his mind and on 9 May declared he would not run.

Reykjavik Grapevine and the news site Kjarninn revealed that Ólafur Ragnar&#x27;s wife, Dorrit Moussaieff, had connections to an offshore company in the British Virgin Islands. Ólafur Ragnar had denied any personal or family ties to companies in tax havens. The company was owned by the parents of Dorrit. According to Kjarninn, the company, Lasca Finance, was in operation from 1999 to 2005. The financial statements of Moussaieff Jewelers Limited show it received almost £7 million (10.2 million or €9.1 million) in interest payments from Lasca in 2000–2005.

==Views on current global issues==
Ólafur has identified the 2009 financial crisis, the need for a green energy revolution, and climate change as the three most pressing issues in today&#x27;s world. Declaring these three problems to be interconnected, he has said, &quot;None of these three crises can be solved without solving the other.&quot;

Ólafur has expressed concern that Saudi Arabian financing of a Reykjavík mosque will fuel radical Islam in Iceland, and said that he was, &quot;shocked to the point of paralysis&quot; when he learned the government of Saudi Arabia had decided to interfere in Icelandic religious life by donating one million US dollars for the mosque.

==Awards and decorations==
===National honours===
** Collar with Grand Cross Breast Star of the Order of the Falcon

===Foreign honours===

** Knight of the Order of the Elephant
** Grand Cross Special Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany
** Grand Cross of the Order of Vytautas the Great
** Grand Cross of the Order of St. Olav
** Recipient of the Order for Exceptional Merits
** Knight of the Royal Order of the Seraphim
** Recipient of the Ruby Jubilee Commemorative Medal of King Carl XVI Gustaf

==Other achievements==

In recent years the President has been outspoken on the issues of renewable energy and global climate change. He initiated a Global Roundtable on Climate Change with the participation of a large group of companies and individual opinion leaders. Ólafur strongly advocates the use of geothermal energy, which is renewable, economically viable and reliable resource, as proven convincingly by the case of Iceland.

In relation to his efforts on these issues, Ólafur has participated in the Global Creative Leadership Summit, organized by the Louise Blouin Foundation, in 2007 and 2008. He was also awarded the Louise T Blouin Award for Creative and Cultural Achievement. In 2008, as a delegate at the Summit he delivered the Keynote Speech on Climate Change versus Globalization.

On 15 April 2013, at the National Press Club in Washington, he announced the formation of the Arctic Circle, an organization to facilitate dialogue among political and business leaders, environmental experts, scientists, indigenous representatives, and other international stakeholders to address issues facing the Arctic as a result of climate change and melting sea ice. 

==Family==
He married Guðrún Katrín Þorbergsdóttir in 1974, who gave birth to twin daughters the following year, Guðrún Tinna, a graduate in business studies, and Svanhildur Dalla, a graduate both in political science and law. Guðrún Katrín was a popular figure in Iceland, and was mourned nationwide when she died of leukaemia in 1998.

Ólafur&#x27;s second marriage was to Israeli-born Dorrit Moussaieff, to whom he became engaged in May 2000. The wedding took place on his 60th birthday, 14 May 2003, in a private ceremony held at the presidential residence.

==Health==
Ólafur was hospitalized in Reykjavík on 6 October 2008, for an angioplasty procedure. This was announced on 9 October, with his saying that he was &quot;recovering and has resumed most activities&quot;.

==Ancestry==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57284" start="0" end="22" title="Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson" label="Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="89" end="109" title="president of Iceland" label="president of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="172" end="192" title="Icelandic Parliament" label="Icelandic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165306" start="201" end="223" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance (Iceland)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q50041105" start="238" end="257" title="Ministry of Finance (Iceland)" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013058" start="354" end="367" title="Arctic Circle (organization)" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q392739" start="419" end="456" title="International Renewable Energy Agency" label="International Renewable Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q106896" start="562" end="572" title="Ísafjörður" label="Ísafjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q107198" start="585" end="591" title="barber" label="barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076673" start="680" end="705" title="Menntaskólinn í Reykjavík" label="Menntaskólinn í Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="751" end="775" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="789" end="805" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="816" end="825" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="830" end="847" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="862" end="882" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569495" start="1001" end="1009" title="lecturer" label="lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q196559" start="1038" end="1059" title="University of Iceland" label="University of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="1243" end="1252" title="left-wing politics" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165306" start="1253" end="1275" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance (Iceland)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="1300" end="1307" title="Althing" label="Althing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147167" start="1312" end="1321" title="Reykjavík (Althing constituency)" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165306" start="1401" end="1423" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance (Iceland)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q939743" start="1678" end="1725" title="Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe" label="Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="1859" end="1874" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q196559" start="1965" end="1986" title="University of Iceland" label="University of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823693" start="2032" end="2066" title="Parliamentarians for Global Action" label="Parliamentarians for Global Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241794" start="2154" end="2173" title="Indira Gandhi Prize" label="Indira Gandhi Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q50041105" start="2291" end="2310" title="Ministry of Finance (Iceland)" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424268" start="2509" end="2518" title="Reykjanes (Althing constituency)" label="Reykjanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896075" start="2593" end="2619" title="1996 Icelandic presidential election" label="1996 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q592617" start="2697" end="2723" title="2004 Icelandic presidential election" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q218303" start="3157" end="3175" title="Independence Party (Iceland)" label="Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264184" start="3554" end="3578" title="2008 Icelandic presidential election" label="automatically re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137483" start="3684" end="3720" title="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis" label="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702232" start="4023" end="4035" title="Klassekampen" label="Klassekampen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481748" start="4396" end="4413" title="Keflavík Air Base" label="Keflavík Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="4562" end="4589" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q373133" start="5186" end="5195" title="Politiken" label="Politiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="5574" end="5578" title="EFTA" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="5650" end="5653" title="European Economic Area" label="EEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656185" start="5791" end="5806" title="Icesave dispute" label="Icesave dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938485" start="6410" end="6436" title="2012 Icelandic presidential election" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690180" start="6670" end="6696" title="2016 Icelandic presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702848" start="6906" end="6919" title="Panama Papers" label="Panama Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190022" start="6943" end="6957" title="Prime Minister of Iceland" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q463588" start="6958" end="6986" title="Sigmundur Davíð Gunnlaugsson" label="Sigmundur Davíð Gunnlaugsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908307" start="7020" end="7050" title="2016 Icelandic anti-government protests" label="large anti-government protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q24045706" start="7058" end="7079" title="Guðni Th. Jóhannesson" label="Guðni Th. Jóhannesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q298030" start="7084" end="7097" title="Davíð Oddsson" label="Davíð Oddsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147151" start="7194" end="7213" title="The Reykjavík Grapevine" label="Reykjavik Grapevine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042441" start="7232" end="7240" title="Kjarninn" label="Kjarninn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518331" start="7323" end="7339" title="offshore company" label="offshore company"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305" start="7347" end="7369" title="British Virgin Islands" label="British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="7440" end="7449" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="8166" end="8175" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394282" start="8535" end="8554" title="Order of the Falcon" label="Order of the Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q976544" start="8596" end="8617" title="Order of the Elephant" label="Order of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="8654" end="8703" title="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q768999" start="8726" end="8753" title="Order of Vytautas the Great" label="Order of Vytautas the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q94345" start="8776" end="8793" title="Order of St. Olav" label="Order of St. Olav"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716439" start="8814" end="8842" title="Order for Exceptional Merits (Slovenia)" label="Order for Exceptional Merits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331130" start="8860" end="8887" title="Royal Order of the Seraphim" label="Royal Order of the Seraphim"/>
<link wikidata="Q10550208" start="8908" end="8964" title="Swedish Royal Jubilee Commemorative Medals" label="Ruby Jubilee Commemorative Medal of King Carl XVI Gustaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570608" start="9115" end="9150" title="Global Roundtable on Climate Change" label="Global Roundtable on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570210" start="9478" end="9511" title="Global Creative Leadership Summit" label="Global Creative Leadership Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263677" start="9530" end="9543" title="Louise Blouin" label="Louise Blouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013058" start="9863" end="9876" title="Arctic Circle (organization)" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623188" start="10166" end="10194" title="Guðrún Katrín Þorbergsdóttir" label="Guðrún Katrín Þorbergsdóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="10462" end="10471" title="Leukemia" label="leukaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="10519" end="10525" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975269" start="10532" end="10549" title="Dorrit Moussaieff" label="Dorrit Moussaieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q539795" start="10781" end="10792" title="angioplasty" label="angioplasty"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162321" wikidata="Q1097654" url="?curid=162321" title="Invariant mass">
<text>The invariant mass, rest mass, intrinsic mass, proper mass, or in the case of bound systems simply mass, is the portion of the total mass of an object or system of objects that is independent of the overall motion of the system. More precisely, it is a characteristic of the system&#x27;s total energy and momentum that is the same in all frames of reference related by Lorentz transformations. If a center-of-momentum frame exists for the system, then the invariant mass of a system is equal to its total mass in that &quot;rest frame&quot;. In other reference frames, where the system&#x27;s momentum is non-zero, the total mass (a.k.a. relativistic mass) of the system is greater than the invariant mass, but the invariant mass remains unchanged.

Because of mass–energy equivalence, the rest energy of the system is simply the invariant mass times the speed of light squared. Similarly, the total energy of the system is its total (relativistic) mass times the speed of light squared.

Systems whose four-momentum is a null vector (for example, a single photon or many photons moving in exactly the same direction) have zero invariant mass and are referred to as &quot;massless&quot;. A physical object or particle moving faster than the speed of light would have space-like four-momenta (such as the hypothesized tachyon), and these do not appear to exist. Any time-like four-momentum possesses a reference frame where the momentum (3-dimensional) is zero, which is a center of momentum frame. In this case, invariant mass is positive and is referred to as the rest mass.

If objects within a system are in relative motion, then the invariant mass of the whole system will differ from the sum of the objects&#x27; rest masses. This is also equal to the total energy of the system divided by &quot;c&quot;2. See mass–energy equivalence for a discussion of definitions of mass. Since the mass of systems must be measured with a weight or mass scale in a center of momentum frame in which the entire system has zero momentum, such a scale always measures the system&#x27;s invariant mass. For example, a scale would measure the kinetic energy of the molecules in a bottle of gas to be part of invariant mass of the bottle, and thus also its rest mass. The same is true for massless particles in such system, which add invariant mass and also rest mass to systems, according to their energy.

For an isolated &quot;massive&quot; system, the center of mass of the system moves in a straight line with a steady subluminal velocity (with a velocity depending on the reference frame used to view it). Thus, an observer can always be placed to move along with it. In this frame, which is the center-of-momentum frame, the total momentum is zero, and the system as a whole may be thought of as being &quot;at rest&quot; if it is a bound system (like a bottle of gas). In this frame, which exists under these assumptions, the invariant mass of the system is equal to the total system energy (in the zero-momentum frame) divided by . This total energy in the center of momentum frame, is the &quot;minimum&quot; energy which the system may be observed to have, when seen by various observers from various inertial frames.

Note that for reasons above, such a rest frame does not exist for single photons, or rays of light moving in one direction. When two or more photons move in different directions, however, a center of mass frame (or &quot;rest frame&quot; if the system is bound) exists. Thus, the mass of a system of several photons moving in different directions is positive, which means that an invariant mass exists for this system even though it does not exist for each photon.

== Sum of rest masses ==
The invariant mass of a system includes the mass of any kinetic energy of the system constituents that remains in the center of momentum frame, so the invariant mass of a system may be greater than sum of the invariant masses (rest masses) of its separate constituents. For example, rest mass and invariant mass are zero for individual photons even though they may add mass to the invariant mass of systems. For this reason, invariant mass is in general not an additive quantity (although there are a few rare situations where it may be, as is the case when massive particles in a system without potential or kinetic energy can be added to a total mass).

Consider the simple case of two-body system, where object A is moving towards another object B which is initially at rest (in any particular frame of reference). The magnitude of invariant mass of this two-body system (see definition below) is different from the sum of rest mass (i.e. their respective mass when stationary). Even if we consider the same system from center-of-momentum frame, where net momentum is zero, the magnitude of the system&#x27;s invariant mass is not equal to the sum of the rest masses of the particles within it.

The kinetic energy of such particles and the potential energy of the force fields increase the total energy above the sum of the particle rest masses, and both terms contribute to the invariant mass of the system. The sum of the particle kinetic energies as calculated by an observer is smallest in the center of momentum frame (again, called the &quot;rest frame&quot; if the system is bound).

They will often also interact through one or more of the fundamental forces, giving them a potential energy of interaction, possibly negative.

== As defined in particle physics ==
In particle physics, the invariant mass is equal to the mass in the rest frame of the particle, and can be calculated by the particle&#x27;s energy  and its momentum  as measured in &quot;any&quot; frame, by the energy–momentum relation:
formula_1
or in natural units where ,
formula_2

This invariant mass is the same in all frames of reference (see also special relativity). This equation says that the invariant mass is the pseudo-Euclidean length of the four-vector , calculated using the relativistic version of the Pythagorean theorem which has a different sign for the space and time dimensions. This length is preserved under any Lorentz boost or rotation in four dimensions, just like the ordinary length of a vector is preserved under rotations. In quantum theory the invariant mass is a parameter in the relativistic Dirac equation for an elementary particle. The Dirac quantum operator corresponds to the particle four-momentum vector.

Since the invariant mass is determined from quantities which are conserved during a decay, the invariant mass calculated using the energy and momentum of the decay products of a single particle is equal to the mass of the particle that decayed.
The mass of a system of particles can be calculated from the general formula:
formula_3
where
* formula_4 is the invariant mass of the system of particles, equal to the mass of the decay particle.
* formula_5 is the sum of the energies of the particles
* formula_6 is the vector sum of the momentum of the particles (includes both magnitude and direction of the momenta)

The term invariant mass is also used in inelastic scattering experiments. Given an inelastic reaction with total incoming energy larger than the total detected energy (i.e. not all outgoing particles are detected in the experiment), the invariant mass (also known as the &quot;missing mass&quot;) of the reaction is defined as follows (in natural units):
formula_7

If there is one dominant particle which was not detected during an experiment, a plot of the invariant mass will show a sharp peak at the mass of the missing particle.

In those cases when the momentum along one direction cannot be measured (i.e. in the case of a neutrino, whose presence is only inferred from the missing energy) the transverse mass is used.

==Example: two-particle collision==

In a two-particle collision (or a two-particle decay) the square of the invariant mass (in natural units) is
formula_8

=== Massless particles ===
The invariant mass of a system made of two massless particles whose momenta form an angle formula_9 has a convenient expression:
formula_10

=== Collider experiments ===
In particle collider experiments, one often defines the angular position of a particle in terms of an azimuthal angle formula_11 and pseudorapidity formula_12. Additionally the transverse momentum, formula_13, is usually measured. In this case if the particles are massless, or highly relativistic (formula_14) then the invariant mass becomes:
formula_15

== Rest energy ==
Rest energy (also called rest mass energy) is the energy associated with a particle&#x27;s invariant mass.

The rest energy formula_16 of a particle is defined as: formula_17 where formula_18 is the speed of light in vacuum. In general, only differences in energy have physical significance.

The concept of rest energy follows from the special theory of relativity that leads to Einstein&#x27;s famous conclusion about equivalence of energy and mass. See &quot;&quot;.

== See also ==
* Mass in special relativity
* Invariant (physics)
* Transverse mass

== References ==
* 

== Citations ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1097654" start="4" end="18" title="Invariant mass" label="invariant mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097654" start="20" end="29" title="Invariant mass" label="rest mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097654" start="31" end="45" title="Invariant mass" label="intrinsic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097654" start="47" end="58" title="Invariant mass" label="proper mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097654" start="99" end="103" title="Invariant mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="133" end="137" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q223557" start="144" end="150" title="physical body" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454986" start="154" end="160" title="physical system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="295" end="301" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="306" end="314" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q184876" start="339" end="358" title="frames of reference" label="frames of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="370" end="392" title="Lorentz transformation" label="Lorentz transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639491" start="400" end="424" title="center-of-momentum frame" label="center-of-momentum frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q719048" start="639" end="656" title="relativistic mass" label="relativistic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q35875" start="762" end="785" title="mass–energy equivalence" label="mass–energy equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097654" start="791" end="802" title="Invariant mass" label="rest energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="856" end="870" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068463" start="1004" end="1017" title="four-momentum" label="four-momentum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1023" end="1034" title="Minkowski space#Causal structure" label="null vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="1058" end="1064" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="1124" end="1128" title="zero" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024141" start="1173" end="1181" title="massless particle" label="massless"/>
<link wikidata="Q41995" start="1318" end="1325" title="tachyon" label="tachyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="1802" end="1803" title="speed of light" label="c"/>
<link wikidata="Q35875" start="1816" end="1839" title="mass–energy equivalence" label="mass–energy equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="2442" end="2456" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="2521" end="2529" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q184876" start="2564" end="2579" title="frame of reference" label="reference frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="3289" end="3295" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="3309" end="3314" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q104934" start="5359" end="5377" title="fundamental forces" label="fundamental forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q662636" start="5435" end="5443" title="Negative energy" label="negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="5486" end="5502" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="5539" end="5543" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="5624" end="5630" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="5640" end="5648" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502299" start="5695" end="5719" title="energy–momentum relation" label="energy–momentum relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962243" start="5737" end="5750" title="natural units" label="natural units"/>
<link wikidata="Q184876" start="5809" end="5828" title="frame of reference" label="frames of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="5839" end="5857" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q844610" start="5941" end="5952" title="four-vector" label="four-vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344309" start="5976" end="6023" title="pseudo-Euclidean space" label="relativistic version of the Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="6311" end="6325" title="Dirac equation" label="Dirac equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597952" start="6364" end="6380" title="quantum operator" label="quantum operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="6967" end="6975" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9178706" start="7730" end="7744" title="missing energy" label="missing energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835439" start="7750" end="7765" title="transverse mass" label="transverse mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962243" start="7904" end="7917" title="natural units" label="natural units"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064924" start="8263" end="8277" title="pseudorapidity" label="pseudorapidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="8644" end="8652" title="Elementary particle" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="8703" end="8727" title="speed of light" label="speed of light in vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="8761" end="8767" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="8841" end="8869" title="special theory of relativity" label="special theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q719048" start="8992" end="9018" title="Mass in special relativity" label="Mass in special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370229" start="9021" end="9040" title="Invariant (physics)" label="Invariant (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835439" start="9043" end="9058" title="Transverse mass" label="Transverse mass"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162325" wikidata="Q371825" url="?curid=162325" title="Johann Christoph Pepusch">
<text>Johann Christoph Pepusch (; 1667 1752), also known as John Christopher Pepusch () and Dr Pepusch, was a German-born composer who spent most of his working life in England. He was born in Berlin, son of a vicar, and was married to Margherita de l&#x27;Epine who also performed in some of his theatrical productions.

== Early life ==
Pepusch studied music theory under Martin Klingenberg, cantor of the Marienkirche in Berlin. At the age of 14, he was appointed to the Prussian court where he gave music lessons to the future Frederick William I of Prussia. He resigned this position in 1698 after witnessing the execution of an officer without trial. He then first went to Amsterdam. In 1704, he settled in England but continued to publish in Amsterdam until 1718.

== Career ==
At first, Pepusch earned a living playing the viola, then as a theatre director, music theoretician, teacher and organist. In 1726, Pepusch founded The Academy of Vocal Music with others; in around 1730–1, it was renamed The Academy of Ancient Music. In Joseph Doane&#x27;s &quot;Musical directory for the year 1794&quot;, the founding of the Academy is discussed. On page 76, Doane states:

He also founded the Madrigal Society. Both were devoted to researching the history of music but specifically music of the Elizabethan period. In 1713 he was awarded the degree of Doctor of Music by the University of Oxford.

Pepusch remained Director of the Academy until his death in 1752, and had established England as an important location for the study of music history. He was succeeded at the Academy by Benjamin Cooke, one of his pupils. His many pupils also included William Boyce and John Bennett. Pepusch died in London at the age of 85.

For a period of twenty years, Pepusch also directed the musical establishment at Cannons, a large stately home at Edgware, Middlesex, northwest of London. He was employed there by James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos. For a few years, he worked alongside George Frideric Handel, who had a role described as composer in residence. Both men were at Cannons in 1717/18.

Amongst English musicologists, Pepusch is considered significant foremost for his teaching role, but is best known for his arrangement of the music for &quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot; (1728) — to the libretto of John Gay. He composed works of all forms, including stage and church music as well as concertos and continuo sonatas. He often made use of popular dance forms, such as the gigue and sarabande.

==References==
=== Sources===
*Baker, C. H. Collins and Baker, Muriel I. (1949). &quot;The Life and Circumstances of James Brydges, First Duke of Chandos&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

==External links==
*Digitized images of Old English Songs containing works by Pepusch, housed at the University of Kentucky Libraries Special Collections Research Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q371825" start="0" end="24" title="Johann Christoph Pepusch" label="Johann Christoph Pepusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q371825" start="54" end="78" title="Johann Christoph Pepusch" label="John Christopher Pepusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q371825" start="86" end="96" title="Johann Christoph Pepusch" label="Dr Pepusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="116" end="124" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760341" start="230" end="256" title="Margherita de l&amp;#x27;Epine" label="Margherita de l&amp;#x27;Epine"/>
<link wikidata="Q679101" start="402" end="414" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Berlin" label="Marienkirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="468" end="482" title="Prussian court" label="Prussian court"/>
<link wikidata="Q105013" start="525" end="555" title="Frederick William I of Prussia" label="Frederick William I of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="743" end="752" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q117374941" start="1004" end="1028" title="The original Academy of Ancient Music" label="Academy of Ancient Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1373" end="1393" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888428" start="1582" end="1596" title="Benjamin Cooke" label="Benjamin Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q313152" start="1647" end="1660" title="William Boyce (composer)" label="William Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q15456495" start="1665" end="1677" title="John Bennett (composer)" label="John Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032843" start="1802" end="1809" title="Cannons (house)" label="Cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1868" end="1874" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q333238" start="1901" end="1935" title="James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos" label="James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="1974" end="1996" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q713223" start="2026" end="2047" title="composer in residence" label="composer in residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472110" start="2245" end="2268" title="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera" label="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="2291" end="2299" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q321660" start="2303" end="2311" title="John Gay" label="John Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9748" start="2389" end="2398" title="concertos" label="concertos"/>
<link wikidata="Q131269" start="2412" end="2419" title="sonatas" label="sonatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q567915" start="2475" end="2480" title="gigue" label="gigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q208593" start="2485" end="2494" title="sarabande" label="sarabande"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="162329" wikidata="Q321660" url="?curid=162329" title="John Gay">
<text>John Gay (30 June 1685 – 4 December 1732) was an English poet and dramatist and member of the Scriblerus Club. He is best remembered for &quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot; (1728), a ballad opera. The characters, including Captain Macheath and Polly Peachum, became household names.

==Early life==
Gay was born in Barnstaple, England, last of five children of William Gay (died 1695) and Katherine (died 1694), daughter of Jonathan Hanmer, &quot;the leading Nonconformist divine of the town&quot; as founder of the Independent Dissenting congregation in Barnstaple. The Gay family – &quot;fairly comfortable... though far from rich&quot; – lived in &quot;a large house, called the Red Cross, on the corner of Joy Street&quot;. The Gay family was &quot;of respectable antiquity&quot; in North Devon, associated with the manor of Goldsworthy at Parkham and with the parish of Frithelstock (where the senior line remained, resident at the priory Cloister Hall with its lands, until 1823) and became &quot;powerful and numerous&quot; in the town, &quot;established among Barnstaple&#x27;s leading families for generations&quot;. Gay&#x27;s great-grandfather, Anthony Gay, served as Mayor; his wife, Elizabeth, was daughter of the merchant and three-time Mayor of Barnstaple, Richard Beaple. Gay was educated at the town&#x27;s grammar school. On leaving school – his elder brother, Jonathan, an Army officer, having inherited the family property – Gay was apprenticed to a silk mercer in London, but being weary, according to Samuel Johnson, &quot;of either the restraint or the servility of his occupation&quot;, he soon returned to Barnstaple, where he was educated by his uncle, the Rev. John Hanmer, the nonconformist minister of the town. He then returned to London.

==Early career==
His first play, &quot;The Mohocks&quot; (1712), had censorship issues. The following year he wrote a comedy &quot;The Wife of Bath&quot;, which appeared at the Drury Lane Theatre.

The dedication of his &quot;Rural Sports&quot; (1713) to Alexander Pope began a lasting friendship with him. In 1714, Gay wrote &quot;The Shepherd&#x27;s Week&quot;, a series of six pastorals drawn from English rustic life. Pope had urged him to undertake this in order to ridicule the Arcadian pastorals of Ambrose Philips, who had been praised by a short-lived contemporary publication &quot;The Guardian&quot;, to the neglect of Pope&#x27;s claim to be the first pastoral writer of the age and the true English Theocritus. Gay&#x27;s pastorals achieved this goal and his ludicrous pictures of the English country lads and their loves were found to be entertaining on their own account.

In 1713 Gay and Pope both joined the Scriblerus Club, a group of Tory writers supportive of first minister Robert Harley that also included John Arbuthnot, Jonathan Swift and Thomas Parnell.

===Diplomatic service===
In 1714 Gay was appointed secretary to the Earl of Clarendon the new British ambassador to the Electorate of Hanover through the influence of Swift. However the death of Queen Anne three months later put an end to his hopes of official employment. The mission had been an unsuccessful attempt by the Tories to ingratiate themselves with Elector George, heir to the throne, who was angry that the Peace of Utrecht had led to Britain&#x27;s abandoning its allies in the war against France and suspected that the Tory leadership favoured the Jacobites.

The Hanoverian succession led to the ousting of the Harley Ministry and establishment of the Whig oligarchy and Gay never held a government post again. While in Hanover he met Caroline of Ansbach, the future Princess of Wales, and Henrietta Howard, who would become a close friend of his.

===Return to London===
In 1715, probably with some help from Pope, Gay produced &quot;The What D&#x27;Ye Call It?&quot;, a dramatic skit on contemporary tragedy, with special reference to Thomas Otway&#x27;s &quot;Venice Preserv&#x27;d&quot;. This appeared on 23 February 1715 as an afterpiece at Drury Lane to Nicholas Rowe&#x27;s tragedy &quot;Jane Shore&quot;. It left the public so ignorant of its inner meaning that Lewis Theobald and Benjamin Griffin published a &quot;Complete Key to What D&#x27;Ye Call It&quot; to explain it. The play also featured a ballad, &quot;Twas When the Seas Were Roaring&quot;, co-written with George Frideric Handel, which became popular in its own right.

In 1716 appeared his &quot;Trivia, or the Art of Walking the Streets of London&quot;, a poem in three books, for which he acknowledged receiving several hints from Swift. It contains graphic and humorous descriptions of the London of that period, depicting the city with photographic accuracy and acting as a guide to the upper-class and upper-middle-class walkers of society. By taking a mock-heroic form, Gay&#x27;s poem was able to poke fun at the notion of complete reformation of street civility, while also proposing an idea of reform in terms of the attitude towards walking. In January 1717 he produced a comedy, &quot;Three Hours After Marriage&quot;, which was thought to be grossly indecent (without being amusing) and a failure. He had assistance from Pope and John Arbuthnot, but they allowed it to be assumed that Gay was the sole author.

By 1717 Gay was associated with George, Prince of Wales, who as part of the Whig Split had set up a rival court to his father the King which was frequented by opposition Whigs and Tories. In 1718 he collaborated with Handel on the masque &quot;Acis and Galatea&quot; for which he supplied the libretto.

==Patrons==
Gay had numerous patrons, and in 1720 he published &quot;Poems on Several Occasions&quot; by subscription, taking in £1000 or more. In that year James Craggs, the secretary of state, presented him with some South Sea stock. Gay, disregarding the advice of Pope and others of his friends, invested all his money in South Sea stock, and, holding on to the end of the South Sea Bubble, he lost everything. The shock is said to have made him dangerously ill. His friends did not fail him at this juncture. He had patrons in William Pulteney, afterwards Earl of Bath, in the third Earl of Burlington, who constantly entertained him at Chiswick or at Burlington House, and in the Duke and Duchess of Queensberry. He was a frequent visitor with Pope, and received unvarying kindness from William Congreve and John Arbuthnot.

In 1727 he wrote for six-year-old Prince William, later the Duke of Cumberland, &quot;Fifty-one Fables in Verse&quot;, for which he naturally hoped to gain some preferment, although he has much to say in them of the servility of courtiers and the vanity of court honours. He was offered the situation of gentleman-usher to the Princess Louisa, who was also still a child. He refused this offer, all his friends seemingly having regarded it- &quot;for no very obvious reason&quot;- as an indignity. His friends thought him unfairly neglected, but Gay, who had never rendered any special services to the court, had nevertheless been given a sinecure as lottery commissioner with a salary of £150 a year in 1722, and from 1722 to 1729 had lodgings in the palace at Whitehall.

==&quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot;==
He certainly did nothing to conciliate the favour of the government by his next work, &quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot;, a ballad opera produced on 29 January 1728 by John Rich, in which Sir Robert Walpole was caricatured. This famous piece, which was said to have made &quot;Rich gay and Gay rich&quot;, was an innovation in many respects.

The satire of the play has a double allegory. The character of Peachum was inspired by the thief-taker Jonathan Wild, executed in 1725, and the principal figure of Macheath reflected memories of the French highwayman, Claude Duval, whose execution had created a sensation in London, and who exemplified the flamboyance and gallantry of Gay&#x27;s literary hero. Gay&#x27;s decision to launch the work was probably also influenced by the huge interest that Jack Sheppard, a cockney housebreaker, had created in all things relating to Newgate Prison. However, the character of Peachum was also understood to represent Robert Walpole, who, like Wild, was seen as a public but morally dubious character, and whose government had been tolerant of Wild&#x27;s thievery and the South Sea directors&#x27; escape from punishment. Under cover of the thieves and highwaymen who figured in it was disguised a satire on society, for Gay made it plain that in describing the moral code of his characters he had in mind the corruptions of the governing class. Part of the success of &quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot; may have been due to the acting of Lavinia Fenton, afterwards Duchess of Bolton, in the part of Polly Peachum. The airs of the &quot;Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot; in part allude to well-known popular ballads, and Gay&#x27;s lyrics sometimes play with their wording in order to amuse and entertain the audience.

The play ran for sixty-two nights. Swift is said to have suggested the subject, and Pope and Arbuthnot were constantly consulted while the work was in progress, but Gay must be regarded as the sole author. After seeing an early version of the work, Swift was optimistic of its commercial prospects but famously warned Gay to be cautious with his earnings: &quot;I beg you will be thrifty and learn to value a shilling.&quot;

==Later career==
He wrote a sequel, &quot;Polly&quot;, relating the adventures of Polly Peachum in the West Indies; its production was forbidden by the Lord Chamberlain, no doubt through the influence of Walpole. This act of &quot;oppression&quot; caused no loss to Gay. It proved an excellent advertisement for &quot;Polly&quot;, which was published by subscription in 1729, and brought its author several thousand pounds. The Duchess of Queensberry was dismissed from court for enlisting subscribers in the palace. In 1730 Gay&#x27;s substantially rewritten version of his 1713 play &quot;The Wife of Bath&quot; appeared at the Lincoln&#x27;s Inn Fields Theatre, lasting for three nights.

The Duke of Queensberry gave Gay a home, and the duchess continued her affectionate patronage until Gay&#x27;s death in London on 4 December 1732. He was buried in Westminster Abbey. The epitaph on his tomb is by Pope, and is followed by Gay&#x27;s own mocking couplet:
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 2em;&quot;&gt;Life is a jest, and all things show it,
I thought so once, but now I know it.&lt;/poem&gt;

==Works==

Among Gay&#x27;s works are:
*&quot;Wine&quot; – 1708
*&quot;The Present State of Wit&quot; – 1711
*&quot;The Wife of Bath&quot; – 1713
*&quot;The Rural Sports&quot; – 1713
*&quot;The Shepherd&#x27;s Week&quot; – 1714
*&quot;The What D&#x27;Ye Call It&quot; – 1715
*&quot;Trivia, or The Art of Walking the Streets of London&quot; – 1716
*&quot;Three Hours After Marriage&quot; – 1717
*&quot;Acis and Galatea&quot; – 1718
*&quot;Dione&quot; – 1720
*&quot;Poems on Several Occasions&quot; – 1720
*&quot;The Captives&quot; – 1724
*&quot;Fables&quot; (also known as &quot;Fifty-one Fables in Verse&quot; or &quot;Fables of John Gay&quot;) – 1727 (&quot;Part the Second&quot; – 1738)
*&quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot; – 1728
*&quot;Polly&quot; – 1729
*&quot;Achilles&quot; – 1733
*&quot;The Distress&#x27;d Wife&quot; – 1743

==References==
Notes
Sources

==Further reading==
*
* [2 volumes]
*
*

==External links==

*John Gay at the Eighteenth-Century Poetry Archive (ECPA)
*
*Luminarium: John Gay Life, extensive collection of works, study resources
*Gay John from FOLDOC
*Fables and Other Works by John Gay at English Poetry</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q321660" start="0" end="8" title="John Gay" label="John Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="57" end="61" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="66" end="75" title="dramatist" label="dramatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q572114" start="94" end="109" title="Scriblerus Club" label="Scriblerus Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472110" start="143" end="166" title="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera" label="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q119272" start="183" end="195" title="ballad opera" label="ballad opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036723" start="223" end="239" title="Captain Macheath" label="Captain Macheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q808532" start="315" end="325" title="Barnstaple" label="Barnstaple"/>
<link wikidata="Q374880" start="844" end="851" title="Parkham" label="Parkham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042053" start="875" end="887" title="Frithelstock" label="Frithelstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867027" start="1251" end="1270" title="Mayor of Barnstaple" label="Mayor of Barnstaple"/>
<link wikidata="Q18640325" start="1272" end="1286" title="Richard Beaple" label="Richard Beaple"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="1324" end="1338" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q350039" start="1475" end="1481" title="mercery" label="mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="1523" end="1537" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="1705" end="1718" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="nonconformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="1719" end="1727" title="Religious minister" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855332" start="1901" end="1917" title="The Wife of Bath (play)" label="The Wife of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756626" start="1947" end="1965" title="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane" label="Drury Lane Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="2025" end="2039" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q390001" start="2150" end="2158" title="pastoral" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q168786" start="2254" end="2262" title="Arcadia (utopia)" label="Arcadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404968" start="2276" end="2291" title="Ambrose Philips" label="Ambrose Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474352" start="2362" end="2374" title="The Guardian (1713)" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="2482" end="2492" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q572114" start="2695" end="2710" title="Scriblerus Club" label="Scriblerus Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="2723" end="2727" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q332499" start="2765" end="2778" title="Robert Harley, 1st Earl of Oxford and Earl Mortimer" label="Robert Harley"/>
<link wikidata="Q435816" start="2798" end="2812" title="John Arbuthnot" label="John Arbuthnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="2814" end="2828" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783425" start="2833" end="2847" title="Thomas Parnell" label="Thomas Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q333577" start="2918" end="2935" title="Edward Hyde, 3rd Earl of Clarendon" label="Earl of Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="2970" end="2991" title="Electorate of Hanover" label="Electorate of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="3045" end="3055" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="3212" end="3226" title="George I of Great Britain" label="Elector George"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="3271" end="3287" title="Peace of Utrecht" label="Peace of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="3343" end="3361" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="war against France"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="3414" end="3423" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="3430" end="3451" title="Hanoverian succession" label="Hanoverian succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658825" start="3478" end="3493" title="Harley Ministry" label="Harley Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="3519" end="3533" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="3587" end="3594" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q76961" start="3602" end="3621" title="Caroline of Ansbach" label="Caroline of Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000835" start="3634" end="3651" title="Princess of Wales" label="Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q275065" start="3657" end="3673" title="Henrietta Howard" label="Henrietta Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855360" start="3802" end="3828" title="The What D&amp;#x27;Ye Call It" label="The What D&amp;#x27;Ye Call It"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="3869" end="3876" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q955217" start="3904" end="3916" title="Thomas Otway" label="Thomas Otway"/>
<link wikidata="Q677401" start="3930" end="3951" title="Venice Preserv&amp;#x27;d" label="Venice Preserv&amp;#x27;d"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913703" start="3999" end="4009" title="afterpiece" label="afterpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382306" start="4027" end="4040" title="Nicholas Rowe (writer)" label="Nicholas Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802866" start="4062" end="4072" title="Jane Shore (play)" label="Jane Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822165" start="4137" end="4151" title="Lewis Theobald" label="Lewis Theobald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="4345" end="4367" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844646" start="4436" end="4487" title="Trivia (poem)" label="Trivia, or the Art of Walking the Streets of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797532" start="5036" end="5062" title="Three Hours After Marriage" label="Three Hours After Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q435816" start="5182" end="5196" title="John Arbuthnot" label="John Arbuthnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="5295" end="5318" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851458" start="5339" end="5349" title="Whig Split" label="Whig Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207959" start="5494" end="5500" title="masque" label="masque"/>
<link wikidata="Q341482" start="5507" end="5523" title="Acis and Galatea (Handel)" label="Acis and Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="5556" end="5564" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210696" start="5786" end="5801" title="South Sea Bubble" label="South Sea stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q795187" start="6099" end="6115" title="William Pulteney, 1st Earl of Bath" label="William Pulteney"/>
<link wikidata="Q335630" start="6253" end="6257" title="Charles Douglas, 3rd Duke of Queensberry" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052743" start="6262" end="6269" title="Catherine Douglas, Duchess of Queensberry" label="Duchess"/>
<link wikidata="Q366805" start="6360" end="6376" title="William Congreve" label="William Congreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q435816" start="6381" end="6395" title="John Arbuthnot" label="John Arbuthnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q378088" start="6432" end="6446" title="Prince William, Duke of Cumberland" label="Prince William"/>
<link wikidata="Q693" start="6494" end="6499" title="Fable" label="Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472110" start="7304" end="7327" title="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera" label="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q119272" start="7337" end="7349" title="ballad opera" label="ballad opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923560" start="7381" end="7390" title="John Rich (producer)" label="John Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="7401" end="7419" title="Robert Walpole" label="Sir Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q380805" start="7659" end="7672" title="Jonathan Wild" label="Jonathan Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q468832" start="7774" end="7786" title="Claude Duval" label="Claude Duval"/>
<link wikidata="Q636214" start="8012" end="8025" title="Jack Sheppard" label="Jack Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822183" start="8089" end="8103" title="Newgate Prison" label="Newgate Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="8172" end="8186" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="8453" end="8459" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502725" start="8695" end="8709" title="Lavinia Fenton" label="Lavinia Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225764" start="9436" end="9441" title="Polly (opera)" label="Polly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355456" start="9546" end="9562" title="Lord Chamberlain" label="Lord Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855332" start="9985" end="10001" title="The Wife of Bath (play)" label="The Wife of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q13142759" start="10024" end="10057" title="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields Theatre" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264581" start="10090" end="10109" title="Duke of Queensberry" label="Duke of Queensberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="10250" end="10267" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855332" start="10612" end="10628" title="The Wife of Bath (play)" label="The Wife of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855360" start="10731" end="10757" title="The What D&amp;#x27;Ye Call It" label="The What D&amp;#x27;Ye Call It"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844646" start="10778" end="10829" title="Trivia (poem)" label="Trivia, or The Art of Walking the Streets of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797532" start="10850" end="10876" title="Three Hours After Marriage" label="Three Hours After Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q341482" start="10897" end="10913" title="Acis and Galatea (Handel)" label="Acis and Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855438" start="10934" end="10939" title="Dione (play)" label="Dione"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855519" start="11007" end="11019" title="The Captives (1724 play)" label="The Captives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472110" start="11192" end="11215" title="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera" label="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225764" start="11236" end="11241" title="Polly (opera)" label="Polly"/>
<link wikidata="Q47004985" start="11262" end="11270" title="Achilles (opera)" label="Achilles"/>
</links>
</doc>
