<doc id="158454" wikidata="Q355388" url="?curid=158454" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr.">
<text>Ralph Dale Earnhardt Jr. (born October 10, 1974) is an American professional stock car racing driver, team owner, and broadcaster. A third-generation driver, he is the son of the late 7-time NASCAR Cup Series champion Dale Earnhardt and relative to many former and current drivers in the NASCAR ranks. Since retiring from full-time competition after the 2017 season, he has competed part-time in the NASCAR Xfinity Series, driving the No. 88 Chevrolet Camaro for his team, JR Motorsports.

He became a color commentator for &quot;NASCAR on NBC&quot; in 2018 after retiring from driving full-time in NASCAR. After his contract with NBC expired after the 2023 season, he left for &quot;Amazon&quot; and &quot;TNT&quot;&#x27;s new NASCAR coverage in NASCAR&#x27;s next TV contract that begins in 2025.

Earnhardt Jr. drove the No. 8 Budweiser-sponsored Chevrolet for Dale Earnhardt, Inc. (DEI), his father&#x27;s team in the NASCAR Cup Series, from his debut in 1999 until 2007. In 2008, he moved to Hendrick Motorsports to drive their No. 88 car. He remained with Hendrick until his last season as a full-time driver in 2017. Earnhardt has 26 wins in the Cup Series, a total that ranks him tied (with Fred Lorenzen) for 32nd in NASCAR history as of May 2024. He is a two-time champion of the Xfinity Series, winning in 1998 and 1999 when the series was known as the Busch Series.

Earnhardt&#x27;s success at Daytona International Speedway and Talladega Superspeedway throughout his career earned him the nickname &quot;the Pied Piper&quot;. He is a two-time Daytona 500 winner (2004 and 2014), and won the Most Popular Driver Award fifteen consecutive times from 2003 to 2017.

==Racing career==
===Early life and career===
Dale Earnhardt Jr. was born and raised in Kannapolis, North Carolina, the son of Brenda Lorraine Jackson and Dale Earnhardt His maternal grandfather, Robert Gee Sr., was a NASCAR car builder. He has an elder sister, Kelley; an elder half-brother, Kerry, from his father&#x27;s first marriage; and a younger half-sister, Taylor Earnhardt-Putnam, from his father&#x27;s third marriage. He is of part German ancestry. His parents divorced shortly after he was born, and he and Kelley lived with Brenda Earnhardt until their house was destroyed in a fire when he was six years old. As Brenda had no financial support after the fire, she gave up custody of the two children to Earnhardt Sr. prior to his marriage to Teresa Houston. During Dale Earnhardt Jr.&#x27;s childhood, Kelley took care of him while their father and stepmother were busy with the race seasons. At the age of 12, he was sent to Oak Ridge Military Academy; three weeks later, Kelley quit high school to join him. He considered remaining at Oak Ridge for his senior year, but instead decided to attend Mooresville High School, from which he graduated in 1992.

Earnhardt Jr. attended the high performance driving school run by Andy Hillenburg and began his racing career at the late age of 17 with his father, competing in the Street Stock division at Concord, North Carolina&#x27;s Motorsport Park. His first race car was a 1979 Monte Carlo that he co-owned with Kerry. By age 19, after two seasons of driving Street Stock Division, Earnhardt Jr. had honed his driving abilities to the point of joining the Late Model Stock Car Division. He competed on the North and South Carolina short tracks driving a No. 3 Buick. While he did run various tracks during this time, Earnhardt Jr. primarily focused his efforts at the Myrtle Beach Speedway in South Carolina and the East Carolina Motor Speedway in Robersonville, North Carolina, where he captured the pole for the Greenville Merchants 300 on October 28, 1994. There, he developed an in-depth knowledge of chassis setup and car preparation, while racing against his siblings. He worked at his father&#x27;s dealership as a mechanic while he went to Mitchell Community College to earn an associate degree in automotive technology.

Earnhardt Jr. ran nine Busch Series races between 1996 and 1997 for Dale Earnhardt, Inc., and Ed Whitaker, respectively, before driving for his father&#x27;s team in the Busch Series full-time in 1998, in which he started the season with an amazing blow over after contact with Dick Trickle and Buckshot Jones at Daytona, on the same weekend that his father had his first and only Daytona 500 win. Earnhardt won consecutive NASCAR Busch Series Championships in 1998 and 1999 barely edging Matt Kenseth. In 1998, he made his first start in the Winston Cup Series, at the exhibition race held at the Twin Ring Motegi in Japan. Also in 1999, he drove in five Winston Cup races in the No. 8 Budweiser-sponsored Chevrolet for DEI in preparation for a full-time Cup Series ride in 2000, with his best finish being a tenth-place finish at Richmond in the fall race.

===2000===
The 2000 season was Earnhardt&#x27;s breakout year in the Winston Cup Series. He competed for the Raybestos NASCAR Rookie of the Year Award in 2000. His primary competitor for the award was Matt Kenseth. Kenseth outran Earnhardt in the season-opening Daytona 500. Earnhardt scored his first win in the DirecTV 500 at Texas Motor Speedway, breaking the record held by his father Earnhardt Sr. for the fewest starts by a driver to earn his first victory in NASCAR&#x27;s &quot;modern era&quot; by winning in his 12th start, and also at Richmond International Raceway. He became the first rookie to win The Winston.

Earnhardt played a part in recreating one Winston Cup milestone in 2000 when he competed with his father and half-brother Kerry in the Pepsi 400 at Michigan International Speedway. That occasion was only the second time that a father had raced against two sons – Lee Petty and his two sons Richard and Maurice had previously accomplished the feat.

Earnhardt ended the 2000 season with two wins, three Top 5&#x27;s, five Top 10&#x27;s, and two poles.

===2001===

The season began with the 2001 Daytona 500 and on the final lap of the race Earnhardt Jr. and his teammate Michael Waltrip competed for the win, with Jr eventually finishing second to Waltrip.

Behind the leading two cars, Earnhardt Jr&#x27;s father had crashed into the outside wall of turn 4 after Sterling Marlin made contact with his left rear bumper. Earnhardt Sr. was pronounced dead at 5:16 pm due to a basilar skull fracture.

In the aftermath, many disgruntled fans sent death threats to Marlin and his family, blaming him for the crash; Earnhardt Jr. and Waltrip both requested that fans stopped blaming anybody for Earnhardt Sr.&#x27;s death, and both the local police and NASCAR investigations into the crash cleared Marlin of any involvement. Earnhardt Jr. raced at Rockingham the following weekend but finished in 43rd place after a wreck on the first lap that looked eerily similar to his father&#x27;s wreck.

Returning to Daytona for the Pepsi 400, Earnhardt Jr. made a comeback and had the dominant car of the race, leading 115 out of 160 laps. On the last restart, he managed to make a move from sixth to first place in the span of two laps, with Waltrip holding off the field as Earnhardt Jr. took the checkered flag.

He won the MBNA Cal Ripken Jr. 400 at Dover, which was the first Winston Cup Series race following the September 11 attacks as the original scheduled race at New Hampshire Motor Speedway was postponed until the end of the season. After the race, he performed a Polish victory lap while holding a large American flag out the driver&#x27;s side window.

In October, Earnhardt Jr. took his second restrictor plate win as he won the EA Sports 500 at Talladega, for which he also scored a Winston No Bull 5 $1 million bonus. He was docked 25 points, however, after his car failed post-race inspection. With this win, DEI swept three of the four restrictor plate races for 2001, only failing to win the spring Talladega race. He finished the 2001 season eighth in the points standings with three wins, nine Top 5&#x27;s, 15 Top 10&#x27;s, and two poles.

===2002–03===
In 2002, Earnhardt Jr. had a roller-coaster season. He struggled after enduring a concussion from a head-on collision to the outside wall at the California race in April – an injury he did not admit to until mid-September. In the three races following California, he finished no better than 30th. However, Earnhardt Jr. rallied to sweep both Talladega races (leading a dominating 133 of 188 laps in the spring race), a pair of Bud Pole Awards, and an 11th-place finish in the points standings with 11 Top 5&#x27;s and 16 Top 10&#x27;s.

In 2003, Earnhardt Jr. became a true title contender, scoring a record-breaking fourth consecutive win at Talladega, after being involved in a 27-car crash on lap 4. He struggled for most of the race and was at points a half-lap down, only catching back up to the pack through a caution. The win was controversial because with five laps to go, it appeared that Earnhardt went below the yellow line to gain position, but NASCAR ruled that Matt Kenseth had forced him below the line, making it a clean pass.

He later scored a victory at Phoenix in October, recording a career-best third-place effort in the point standings, with 13 Top 5&#x27;s and 21 Top 10&#x27;s. He also took home the NMPA Most Popular Driver award for the first time in his career.

===2004–06===
In 2004, Earnhardt won the Daytona 500, six years to the day after his father won his only title in the Great American Race (and 3 years after his father was killed in the 2001 race). Earnhardt came very close to sweeping Speedweeks, as in addition to the Daytona 500, he also won his Gatorade Duel and the Busch Series race. However, he finished 2nd in the Budweiser Shootout to Dale Jarrett.

On July 18, during the summer off-weekend, Earnhardt crashed a Chevrolet Corvette C5-R during a practice for the American Le Mans Series Grand Prix of Sonoma at Infineon Raceway. The car slid off course and hit a concrete barrier during warm-up the day of the race, rupturing a fuel line and causing the car to burst into flames with him still inside. He suffered second and third-degree burns on his neck, chin, and legs partially due to not wearing a protective balaclava with his helmet. The burns prevented him from finishing two races where he was relieved by Martin Truex Jr. (at New Hampshire) and his DEI teammate John Andretti (at Pocono) in the middle of the races. In the fall, Earnhardt became the first driver to sweep a weekend at Bristol by winning both the Busch and Nextel Cup races in the same weekend.

Earnhardt was able to qualify for the NASCAR 10-race playoff and had his 5th NEXTEL Cup win of the season (a career high) at Talladega. However, he was penalized 25 points for the use of an obscenity during the television broadcast, in violation of a new NASCAR rule prohibiting participants from using obscene language (the rule had been created the week after the Daytona 500, in the wake of the Super Bowl half-time show controversy). That incident, combined with two consecutive DNFs in the Chase, eventually dropped him out of the running, and he finished fifth in the 2004 NEXTEL Cup Chase despite a career-high 6 wins at Daytona, Atlanta, Richmond, Bristol, Talladega and defending his fall win at Phoenix (though under the non-Chase points system, Earnhardt would have tied his third-place points finish of the previous year). He closed off the 2004 season with 6 wins, sixteen Top 5s, and twenty-one Top 10 finishes. He also picked up his 2nd consecutive Most Popular Driver Award.

At the close of the 2004 season, it was revealed that Tony Eury Sr. would be promoted to the team manager position for the DEI corporation, while Tony Eury Jr. became the crew chief for Michael Waltrip for the 2005 season. Peter Rondeau, a Chance 2 employee who also helped Earnhardt win the Busch Series race at Bristol in August, became the crew chief for Earnhardt in 2005. Rondeau served as Earnhardt&#x27;s crew chief until the Coca-Cola 600 weekend when he was replaced with DEI chief engineer Steve Hmiel, who helped Earnhardt score his lone win of 2005 at Chicagoland in July when he took the lead from Matt Kenseth on the last cycle of pit stops. Earnhardt was eliminated from any possible competition for the NEXTEL Cup championship after suffering an engine failure at the California Speedway. Earnhardt was reunited with his cousin, Tony Eury Jr., after the fall Richmond weekend, and results improved immediately. Earnhardt finished the season 19th in points. For the 3rd straight year, he took home the NMPA Most Popular Driver Award.
Earnhardt&#x27;s proficiency as a car owner continued. His race team outside of DEI, JR Motorsports, in 2005 fielded a car in the USAR Hooters ProCup Series, winning once and qualifying for the Four Champions playoff. Mark McFarland moved to the Busch Series in 2006, driving the No. 88 JR Motorsports US Navy Chevrolet, with Richard Childress Racing providing assistance; however, he was fired before the fall Michigan race, the Carfax 250. He was replaced by Robby Gordon and Martin Truex Jr. for the rest of the year. Long-time short track racer Shane Huffman drove Earnhardt&#x27;s USAR Hooters ProCup car in 2006. In 2006, during the spring weekend at Talladega Superspeedway, Earnhardt and other DEI drivers drove with special black paint schemes on their cars, reminiscent of his late father&#x27;s famous No. 3 paint scheme. On Father&#x27;s Day in 2006, he drove a vintage Budweiser car at Michigan International Speedway to honor both his grandfather (Ralph Earnhardt) and his father, who at one point in both their careers used the No. 8 car. After rain caused the race to be ended early, Earnhardt finished 3rd with Kasey Kahne winning the race. After 17 races in the 2006 season, Earnhardt sat 3rd in the championship standings with 1 win, coming at Richmond in May 2006.

During the race at New Hampshire, he experienced the second engine failure of his 2006 season, ultimately leading to a 43rd-place finish. Following New Hampshire was the race at Pocono, where he was running in the middle of the pack when he crashed in turn 2. These two events catapulted him to 11th in the points standing, out of the Chase for the Cup. At Indianapolis Motor Speedway, Earnhardt and his crew made a critical decision to stay out on the final pit stop to get a much needed Top 10 finish to move him up to 10th in the points. He made the 2006 Chase for the NEXTEL Cup after finishing 17th in the Chevy Rock and Roll 400 at Richmond International Raceway on September 9, 2006. He came close to winning at Talladega and was leading on the last lap when Brian Vickers made contact with Earnhardt&#x27;s future teammate Jimmie Johnson, sending Johnson into Earnhardt and spinning both of them out. His points position going into the Chase was 6th. He finished the season 5th in the point standings, 147 points behind leader Jimmie Johnson.

===2007: Final Season At DEI===

Earnhardt began the 2007 NASCAR Nextel Cup Series season by finishing 32nd at the Daytona 500 as the result of a late race crash. His first Top 10 came at Bristol Motor Speedway in the Food City 500, where he finished 7th. His first Top 5 came at Martinsville Speedway in the Goody&#x27;s Cool Orange 500. He led 136 laps and finished 5th. He collected his third Top 10 of the season and his 8th at Talladega Superspeedway with his 7th-place performance in the 2007 Aaron&#x27;s 499. On May 14, 2007, he was docked 100 driver championship points, car owner Teresa Earnhardt was docked 100 owner points, and his crew chief, Tony Eury Jr., was fined $100,000 and suspended for 6 races due to the use of illegal mounting brackets used to attach the wing to his car. During the April race at Texas Motor Speedway he drove the last 10 laps in the No. 5 car of Kyle Busch owned by Rick Hendrick.

On May 27, 2007, Earnhardt rode a camouflage No. 8 car in the Coca-Cola 600 on Memorial Day to raise money for the families of military troops. Jeff Gordon, Jimmie Johnson, Greg Biffle, Mark Martin, Ward Burton, Denny Hamlin, Casey Mears, Shane Huffman and Bill Elliott also changed their paint schemes for the occasion. He finished eighth, after leading with seven laps to go, but he had to pit for fuel and Casey Mears finished with the win.

On August 5, 2007, Earnhardt earned his first pole position in a race since 2002 at Pocono Raceway. Although Kurt Busch won the race, Earnhardt had a dramatic comeback to finish 2nd after spinning out and experiencing shock troubles. Earnhardt led for eight laps before Busch took over. On August 12 at Watkins Glen International, Earnhardt was making the push into the Top 12 of the Nextel Cup standings from his No. 13 position. After being at the No. 2 position during the race, Earnhardt had engine problems on lap 64 and had to end his race day. After the Glen, he tried furiously to reach the 12th spot in standings. However, a resurgence by Kurt Busch and a blown engine during the final race at Richmond ended his Chase hopes. That was his last chance to participate in the Championship at Dale Earnhardt, Inc. (DEI). After the 2007 season, Dale Jr. won the NMPA Chex Most Popular Driver award for the 5th consecutive time.

After the season, Earnhardt, who had always been fascinated with Australian V8 Supercars, test drove the cars on vacation in Australia.

===Move to Hendrick Motorsports===
After much speculation, Earnhardt announced on May 10, 2007, that he would leave Dale Earnhardt Inc., the company founded by his father, to drive for another team in 2008. Earnhardt expressed that his decision was based entirely on his desires to achieve his career goal of a Sprint Cup Championship, and his apparent belief that he would not be able to attain that objective while driving for DEI. He said that unless he could gain majority ownership, and therefore control, of DEI, he was not confident in the organization&#x27;s ability to field the elite level equipment that would yield the elusive title.

On June 13, 2007, he announced at a press conference that he had signed a five-year contract with Hendrick Motorsports, replacing Kyle Busch. At the time, Hendrick consisted of Jeff Gordon, Jimmie Johnson, and Casey Mears.
One month later on July 13, 2007, it was announced that his long-time primary sponsor Budweiser would not be with Earnhardt when he made the move to Hendrick. Other contractual agreements in place at Hendrick Motorsports are said to have prevented a relationship with Bud. Due to a previous friendship between team owner Rick Hendrick and Earnhardt&#x27;s father, Earnhardt later said that going to drive for Hendrick almost felt like driving for a second family team.

On August 15, 2007, it was announced that Earnhardt would not be taking his familiar No. 8 with him to Hendrick Motorsports in 2008. His late grandfather, Ralph Earnhardt, used that number, while Earnhardt picked it when he entered the Cup Series in 1999. His father also used No. 8 early in his career. Earnhardt Jr. blamed his stepmother for not allowing the No. 8 to move with him to Hendrick Motorsports. Earnhardt said negotiations broke down when Teresa Earnhardt asked for part of the licensing revenue, along with wanting the number back after he retired. (The No. 8 team, after a successful season in 2008 with co-drivers Mark Martin and Aric Almirola, would end up being shut down in 2009 after DEI&#x27;s merger with Ganassi Racing.)

Earnhardt moved to the No. 88 car with Tony Eury Jr. coming to Hendrick to remain as his crew chief. On September 19, 2007, the official announcement was made that Earnhardt would be driving the No. 88 Mountain Dew AMP/National Guard Chevrolet Impala for the 2008 season.

The No. 88, according to NASCAR archives, was driven by Ralph Earnhardt, his paternal grandfather, in 1957. His maternal grandfather, Robert Gee, was one of the first employees of All Star Racing, initially a Late Model Sportsman (now Xfinity Series) team with Gee as Hendrick&#x27;s partner, which is now Hendrick Motorsports. Hendrick said about Earnhardt and his uncles, &quot;I can look at Robert Gee Jr., or Jimmy Gee, or Dale Jr. and all I see is Robert Gee. They&#x27;re the spitting image of him. I go back and look and pictures from when we did things together, and I have to say, I owe Robert a lot.&quot; Starting in the 2008 season, Hendrick Motorsports merged its Nationwide Series team to Earnhardt&#x27;s JR Motorsports, with the cars coming from Earnhardt&#x27;s shop, which employs his mother and uncles.

===2008===

Earnhardt started the 2008 season by winning the Budweiser Shootout, a non-points paying exhibition. It was his first race for Hendrick. He led for a total of 47 out of 70 laps, a Budweiser Shootout record. He followed that up five days later with a win in the first of the Gatorade Duels. This was his third career win in the duels, however, he was unable to follow it up with victory in the Daytona 500, finishing 9th. Ryan Newman was the winner of the event.

Earnhardt was docked 50 points because his rear spoiler did not meet the specified height in the Nationwide Series. His crew chief Chad Walter was fined $35,000, suspended for 6 races and was placed on probation until December 31, 2008. Team owner Rick Hendrick was also docked 50 owner points along with Earnhardt.

At Michigan, Earnhardt broke his 76-race winless streak, managing to stretch his fuel mileage enough to allow him to win under a caution on the last lap of a green-white-checkered (overtime) finish. He did not find much success after the Michigan win. He then went back to Talladega Superspeedway for the AMP Energy 500 where he was en route to a possible win before being caught up in &quot;The Big One&quot; late in the race. He headed to Martinsville Speedway where he finished 2nd to teammate Jimmie Johnson. He ended the season in the garage area at Homestead Miami Speedway in The Ford 400 after losing his brakes with just a few laps to go in the race. Earnhardt finished the season 12th in points, 557 points behind champion Jimmie Johnson.

===2009===
In the season-opening Daytona 500, Earnhardt began well, even leading for a lap. However multiple misfortunes, including a missed pit stop and a 1-lap penalty for pitting outside of his pit box, sent him far into the back of the running order. Earnhardt was then directly involved in a controversial crash on lap 124, when, while fighting to return to the lead lap, he came in contact with Brian Vickers while fighting to be the first driver one lap down (who gets a free pass should the caution flag come out), causing a 10-car pileup which included Denny Hamlin, Scott Speed, Jimmie Johnson, Kyle and Kurt Busch, Robby Gordon, Jamie McMurray, and Carl Edwards. Vickers and Kyle Busch later criticized Earnhardt, who denied purposely clipping Vickers. Earnhardt criticized Vickers for blocking him on the inside. The race concluded early due to the rain and Earnhardt officially finished 27th. He later apologized for his actions but maintained that he never intended to wreck Vickers.

After a blown engine at California and falling to 35th in owners&#x27; points, he finished 10th at Las Vegas and reached 29th place in points. He finished 8th at Martinsville. He had a string of poor finishes including 20th at Texas, and 31st at Phoenix after being spun out by Casey Mears. He gained confidence in his team with a very strong performance at Talladega, leading for 20 laps, and finishing second to his protege Brad Keselowski after Keselowski sent Edwards flying into the catch fence. However, two weeks later at Richmond, Earnhardt finished 27th. He was again spun out late in the race at Darlington and ended the race in 27th place. He then finished 10th in the All-Star race at Lowe&#x27;s Motor Speedway.

Earnhardt&#x27;s poor performance continued as he finished 40th at the Coca-Cola 600 due to an ill-handling race car, after which Tony Eury Jr. was fired as his crew chief on May 28, 2009. Lance McGrew was named interim crew chief starting with the June 2009 race at Pocono, with team manager Brian Whitesell calling the shots at Dover the previous week. Earnhardt finished 12th at Dover for the Autism Speaks 400 with McGrew as his crew chief after contending for the lead. At Pocono Raceway, however, he again ended with a 27th-place finish. Earnhardt improved thereafter following the change, finishing fifteenth at Chicagoland Speedway, though he had one DNF at Daytona International Speedway after being taken out of the race early in a large pileup.

At the Carfax 400 at Michigan, Earnhardt charged to the front near the end of the race and finished 3rd; he also earned his second Top 5 finish this season in the same race. Earnhardt finished 9th in the Sharpie 500 a week later at Bristol, but his bad luck continued at the Auto Club Speedway when he was involved in a multi-car incident. After a 39th qualifying run at Lowe&#x27;s Motor Speedway, he said &quot;I&#x27;m about to the end of my rope&quot;. At the fall Talladega race, Earnhardt had a solid run, including leading several laps, before finishing in 11th place. Lance McGrew had the &quot;interim&quot; taken off of his title, and he continued working with the No. 88 team through the end of the 2010 season. Earnhardt ended 2009 winless scoring two top-fives, five top-tens, an average finish of 23.3, and finished a career low 25th in the standings.

===2010===

On February 6, 2010, Earnhardt qualified second overall for the 52nd Daytona 500 after losing the pole position to teammate Mark Martin. He started 1st in the Gatorade Duel No. 2 on February 11 of that year. He finished 11th in the 2010 Budweiser Shootout after struggling with an ill-handling car for most of the race.

On February 13, 2010, while running in the front of the pack at the Daytona Nationwide Series race, Earnhardt was caught up in a multi-car wreck, causing his car to flip upside down on the backstretch. He walked away from the wreck uninjured. His driver Danica Patrick was caught up in another wreck before Earnhardt flipped. The next day during the 2010 Daytona 500, Earnhardt made a late charge to the front of the pack. After restarting 10th with two laps to go, Earnhardt used four fresh tires and a series of aggressive moves to make his way to second on the final lap, but his bid for victory was foiled by Jamie McMurray as Earnhardt finished 2nd. Earnhardt enjoyed a hot start to the year, qualifying well in the season&#x27;s first two months and winning the pole for the spring race at Atlanta Motor Speedway in March. He finished 15th in the race and stayed within Chase for the Sprint Cup contention for much of the season&#x27;s first half.

In a year defined by inconsistency, however, Earnhardt scored only two additional top-five finishes after the Daytona 500: a fourth-place result at the Coke Zero 400, and an additional fourth-place finish at New Hampshire Motor Speedway in September. He wrapped up the year with eight top-10s and a 21st-place finish in points. Hendrick Motorsports did a major crew chief shuffle following the season, pairing Earnhardt&#x27;s crew chief McGrew with Mark Martin, while Gordon&#x27;s crew chief, Steve Letarte, moved to the No. 88 team, and Gordon inherited Martin&#x27;s crew chief, Alan Gustafson.

Earnhardt&#x27;s Nationwide Series results offered more optimism in 2010. On July 2, Earnhardt raced a blue-and-yellow No. 3 Wrangler Chevrolet (painted to pay tribute to his father and fans) and drove it to victory lane in the Nationwide Series&#x27; Subway Jalapeño 250 at Daytona. On December 2, 2010, it was announced that Earnhardt won the NMPA Most Popular Driver award for the 8th consecutive time.

===2011===

He began the season by drawing the pole position at the 2011 Budweiser Shootout, where he finished 19th in the race. On February 13, he earned his first pole position at Daytona International Speedway, as well as his first at a track that uses restrictor plates. Due to a practice crash, he had to start at the back of the field for both the duel race and the 500. He finished 24th in the Daytona 500 after being wrecked with 4 laps to go. Over the next seven races, Earnhardt would achieve five Top 10 finishes, including a 2nd-place finish at Martinsville after losing the lead to Kevin Harvick with 4 laps to go, and a 4th-place finish at Talladega in a photo finish with Jimmie Johnson, Jeff Gordon, Mark Martin, Clint Bowyer, and Kevin Harvick. Earnhardt came within half a lap of snapping his then-104 race winless streak at the Coca-Cola 600 at the Charlotte Motor Speedway, when he ran out of fuel during a green-white-checkered finish, finishing 7th. The following week at Kansas, Earnhardt finished 2nd to Brad Keselowski. He followed this up with a solid 6th-place finish at Pocono. Over the course of the next three races, Earnhardt would slide to 7th in the Championship points, finishing 21st at Michigan, 41st at Infineon, and 19th at Daytona. On September 1, 2011, Earnhardt announced he had signed a 5-year contract extension with Hendrick Motorsports to drive the No. 88 until 2017. On September 19, 2011, Earnhardt made his first Chase for the Sprint Cup appearance since 2008 at Chicagoland. At the season finale at Homestead, he finished 11th and finished 7th in the final points standings. On December 1, 2011, it was announced that Earnhardt won the Most Popular Driver award for the 9th consecutive time.

===2012===
Earnhardt started 8th in the Budweiser Shootout, led for several laps, and finished 20th after being caught up in a six-car crash on lap 55 that also involved Matt Kenseth, Joey Logano and Kevin Harvick. In the Gatorade Duel, Earnhardt performed strong, starting on the outside pole in the first duel race. He led a few laps in the early part of the race before finishing second to Tony Stewart after his Nationwide Series teammate Danica Patrick smashed hard into the inside wall in a last lap crash on the back straightaway. In the postponed Daytona 500, he finished in 2nd place behind Matt Kenseth, after passing Greg Biffle on the last lap. At Phoenix, Earnhardt&#x27;s car struggled most of the race and came out with a 14th-place finish.

At Las Vegas, Earnhardt led 70 laps early but finished 10th based on bad pit strategy. At Bristol, Earnhardt finished 15th following a late race contact with teammate Jeff Gordon and a speeding penalty. Earnhardt would back this up with a pair of back to back 3rd-place finishes at Auto Club and Martinsville Speedway, leaving him second in the standings.

In the following weeks, Earnhardt would bring a string of Top 10s: 10th at Texas, 7th at Kansas, 2nd at Richmond, and 9th at Talladega, where he led 10 laps. The following week, Earnhardt struggled for most of the race at Darlington and had to settle with a 17th-place finish. At the All-Star Race, Earnhardt won the Sprint Showdown, leading all 40 laps to race his way into the big event. In the event, Earnhardt won the 4th segment and in the final 10 lap shootout, had to settle for a 5th-place finish. In the following two weeks, Earnhardt would post finishes of 6th at Charlotte and 4th at Dover heading into the summer months. At the newly repaved Pocono Raceway, Earnhardt led 36 laps during the race but made a late race fuel pit stop from 3rd place with just over 20 laps to go, finishing 8th and standing 2nd in points. At the 2012 Quicken Loans 400 at Michigan, Earnhardt dominated the race, leading 95 laps, and won, snapping a 143-race winless streak, almost four years to the day after his last win on June 15, 2008. Earnhardt would suffer a 23rd-place finish at Sonoma after being wrecked in a green-white-checkered finish, but was still able to cross the finish line intact and on the lead lap, continuing his streak of being the only driver to finish all races on the lead lap. He would back this up with a fourth-place finish in the Quaker State 400 at Kentucky Speedway.

The following week at Daytona, a last lap crash resulted in a 15th-place finish for Earnhardt but he still kept his streak of being the only driver to finish every single lap in every race. Earnhardt backed up with a couple of Top 5 finishes, finishing 4th at both Loudon and Indianapolis, where he gained the points lead for the first time since 2004 after points leader Matt Kenseth was taken out in a late race crash. Back at Pocono, Earnhardt was running in the 2nd position, but a break in the transmission sent the 88 to the garage, but he came back out 18 laps down and finished 32nd, due to rain that came and ended the race and a late race wreck involving Jimmie Johnson, Matt Kenseth, and Denny Hamlin. His streak of completing on the lead lap came to an end, but he still maintained the points lead with 5 races until the chase cutoff. At Watkins Glen, Earnhardt had a steady Top 10 going in the final laps but a late race spin resulted in a 28th-place finish, this would drop the 88 team from 1st to 4th in the points.

Returning to Michigan for the Pure Michigan 400, Earnhardt had to start in 42nd place after a crash in practice forced him to move to a backup car. He led for a number of laps mid-race and finished on the lead lap in 4th place. Earnhardt, Ryan Newman and Kasey Kahne also escaped engine difficulties that plagued Jimmie Johnson, Jeff Gordon, and Tony Stewart. At Bristol Motor Speedway, Earnhardt started 16th after a qualifying rainout; he led 13 laps in the race before pit road penalties resulted in a 12th-place finish. The finish locked him into the 2012 Chase for the Sprint Cup, alongside Greg Biffle, and teammate Jimmie Johnson. At Atlanta Motor Speedway, Earnhardt went a lap down early but recovered to earn a 7th-place finish. The following week at Richmond International Raceway, Earnhardt earned his first pole of the season. He would go on to lead 69 laps, but a late race pit stop resulted in the 88 team getting a 14th-place finish, and being seeded 7th in the standings. In the first race of the chase at Chicagoland Speedway, Earnhardt finished 8th despite having to start at the rear of the field due to an engine change. Finishes of 13th and 11th at Loudon and Dover left the 88 team 7th in the standings.

====Concussion====
On the morning of October 11, 2012, Hendrick Motorsports announced that Earnhardt would have to sit out the Bank of America 500 at Charlotte and the Hollywood Casino 400 at Kansas due to a concussion from a 25-car crash on the last lap at Talladega on October 7, 2012. That weekend, Earnhardt finished 20th at Talladega when he took a hard lick in a crash after making contact with Bobby Labonte. Prior to this, Earnhardt had suffered a concussion during an August 29 test at Kansas Speedway. Regan Smith was announced to replace him at those two races. Prior to the concussion, Earnhardt had competed in 461 consecutive races, dating back to the 1999 Atlanta event. The 2012 Bank of America 500 marked the first race since the 1979 Southern 500 that an Earnhardt had not competed in the Sprint Cup Series as Dale Earnhardt had competed in every race from that one up until his death in the 2001 Daytona 500. On October 23, 2012, Earnhardt was cleared for the Tums Fast Relief 500 at Martinsville after missing two races. He started strong in the race, but a late race spin with Carl Edwards placed for a 21st-place finish. His first top ten finish after returning to the track was a seventh-place finish at Texas. At Phoenix, Earnhardt fought an ill-handling car and finished 21st. At the season finale, at Homestead-Miami Speedway, Earnhardt would finish 10th. This was his first top 10 finish at the 1.5-mile track and his 20th of the season. He closed the season 12th in the final standings. On November 29, 2012, it was announced that Earnhardt won the NMPA Most Popular Driver Award for the 10th consecutive year. This tied Bill Elliott&#x27;s streak of 10 consecutive wins in the award.

===2013===
Earnhardt started the 2013 season with an 8th-place finish in the rechristened Sprint Unlimited. He qualified 11th for the Budweiser Duel, but he blew an engine in practice, he was forced to drop to the rear of the field. After narrowly missing a 3-car wreck between Carl Edwards, Trevor Bayne, and Regan Smith, he finished 9th. He finished fourth at the DRIVE4COPD 300 after submarining under Alex Bowman&#x27;s car in a violent last lap wreck.

In the Sprint Cup Series, Earnhardt hit a slight resurgence, and in the first five races of the season recorded three Top 5s and five Top 10 finishes. It began with a second-place finish to teammate Jimmie Johnson at the Daytona 500, Earnhardt&#x27;s third runner up finish in the 500 since 2010. The following week at Phoenix, he led for 47 laps but was shuffled back in traffic during a cycle caution flag pit stop, which allowed Carl Edwards to assume the lead while Junior finished in fifth place. This was followed by two more Top 10 finishes: 7th at Las Vegas and 6th at Bristol. At Fontana, Earnhardt started mid-pack and after a couple of mistakes including a lengthy pit stop caused by missed lug nuts on a right rear tire, he came home in 2nd-place finish, assuming the points lead as a result of Brad Keselowski going off pace and falling back. Two weeks later in Martinsville, Earnhardt struggled throughout the race and spun out after Danica Patrick was hit by Brian Vickers and sent into Earnhardt and ended up finishing 24th, 2 laps down, losing the points lead to Jimmie Johnson.

At Texas, Earnhardt ran near the front until lap 187, when his battery alternator quit and he ended up finishing 29th. At Kansas, he ran near the front until a debris caution happened while he, Ricky Stenhouse Jr., and Carl Edwards were all on pit road. Earnhardt would go a lap down, take the wave-around, and finish 16th. At Richmond, he finished 10th. At Talladega, he went a lap down early after some banging with Travis Kvapil. However, with a caution for a crash on lap 43, Earnhardt got the free pass to get back on the lead lap. He made his way back up through the field to the Top 5 but slipped back to 17th at the end.

The following week at Darlington, Earnhardt raced inside the Top 10 much of the night before settling for a 9th-place finish. He was one of only a few cars who were able to avoid being put a lap down by Kyle Busch.

The following week in the Sprint All-Star Race, Earnhardt battled a tight handling car much of that night before finishing 7th. The following week for the Coca-Cola 600, Earnhardt lost an engine and finished 39th, giving him his first DNF since 2011. The next two weeks saw a rebound, with finishes of 10th at Dover and 3rd at Pocono. At the Quicken Loans 400, Earnhardt led 23 laps but suffered an engine failure, and finished 37th in what was the lowest point of the season for the Hendrick Motorsports teams as a whole (Kasey Kahne and Jeff Gordon both had DNFs due to crashes, and Jimmie Johnson cut a tire with 5 laps to go). After the low of Michigan, Earnhardt had a 12th-place finish at Sonoma.

At Kentucky, Earnhardt won the pole and set a new track qualifying speed record with a lap time of 29.406 seconds and a speed of . Though he started on the pole, he lost the lead to Carl Edwards early. However, while Earnhardt was leading after the restart from a competition caution (due to a rain delay), Denny Hamlin cut a tire and the carcass came up the track and was struck by Earnhardt&#x27;s splitter and also by Jimmie Johnson&#x27;s car, causing significant damage. Earnhardt had to make several charges through the field to salvage a 12th-place finish. He then took an 8th-place finish at the Coke Zero 400. He, Johnson, and Ryan Newman were the only three drivers to sweep the Top 10 in both Daytona races.

Earnhardt then battled a struggling car at New Hampshire, where he finished 14th. After the final off week, he found some consistency with finishes of 6th at Indianapolis and 5th at Pocono, while battling loose wheels and vibrations in a span of two weeks.

The No. 88 team then had two bad weeks, with a 30th-place finish at Watkins Glen due to a late race crash with Kasey Kahne. The next week, Earnhardt blew a right front tire while running in the Top 10. The damage was enough that he finished 26 laps down, in 36th place. This evaporated his Chase cushion, but with finishes of 10th at Bristol and 8th at Atlanta, he was able to rebuild this cushion. At Richmond, the last race of the regular season, Earnhardt only needed to finish 32nd or better to make the Chase. A 13th-place finish did this, and he entered the Chase seeded in ninth place. This was the first time in Earnhardt&#x27;s career that he had made three straight Chase appearances. In the first Chase race at Chicagoland Speedway, Earnhardt suffered an engine failure, placing him last in Chase competition. He bounced back at New Hampshire Motor Speedway, leading 17 laps and finishing 6th. The result was good enough to move Earnhardt up to 11th in Chase for the Sprint Cup standings with eight races left in the season.

At Dover, Earnhardt won his second pole of the season, setting a new qualifying speed record of 161.849 mph. This was the first time since 2002 that he had recorded more than one pole during a season. During the race, Earnhardt would lead 80 laps but would finish 2nd to Jimmie Johnson. The following week at Kansas, he finished 8th. Making his 500th Cup start at Charlotte, Earnhardt led 19 laps early but finished 15th while battling a tight race car. The following week at Talladega, Earnhardt led 38 laps and was about to receive a push from Austin Dillon to overtake Jamie McMurray on the last lap when Ricky Stenhouse Jr. tapped Dillon, causing that driver to spin out and then get hit by Casey Mears, leaving Earnhardt with a 2nd-place finish. The following week at Martinville, Earnhardt earned an 8th-place finish. The next week at Texas, he had a solid night, finishing 2nd to Johnson for the third time in the season (after Daytona and Dover). The next week at Phoenix, Earnhardt started by being forced to pit with a loose wheel early, putting him a lap down. However, a caution allowed him to use the free pass to get back on the lead lap and salvage a 4th-place finish.

At the season finale, the last 67 laps saw a tight battle for the lead between Earnhardt; Matt Kenseth; and Denny Hamlin. Hamlin won while Earnhardt finished 3rd, giving him his first Top 5 at Homestead. He finished off the season 5th in the points, with two pole positions, ten Top 5s, and a career-high 22 Top 10 finishes.

On December 5, 2013, Earnhardt won the Most Popular Driver Award for the 11th consecutive year, breaking Bill Elliott&#x27;s record, who scored 10 straight awards from 1991 to 2000.

===2014===
The No. 88 team made headlines even before the start of the season. During the regular Daytona Winter test in January, it was announced that crew chief Steve Letarte would step down from the pit box after the season to become a full-time member of the upcoming NASCAR on NBC broadcast team, alongside Jeff Burton and Rick Allen. Earnhardt and Letarte reassured that this move would not interfere with them winning races and competing for the championship at the season&#x27;s end. In the Sprint Unlimited, Earnhardt led for 7 laps, but in the last segment, contact with Marcos Ambrose caused him to hit the wall in turn 1, finishing 9th. In the first Budweiser Duel, Earnhardt started 4th, and led 14 laps, before fading back to finish where he started.

In the Daytona 500, Earnhardt started 9th. His car hung around mid-pack for most of the first quarter of the race. After a six-hour and 22-minute red flag, Earnhardt&#x27;s car came alive, taking the lead with 70 laps remaining. He led 54 of the last 70 laps and he held off Denny Hamlin and Brad Keselowski to win his second Daytona 500, just 10 years after his first one. The following week at Phoenix, Earnhardt continued his momentum, finishing 2nd to Kevin Harvick. At Las Vegas, Earnhardt gambled on fuel in the remaining 40 laps, but he ran out of gas while leading on the last lap, finishing 2nd to eventual race winner Brad Keselowski. At Bristol, he was strong early and had a chance to become the first driver since Richard Petty to start a season with four straight Top 2 finishes, until tire problems forced him to make an unscheduled stop, leaving him to finish 24th, four laps down.

At Auto Club Speedway, Earnhardt started 15th. However, on lap 44, his car lost a right front tire and hit the outside wall in turn 2, bringing out a caution, making him one of several victims of tire failures that plagued the race. After being repaired and falling to the back of the lead lap, Earnhardt made several charges through the field to salvage a 12th-place finish, keeping him at 2nd place in the points. The following week at Martinsville, Earnhardt battled inside the Top 5 all day, leading 25 laps, and finished 3rd, giving him his 4th Top 3 finish of the season, and regained the points lead. At Texas, he crashed on Lap 13 and caught on fire. He finished last and fell 5 positions in points and dropped to 31 points behind new points leader Jeff Gordon. The following week at Darlington, Earnhardt raced among the Top 5 all night and was leading on a green-white-checkered finish, before finishing 2nd to Kevin Harvick.

At Richmond, after the Easter off week, Earnhardt was strong in the race, racing among the Top 3 late, and led 7 laps, but a green-white-checkered, and bad brakes forced Earnhardt to a 7th-place finish. The following week at Talladega, Earnhardt raced among the pack until the middle of the race, when he took the lead. He led for 26 laps, but the last 30 laps saw the car take a conservative pace, and he was never able to regain any track position, and finished 26th. At Kansas, for the first night race at the track, Earnhardt ran solidly in the Top 5, even leading a few laps, before finishing 5th.

For the Sprint All-Star Race, Earnhardt started 6th, but battled a tight car all night, and was never a real contender. Earnhardt crossed the finish line 4th. The following week at the Coca-Cola 600, he raced inside the Top 5 for most of the night, before making an unscheduled pit stop for an engine vibration. This resulted in a 19th-place finish, only two laps down. The following week at Dover, Earnhardt raced inside the Top 10 all day and was running in the Top 5 late, but a mistake on pit road left them with a 9th-place finish.

At Pocono, Earnhardt started eighth and stayed inside the Top 10 most of the afternoon. On the last restart, he was behind Brad Keselowski. In a reversal of the events at Las Vegas, with 5 laps to go, Keselowski tried to move behind the lap down car of Danica Patrick to get a piece of trash off his grille, which caused Earnhardt to slip by and never look back en route to his first victory at Pocono and second of the season. The win marked the first time since 2004 that he had won multiple races in a season. The next week at Michigan, Earnhardt started inside the Top 5, but finished 7th, after several cars had different pit strategies. The next week at Sonoma, saw Earnhardt have his statistical best road course finish, staying in the top ten for most of the race and finished 3rd. The following week at Kentucky, Earnhardt finished 5th.

Returning to Daytona, Earnhardt was involved in an early 16-car pileup on the front straightaway on lap 20, but was able to salvage a 14th-place finish by the time the race was called for rain after 112 of 160 laps.

Earnhardt was able to bounce back the following week at New Hampshire with a 10th-place finish. With the finish, he clinched a Chase berth, with him being enough inside the Top 30 and having two victories. The following week, he finished 9th at Indianapolis.

The questions referring to the replacement of Steve Letarte were finally answered on July 30, for it was announced that Greg Ives, Chase Elliott&#x27;s Nationwide Series crew chief at JR Motorsports, would return to Hendrick Motorsports, and take over Earnhardt&#x27;s pit box for 2015.

Returning to Pocono, Earnhardt started 9th. He ran inside the Top 10 for most of the race and took the lead from Greg Biffle with 14 laps to go. Earnhardt had built up a lead in excess of three seconds when the caution came out for Kurt Busch&#x27;s cut tire on lap 154, erasing his lead. He then sweated out a four lap shootout on the last restart to take his 3rd win of the year, marking the first time since 2006 that a driver swept both Pocono races (Denny Hamlin was the last driver). This win tied Earnhardt with Jimmie Johnson and Brad Keselowski for most wins of the season up to that point.

At Watkins Glen, Earnhardt finished 11th, and due to Jeff Gordon struggling, assumed the points lead, for the first time since Martinsville in April. The following week at Michigan, he made contact with Kyle Larson on pit road, but through hard work from his pit crew, was able to lead four laps and salvage a 5th-place finish.

The following week at Bristol, while running 5th, leader Denny Hamlin was wrecked by Kevin Harvick while racing for the lead, which then sent Hamlin&#x27;s car into the inside wall. Hamlin&#x27;s car then slid right back up in front of the No. 88 and slammed into the left-side door of the car, and the contact was bad enough to send Earnhardt behind the wall and suffer a 39th-place finish. This was his second DNF of the year, after the early exit in the spring Texas race.

In the final race of NASCAR&#x27;s regular season at Richmond, Earnhardt made his debut with a Nationwide-sponsored No. 88. He raced to a 12th-place finish, after what was a long, difficult night for the team. Despite struggling at the 3/4-mile track, Earnhardt seeded third in the Chase grid, behind series leader Brad Keselowski, and tied with Jeff Gordon, Jimmie Johnson, and Joey Logano for 2nd place. He started the Challenger Round of the Chase with an 11th-place finish in Chicago. The following week at New Hampshire, Earnhardt finished a solid 9th-place finish, giving him a comfortable advantage to make the Contender Round after Dover. At Dover, he finished 17th to make it to the next round.

At Kansas, after a 5th-place run in the spring, Earnhardt was looking to repeat this feat to start off the contender with a solid finish to help his chances to extend his run for the championship. After leading 45 laps in the same car he used to win both Pocono races earlier in the season, a cut right front tire resulted in a 39th-place finish. That finish caused him to fall to 11th place in points, 25 points behind 8th place. He came to Charlotte needing a win or a good finish. He led early but around lap 133, his shifter broke due to a vibration (a similar problem had befallen Jimmie Johnson at Michigan in August). He had to make multiple pit stops to fix the problem and never recovered, ending up 20th. He fell to last in the Chase standings, 26 points behind 8th.

At Talladega, Earnhardt started 28th and led for 31 laps. However, a crash on the back straightaway when he was turned by Greg Biffle ended his title contention chances and left him with a 31st-place finish.

Despite being knocked out of the Chase, Earnhardt continued to be consistent. At Martinsville, he led 79 laps and was leading with ten laps to go when a caution came out for a wreck between Kyle Larson and Marcos Ambrose. On the resulting restart, Earnhardt was running 5th. During the restart, he slipped through the pack and overtook Tony Stewart for the lead in turn 4. He continued to hold the lead to win the race ahead of Jeff Gordon. It was Earnhardt&#x27;s first career win at Martinsville.

Returning to Texas, Earnhardt had a rather average run, starting 12th and finishing 6th. At Phoenix, he had a solid day and got another Top 10, finishing 8th. At Homestead, Earnhardt had a tire problem early. He got the free pass and managed to crack the Top 5 at one point but fell back late to finish 14th. He finished 8th in the final standings with what was the best season for Earnhardt since 2004 with 4 wins, 12 Top 5s, 20 Top 10s, and an average finish of 12.2. For the 12th straight year, Earnhardt won the NMPA Most Popular Driver Award.

===2015===

At the end of the 2014, Earnhardt Jr.&#x27;s crew chief Steve Letarte departed Hendrick Motorsports to join NASCAR on NBC&#x27;s broadcasting team. Letarte was replaced by Chase Elliott&#x27;s 2014 Xfinity crew chief Greg Ives. Due to National Guard dropping their motorsports sponsorships, Earnhardt Jr. also got a new sponsor in the form of Nationwide Insurance.
Earnhardt Jr. kicked off 2015 with a ninth-place finish in the Sprint Unlimited. On February 19, he won the first Budweiser Duel in what was his fourth triumph in the Budweiser Duels. In the Daytona 500, he led for over 30 laps but on one of the last restarts, he made a move that mired him in the middle without help, and fell back to 16th with 15 laps to go, but managed to make his way back to third place by the last lap. This was his fifth Top 3 finish in the Daytona 500 in six years, after his runner-up finishes in 2010, 2012, and 2013, and his win in 2014.

At Atlanta, Earnhardt Jr. came home with another third-place finish and at Las Vegas, he finished fourth, scoring his third Top 5 finish after taking two tires during green flag pit-stops with 30 laps to go. At Phoenix, he had his worst finish of the year, with a last place finish after a tire-blowout. At Auto Club, he finished 6th. At Martinsville, he also ran inside the Top 20 until a tire-blowout made him get involved in a massive pileup that destroyed the front end of his car. Because of this crash, he would go on to finish 36th. At Texas, he narrowly was beaten by Kevin Harvick for second place. At Bristol, he ran as high as third until a loose wheel put him down two laps down. Although he never got them back, he was able to bring home a 16th-place finish only two laps down. At Richmond, he ran in the Top 10 all day until he and Tony Stewart made contact but managed to finish 14th.

At Talladega, Earnhardt Jr. started in row 2. He stayed near the front of the pack for most of the day, taking the lead with 27 laps to go and sailing away to his sixth win at the track and his first since October 2004, tying him with teammate Jeff Gordon for most wins among active drivers at Talladega. At Kansas, he finished third after staying out on the last caution. At Charlotte, he gambled on fuel and barely beat out Matt Kenseth and Martin Truex Jr. for another third-place finish. Earnhardt led three laps at Dover but a penalty for speeding on pit road cost him, although he was able to finish 14th two laps down.

At Pocono, Earnhardt ran in the top ten all day. On a late restart, he and Brad Keselowski cut their tires from incidental contact and a caution flew seconds later when Keselowski hit the wall after making contact with Brett Moffitt. Earnhardt Jr. pitted and restarted 29th with 20 laps to go and salvaged an 11th-place finish. Earnhardt finished second in the rain-shortened Michigan race after he could not pass Kurt Busch on the last restart before the race was called for rain on lap 138. Earnhardt also had another solid Top 10 run at Sonoma, finishing 7th.

Returning to Daytona, Earnhardt Jr. won the pole for the Coke Zero 400 after qualifying was rained out and the starting lineup was set by opening practice times. In the race itself, after enduring a rain delay, he took the lead early on lap 8, and after leading 97 laps, held off multiple charges from Jimmie Johnson and Denny Hamlin in the closing laps to take his second win of the year. The win itself, however, was overshadowed by the last lap crash that saw Austin Dillon&#x27;s car fly into the catch fence. Earnhardt Jr. also became only the 23rd driver in NASCAR Sprint Cup history to lead over 8,000 laps. He achieved this milestone, when he led 97 laps. This brought his career total laps led count to 8,051.

At Kentucky, Earnhardt Jr. struggled with overheated brakes and even caused a caution when he brushed the outside wall in turns 3 and 4 halfway through the race. Later, on lap 206, he would be the subject of controversy when he rear-ended Danica Patrick and spun her out, in part because of his faulty brakes. Patrick retaliated by cursing at Earnhardt on the radio and ramming him on pit road. Earnhardt was perplexed with Patrick&#x27;s reaction, saying &quot;I mean, what am I supposed to say other than the truth? We didn&#x27;t have any brakes going into the corner. I know better than to run into her because it gets so much attention. There wasn&#x27;t nothing I could do. I mean, as hard as I hit her, what the hell did she think I was doing? Trying to wreck her? We ain&#x27;t got no problem. It&#x27;s not like we were having a problem out on the racetrack with her. It&#x27;s not like I just drew her name out of a hat and decided she was the one I was going to run into tonight.&quot;
At New Hampshire, Earnhardt Jr. started 19th and finished 5th.

At Indianapolis, Earnhardt Jr. was running well until lap 147, when he got forced into the grass in turn 1 and spun out. He was able to salvage a 22nd-place finish.

Returning to Pocono, Earnhardt Jr. was involved in a spin on a restart on lap 72 that also involved Kurt Busch. His car did not take severe damage, however, and despite running mid-pack for most of the second half of the race and running 17th with four laps to go, he ended up finishing in fourth place after many other drivers including the leaders at four laps to go ran out of fuel.

At Watkins Glen, Earnhardt was able to start 7th and finished 11th after running in the top 10 all day, but running out of fuel on the last lap.

Returning to Michigan, Earnhardt Jr. started inside the top 10 and was running in the top 3 in the early part of the race. After battling an ill-handling racecar, he was able to finish 10th.

Earnhardt returned to Bristol looking for his first win at that track since 2004. He qualified 26th and after the first caution came out he would pit. During the pit stop the crew would leave a wheel loose and Earnhardt would pit again. After going a lap down multiple times in the race, he got the Lucky Dog and got back on the lead lap. After moving up to the top 5 later on in the race, he would settle for a 9th-place finish.

The series would take an off week and return to Darlington. Again Earnhardt would have to start mid-pack. He would run outside the top 10 most of the day, but the crew would make right adjustments and they would finish 8th.

The regular season finale would take place at Richmond for the 26th race. Earnhardt would qualify 29th and was puzzled in his interview afterwards. During the race, Earnhardt made steady climbs and by halfway had cracked the top ten. Earnhardt would climb as high as 4th and end up finishing 5th. He made the chase for the 8th time in his career and was seeded 6th for the first Chase race.

Earnhardt Jr. opened the Challenger Round with a 12th-place finish at Chicagoland. At New Hampshire, he ran up front for most of the day, but an emergency fuel stop with two laps to go led him to finish 25th, two laps down, and at the bottom of the Chase cutline. At Dover, despite falling back at a few points, Earnhardt Jr. was locked in a battle with Jamie McMurray for control of the final transfer spot into the Contender Round. He almost did not make it into the next round, with his chances being saved thanks to a caution for Brett Moffitt&#x27;s crash on lap 357 keeping him from having to make a green flag pit stop to replace a loose wheel. On the last restart, Earnhardt Jr. overtook McMurray on the outside, and finished third, clinching the final transfer spot and bumping McMurray out of the Chase.

At Charlotte, Earnhardt Jr was battling for a position inside the top 10 when he made contact Carl Edwards and hit the wall ending up 29th. At Kansas, Earnhardt Jr had to pit for a loose wheel under green and ended up finishing 21st, 2 laps down. Heading into Talladega, he basically needed to win to advance. He led 61 laps, but he slid his tires coming onto pit road and ended up having to take 2 tires instead of fuel only while others were taking fuel only. He ended up on the front row, heading into the only GWC. But a wreck behind him ended up cutting it short and he ended up 2nd upon a review, eliminating him from the championship. At Martinsville, the week after he was eliminated from Chase Contention, he was strong all race taking home a 4th-place finish at the track. At Texas the following week Earnhardt recovered from an early spin to finish 6th. Earnhardt Jr. managed to get his 3rd victory of the season at Phoenix, after the race was called for rain. At the season finale at Homestead Earnhardt crashed early in the race, winding up 40th. For the 13th consecutive year, Earnhardt won the NMPA Most Popular Driver Award.

===2016===

Earnhardt started the 2016 season with a crash in the Sprint Unlimited on lap 23 when Brian Vickers cut down a tire and hit him, damaging the side of his car. This would allow him to finish 15th, four laps down. He then went on to win the first Can-Am Duel race for the second year in a row. In the Daytona 500, he was strong early in the race but with 30 laps to go, he spun off of turn 4 while trying to make a move and hit the SAFER barrier head-on. He would wind up 36th. The following week in Atlanta he was very strong, finishing second. The following week, at Las Vegas, Earnhardt had a car that was solid all day and ended with an 8th-place finish. At the spring race in Phoenix, he led for a good portion of the race but stayed out on old tires during overtime. Because of this, he slid his tires on the start, finishing 5th. At Fontana the next week, he struggled throughout the race in the early stages, even being as low as 34th. But in overtime, he made a charge, finishing 11th. At Martinsville, he spun on lap 5, spending 300 laps one lap down. But in the end, he finished 14th and on the lead lap. In Texas, he was strong late in the race, finishing 2nd to Kyle Busch, who won back to back races. At Bristol, he stalled his car on the start, going 2 laps down. But as the race went on, his car came to life and he finished 2nd.

When the Xfinity Series came to Richmond for the running of the Toyota Care 250, Earnhardt would finish 2nd in the first heat race. In the main feature, he would dominate and win the race holding off Ty Dillon for his first Xfinity win since 2010 and his first for JR Motorsports.

On Lap 50 at the spring Talladega race, he got loose in the draft and just like Daytona he hit the wall, damaging his car. This would result in a 40th-place finish. At Kansas, he started 22nd and finished 15th. The following week at Dover, he would start 2nd because qualifying was rained out, but was involved in a late wreck on a botched restart, finishing 32nd.

In the All-Star Race, qualifying was rained out, so he started 10th due to owner points, but was able to finish 3rd.

====Concussions end season====
In July, Earnhardt was diagnosed with concussion-like symptoms and would miss the second half of the year as a result. He was replaced by Alex Bowman for the New Hampshire 301 and Jeff Gordon at the Brickyard 400 and Pennsylvania 400. On September 2, Earnhardt announced he would sit out the remainder of the season with Gordon and Bowman continuing their replacement roles in the 88. On December 8, 2016, Earnhardt was medically cleared to return to competition in 2017.
Despite missing the second half of the season, Earnhardt Jr. won the NMPA Most Popular Driver Award for the 14th consecutive time.

It was also during this year that Junior would announce, that after his death, his brain would be donated to science to research how his concussions impacted his brain.

===2017: Final year===

Earnhardt started the 2017 Daytona 500 qualifying second but was wrecked while leading mid-race, and finished 37th. After a string of lackluster finishes, he managed to score a top 5 at the newly repaved Texas. It was his first and only Top 5 finish of the year. On April 25, 2017, Earnhardt announced that 2017 would be his final year driving full-time. Earnhardt Jr. failed to make the Playoffs in his final year, posting a 13th-place finish at Richmond, needing a win to make it in. In his final restrictor plate race at Talladega, Earnhardt would start on the pole and he would miss three big wrecks in the closing laps to finish seventh. In his final career race, Earnhardt started in 24th place and finished in 25th place. He ended up in 21st in points standings. He ended up with only one Top 5, eight Top 10&#x27;s, two poles, and seven DNF&#x27;s. However he did win his 15th consecutive and final Most Popular Driver award. Even though 15 straight years of Earnhardt being most popular driver is a NASCAR record, he is second all-time to Bill Elliott, who has 16 most popular driver awards, including 10 straight.

===2018–present===
After his retirement, Earnhardt began sporadically racing in the Xfinity Series with JR Motorsports. In 2018, he ran the fall Xfinity race at Richmond in the No. 88, after qualifying second, he dominated by leading 96 of the 250 laps, but would ultimately finish fourth after a late race restart. The following year, he contested the Sport Clips Haircuts VFW 200 at Darlington, his first Xfinity start at the track since 1999, driving a No. 8 designed after his father&#x27;s 1975 Cup car. After starting 15th, he finished fifth; he had originally finished sixth but was promoted one position following Denny Hamlin&#x27;s disqualification.

In 2020, Earnhardt shared the No. 8 with Daniel Hemric and Jeb Burton. At the 2020 Daytona 500, Earnhardt Jr. was named the Honorary Starter and waved the green flag to officially begin the race. It was soon announced Earnhardt would compete in the Hooters 250 at Homestead-Miami Speedway that year. Earnhardt finished 5th.

It was announced on September 10, 2021, that he would be running in the 2021 version of the Go Bowling 250, with his paint scheme honoring the ones who lost their lives in the 9/11 attacks exactly 20 years ago to the day.

On April 8, 2022, Earnhardt made his Xfinity series start at Martinsville and would ultimately finish 11th after starting 30th. He drove the No. 88 in the race for the first time since 2018.

Earnhardt expanded his Xfinity schedule from one race to two in 2023, with Hellmann&#x27;s sponsoring him at Bristol in September and Bass Pro Shops sponsoring him at Homestead-Miami in October. At Bristol, he was running near the lead with 30 laps to go until a fire in the shifter tunnel column resulted in a 30th place DNF.

On September 20, 2024, Earnhardt raced in the Xfinity Series - Food City 300 at Bristol. He drove the No. 88 and finished in 7th place despite a myriad of issues with the car and not having raced in nearly a year.

===Other racing===
On top of his 26 career NASCAR Cup regular season victories, Earnhardt has also won nine exhibition races. He won the 2003, 2004, 2008, 2015, and 2016 Budweiser Duels, the 2000 The Winston, the 2003 and 2008 Budweiser Shootout and the 2012 Sprint Showdown. He finished second in the 1999 IROC race from Michigan International Speedway, barely losing to his father. In 1998, he was one of a select few of drivers invited to race in the NASCAR Thunder/Motegi 500 in Motegi, Japan. He achieved a sixth-place finish in this overseas race.

On April 20, 2022, Earnhardt won on his debut in the iRacing MOONCAR series, racing vintage 1987 Winston Cup stock cars at Talladega in dramatic fashion, flipping across the start/finish line. On September 1, he finished third at the CARS Tour Window World 125 at North Wilkesboro. On November 20, Earnhardt finished ninth at the South Carolina 400 at Florence Motor Speedway.

On October 22, 2024, Earnhardt announced that he will reunite with Budweiser and drive the No. 8 in select Late Model races in 2024 and 2025, starting with the 2024 South Carolina 400 at Florence.

==Team ownership==
===Chance 2 Motorsports===

In 2003, Earnhardt and his stepmother Teresa founded Chance 2 Motorsports as a separate entity from DEI. The company hired Martin Truex Jr. to drive the No. 8 in the 2004 and 2005 Busch Series season, and he would go on to win the championship both years. Truex won twelve races for the team and Earnhardt added four more, three of which were in 2003. The company would later endure financial struggles and go out of business in 2006 and Truex, Earnhardt, and the No. 8 car returned to DEI.

===JR Motorsports===

Earnhardt is a co-owner of JR Motorsports with his older sister Kelley Earnhardt Miller, a NASCAR Xfinity and Truck Series team. In 2014, the team won their first NASCAR national championship, as Chase Elliott drove the No. 9 NAPA Auto Parts car to the 2014 NASCAR Nationwide Series championship. In 2015, JR Motorsports began fielding a part-time team in the Truck Series, with Cole Custer driving the No. 00 Haas Automation Chevrolet Silverado in 10 races. Kasey Kahne also drove part-time in the Truck Series, with the two drivers winning at Gateway Motorsports Park and Charlotte, respectively. JR Motorsports also has a very successful regional late model program, with Josh Berry capturing the 2012 Motor Mile Championship in the Whelen All-American series. Berry was also able to win a second track championship at Hickory Motor Speedway.

==Broadcasting career==
===NBC (2018–2023)===
In 2016, Earnhardt was a guest analyst in NASCAR Cup and Xfinity race broadcasts on Fox and NBC.

Earnhardt joined the &quot;NASCAR on NBC&quot; broadcasting team as a color commentator for the 2018 season. He made his debut on NBCSN&#x27;s &quot;NASCAR America&quot; on March 12, 2018, joining Leigh Diffey, Jeff Burton, and his former crew chief Steve Letarte. In his debut at the 2018 Overton&#x27;s 400 at Chicagoland Speedway, he coined his catchphrase: &quot;Slide job!&quot; when Kyle Busch and Kyle Larson battled for the lead on the final lap.

===Amazon Prime Video and TNT (2025 onwards)===
On February 29, 2024, &quot;The Athletic&quot; reported that Earnhardt Jr&#x27;s contract with &quot;NASCAR on NBC&quot; expired after the 2023 season and would reportedly be leaving NBC for Amazon and TNT&#x27;s new NASCAR coverage in the next TV contract that starts in 2025.

On May 7, 2024, it was officially announced that he would join the broadcast teams of Amazon Prime Video and TNT starting in 2025, presumably continuing as a color commentator. Earnhardt will also participate in a Bleacher Report content series that will be co-produced with his Dirty Mo Media production company.

==Business interests==
Earnhardt owns Hammerhead Entertainment, a media production company that created and produced the TV show &quot;Back in the Day&quot;, which aired on SPEED. Hammerhead also produced &quot;Shifting Gears&quot;, a show on ESPN2 that chronicled his 2008 team switch.

He was partners with a group of investors who were building Alabama Motorsports Park, a Dale Earnhardt Jr. Speedway. The track was to be located near Mobile, Alabama, and would feature stock car racing, kart racing and a road course. This would have joined with his partial ownership of Paducah International Raceway. 

, Earnhardt has his own signature line of eyeglass frames, partnering with NY Eye Inc. In August 2012, he entered the automobile dealer business, opening Dale Earnhardt Jr. Chevrolet and Dale Earnhardt Jr. Buick-GMC-Cadillac in Tallahassee, Florida in association with car owner Rick Hendrick.

Earnhardt co-owns the Whiskey River Beer and Wings restaurants in Charlotte, North Carolina, and at the Charlotte Airport.

Earnhardt is also the co-owner of FilterTime, a residential air filter delivery service, alongside former NASCAR driver Blake Koch.

Earnhardt has been a long-time sim racer. In November 2020, he officially joined iRacing as an executive director and was part of the management committee.

On January 9, 2023, a consortium consisting of Earnhardt&#x27;s DEJ Management, Jeff Burton Autosports, Inc., Kevin Harvick Incorporated, and Trackhouse Racing Team purchased the CARS Tour.

==In popular media==
===Films===
He was featured in the video Playboy: Celebrity Photographers (2003) where he photographed The Dahm Triplets. He appeared in the 2006 film &quot;Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby.&quot; In the movie, he is seen asking Ricky Bobby (Will Ferrell) for his autograph, and tells Ricky &quot;don&#x27;t tell any of the other drivers.&quot; There is also a deleted scene on the DVD where he calls Ricky a &quot;dirty liar&quot; and asks him for money he owed him. The No. 8 car also appeared in &quot;&quot; in the final race where Herbie overtook him. His No. 88 car also appeared in the 2011 film &quot;&quot; as the vehicle form of Roadbuster, one of a trio of NASCAR stock cars equipped with armor and heavy machine guns called the &quot;Wreckers&quot; (the other Wreckers were based on the No. 42 and No. 48 cars driven respectively by Juan Pablo Montoya and Jimmie Johnson). The Wrecker versions of these cars circled the track during the opening pace laps of the 2011 Daytona 500 (Josh Duhamel, Rosie Huntington-Whiteley and Michael Bay were also the grand marshals for that race, in which Earnhardt crashed on lap 203 after making contact with Ryan Newman).

===Television===
He hosted &quot;Back in the Day&quot;, a show that recapped races from the 1960s and 1970s with trivia and information. The show debuted on the Speed Channel on February 6, 2007. He has also appeared in an episode of the TV show &quot;Yes, Dear&quot;. He has also been on two episodes of &quot;MTV Cribs&quot;. The first episode originally aired in 2001. The second episode featuring the Western town Earnhardt built originally aired in 2009. His production company Hammerhead Entertainment also assisted in creating a DirecTV special called &quot;Fast Lane For Fun&quot;, in which Earnhardt&#x27;s Whisky River was shown in one episode. In 2010, he appeared in an episode of &quot;Shaq Vs.&quot;, where he was racing against Shaquille O&#x27;Neal. In 2013 Earnhardt made an appearance on the show &quot;Fast N&#x27; Loud&quot; where he requested Richard Rawlings from Gas Monkey Garage to build him a custom-built car for a road trip vacation. He has a home renovation show for the DIY Network called &quot;Renovation Realities: Dale Jr. and Amy&quot;. He later voiced Chip Racerson Jr. in one episode of the 2013 animated series &quot;Teen Titans Go!&quot; called &quot;Teen Titans Vroom!&quot; In 2020, Earnhardt hosted &quot;Lost Speedways&quot;, a television documentary series that saw him travel to and explore abandoned racetracks across the country.

===Voice acting===
* His voice is featured in the video game &quot;&quot;.
* He voiced himself in Disney/Pixar&#x27;s movie &quot;Cars&quot; as a No. 8 car (painted in resemblance to Earnhardt&#x27;s actual car) named &quot;Junior&quot; with the DEI logo on the hood. The Budweiser logos were censored from the No. 8 to prevent alcoholic advertising to gain a &quot;G&quot; (General) rating.
* His voice was used for the character Chase Davis in an episode of the Disney Channel&#x27;s &quot;Handy Manny&quot;. Chase helps Manny compete in the Wood Valley 500 auto race in &quot;Handy Manny&#x27;s Big Race&quot;.
* He played himself in &quot;The Hangover: Part Tubbs&quot;, a 2013 episode of &quot;The Cleveland Show&quot;.

===Music===
Until its rebranding in 2015, the band Dale Earnhardt Jr. Jr. was named after Earnhardt. Earnhardt is a noted fan of Ellicott City, Maryland rock band The Dangerous Summer and produced the music video for the band&#x27;s song &quot;Ghosts&quot;.

====Music video appearances====
He has made appearances in several music videos, including:
* &quot;Show Me What You Got&quot; by Jay-Z, along with Danica Patrick.
* &quot;Anti-Pop&quot; by Matthew Good Band.
* &quot;Steve McQueen&quot; by Sheryl Crow.
* &quot;Rough and Ready&quot; by Trace Adkins.
* &quot;The Road I&#x27;m On&quot; by 3 Doors Down, along with Tony Stewart.
* &quot;Right on Time&quot; by O.A.R..
* &quot;Rockstar&quot; by Nickelback.
* &quot;Warrior&quot; by Kid Rock.

===Radio===
Earnhardt hosted a show on Sirius XM Radio&#x27;s Sirius XM Sports Nation called &quot;Dale Earnhardt Jr.&#x27;s Unrestricted&quot;.

Beginning the 2013 season, Earnhardt&#x27;s Hammerhead Entertainment and his Dirty Mo Radio podcasting network began producing &quot;The Dale Jr. Download&quot;, a weekly podcast which recaps his race weekend. It was hosted by Taylor Zarzour and Mike Davis up until the end of the 2016 season. For the 2017 season Dale Jr and his road manager, Tyler Overstreet replaced Davis and Zarzour as the hosts of &quot;The Dale Jr. Download&quot;. However, Davis continued to make an occasional appearance on the podcast. In 2018, edited versions of &quot;The Dale Jr. Download&quot; began airing on NBCSN featuring interviews with current and former NASCAR personalities. When NBCSN shut down, the show moved to NBC&#x27;s Peacock streaming service in 2022.

===Video games===
Earnhardt has been featured on the cover of NASCAR-themed video games twice; he appeared on the cover of EA Sports&#x27; &quot;NASCAR Thunder 2003&quot;, and also was voted to be on the cover of &quot;NASCAR The Game: Inside Line&quot; in 2012.

A long-time member of and advocate for &quot;iRacing&quot;, Earnhardt joined the service&#x27;s parent company as executive director in 2020. In 2022, the trophy for the eNASCAR Coca-Cola iRacing Series was renamed in his honor.

==Politics==
In a 2004 interview with Mike Wallace (not fellow competitor) on &quot;60 Minutes&quot;, Earnhardt revealed himself to be a Republican and a supporter of President George W. Bush. Despite this, he took his crew out to see the film &quot;Fahrenheit 9/11&quot; earlier that year, explaining, &quot;I like hearing both sides of the argument. I thought the movie was well done. But my dad was a Republican, and I&#x27;m a Republican, and so [it&#x27;s] not that I came out of there going, &#x27;I ain&#x27;t voting for Bush again.&#x27; That didn&#x27;t happen, and I didn&#x27;t expect that to happen. I just wanted to go and enjoy the movie.&quot;

Earnhardt is a longtime opponent of the modern display of the Confederate flag at NASCAR events. He wrote in his 2001 autobiography &quot;Driver #8&quot; about his experience being asked about the flag in a Q&amp;A at Richmond International Raceway (now Richmond Raceway) the previous year. &quot;I think it means something different to me than it does to y&#x27;all...&quot; he responded. He has distanced himself from race fans who display the flag, explaining, &quot;It never really was me.&quot; In 2006, Earnhardt told Dan Wetzel of Yahoo! Sports: &quot;We live in a country where you can speak freely and do as you may. I don&#x27;t know (if) what that flag stands for is the same for me as it is the guy who might have it flying out there. I am not going to agree with everything everybody does all my life. So I don&#x27;t have any control over it.&quot; Following the Charleston church shooting in 2015, Earnhardt told reporters: &quot;I think it&#x27;s offensive to an entire race. It does nothing for anybody to be there flying, so I don&#x27;t see any reason. It belongs in the history books and that&#x27;s about it.&quot;

In January 2009, Earnhardt expressed enthusiasm following President Barack Obama&#x27;s inauguration: &quot;I&#x27;m as excited as everybody else is about him. I wish I had been able to go to the inauguration. I would love to meet him. That would be a great honor.&quot;

In April 2012, Earnhardt became a partner of the American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity. He addressed delegates to the 2012 Democratic National Convention at Charlotte Motor Speedway on behalf of the coalition. In 2014, Earnhardt recorded an advertisement for America&#x27;s Power, encouraging voter turnout for the U.S. elections that year.

In May 2012, Earnhardt singled out Republican Representative Jack Kingston of Georgia while speaking against an amendment to a defense bill that would prohibit the military from funding sponsorships in professional sports.

In January 2017, Earnhardt revealed that his family immigrated from Germany in the 1770s to escape religious persecution, saying &quot;America is created by immigrants.&quot; In August, he spoke out against hatred, bigotry and racism following the attacks in Charlottesville, Virginia and Barcelona, Spain. In September, after protests of the U.S. national anthem gained traction following criticism from President Donald Trump, Earnhardt expressed support for peaceful protesters, quoting former president John F. Kennedy on Twitter: &quot;Those who make peaceful revolution impossible will make violent revolution inevitable.&quot;

==Personal life==

Earnhardt is a passionate Washington Commanders fan and has been known to have their scores relayed to him during races. &quot;During the race season, [if] I&#x27;m under caution, I&#x27;m getting stats and numbers told to me over the radio during the race,&quot; Earnhardt said. &quot;I&#x27;ve got to know. I can&#x27;t concentrate on what I&#x27;m doing if I don&#x27;t know what the Redskins are doing. My fans tell me if I lose, it ruins their week. But if the Redskins lose, it ruins my week.&quot; Earnhardt once dreamed of playing football for Washington, but states that he &quot;wasn&#x27;t built&quot; for it. &quot;I was 5–3 (5&#x27;3&quot;, 160 cm) when I got my driver&#x27;s license at the age of 16,&quot; he said, &quot;so I wasn&#x27;t going to make much of a football player.&quot; He currently owns a Learjet 60 private jet with the tail number N8JR.

Earnhardt also owns a yard of wrecked race cars on a property in North Carolina. Some of the most notable cars include Juan Pablo Montoya&#x27;s 2012 Daytona 500 car that collided with a jet dryer, David Gilliland&#x27;s 2014 5-hour Energy 400 car that was destroyed in a violent impact with the tri-oval wall, and Earnhardt&#x27;s own 2014 Duck Commander 500 car that was wrecked from incidental contact with wet infield grass on lap 12 that cut a tire.

On June 17, 2015, Earnhardt announced his engagement to his longtime girlfriend Amy Reimann. After winning his 14th Most Popular Driver Award in 2016, he announced their marriage would take place on New Year&#x27;s Eve. They got married at Richard Childress&#x27; Childress Vineyards in Lexington, North Carolina.

In March 2016, Earnhardt announced that he plans to donate his brain for concussion research when he dies.

In October 2017, Earnhardt revealed that he and Amy were expecting their first child. Their daughter, Isla Rose Earnhardt, was born on April 30, 2018. In March 2020, Earnhardt revealed that he and Amy were expecting their second child. The couple welcomed Nicole Loraine Earnhardt on October 12, 2020.

On April 22, 2019, Brenda Jackson, Earnhardt&#x27;s mother, died at the age of 65 after years of battling cancer. She had served as an accounting specialist for JR Motorsports since 2004.

Earnhardt is a supporter of the Make-A-Wish Foundation and has granted over 250 wishes.

On August 15, 2019, a Cessna Citation Latitude private jet carrying Earnhardt, his wife Amy, daughter Isla Rose, and dog Gus was involved in a bounced landing at Elizabethton Municipal Airport in Elizabethton, Tennessee and caught fire. None of the passengers were seriously injured. He announced on Twitter about a week after the accident that he still intended to participate in the Xfinity Series one-off entry at Darlington the week afterwards, even though his lower back had gotten sizeable bruises and swelling. Earnhardt finished fifth in the Darlington race after having sufficiently recovered to be taking part in the event, confirming before the race he was feeling great and had been assured there was no risk for him in taking part.

Earnhardt suffers from kosmemophobia, which is a fear of jewelry.

==Motorsports career results==

===NASCAR===
() (Bold – Pole position awarded by qualifying time. &quot;Italics&quot; – Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * – Most laps led. ** – All laps led.)

====NASCAR Cup Series====
=====Daytona 500=====
====Xfinity Series====
 Season still in progress&lt;br&gt;
 Ineligible for series points

====CARS Late Model Stock Car Tour====
() (Bold – Pole position awarded by qualifying time. &quot;Italics&quot; – Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * – Most laps led. ** – All laps led.)
===International Race of Champions===
() (Bold – Pole position. * – Most laps led.)
===24 Hours of Daytona===


==References==
==External links==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q355388" start="0" end="24" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr." label="Ralph Dale Earnhardt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1758324" start="77" end="93" title="stock car racing" label="stock car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="191" end="208" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q355420" start="218" end="232" title="Dale Earnhardt" label="Dale Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="288" end="294" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534770" start="354" end="365" title="2017 Monster Energy NASCAR Cup Series" label="2017 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q645499" start="400" end="421" title="NASCAR Xfinity Series" label="NASCAR Xfinity Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q332448" start="442" end="458" title="Chevrolet Camaro" label="Chevrolet Camaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094266" start="473" end="487" title="JR Motorsports" label="JR Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276037" start="502" end="519" title="color commentator" label="color commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q612944" start="530" end="543" title="NASCAR on NBC" label="NASCAR on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30596171" start="553" end="557" title="2018 Monster Energy NASCAR Cup Series" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q954984" start="707" end="710" title="NASCAR on TNT" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952525" start="766" end="777" title="NASCAR on television and radio" label="TV contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="830" end="839" title="Budweiser" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210420" start="864" end="884" title="Dale Earnhardt, Inc." label="Dale Earnhardt, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="922" end="939" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453843" start="959" end="963" title="1999 NASCAR Winston Cup Series" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q183518" start="970" end="974" title="2007 NASCAR Nextel Cup Series" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788156" start="979" end="983" title="2008 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096654" start="997" end="1017" title="Hendrick Motorsports" label="Hendrick Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502156" start="1199" end="1212" title="Fred Lorenzen" label="Fred Lorenzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593817" start="1317" end="1321" title="1998 NASCAR Busch Series" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594926" start="1326" end="1330" title="1999 NASCAR Busch Series" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="1407" end="1437" title="Daytona International Speedway" label="Daytona International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547320" start="1442" end="1465" title="Talladega Superspeedway" label="Talladega Superspeedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q841738" start="1557" end="1568" title="Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602692" start="1577" end="1581" title="2004 Daytona 500" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737163" start="1586" end="1590" title="2014 Daytona 500" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550107" start="1605" end="1630" title="NASCAR&amp;#x27;s Most Popular Driver Award" label="Most Popular Driver Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029146" start="1765" end="1791" title="Kannapolis, North Carolina" label="Kannapolis, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q355420" start="1832" end="1846" title="Dale Earnhardt" label="Dale Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16214092" start="1939" end="1945" title="Kelley Earnhardt Miller" label="Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394515" start="1970" end="1975" title="Kerry Earnhardt" label="Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="2121" end="2127" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702131" start="2434" end="2448" title="Teresa Earnhardt" label="Teresa Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073704" start="2618" end="2644" title="Oak Ridge Military Academy" label="Oak Ridge Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708043" start="2790" end="2813" title="Mooresville High School (North Carolina)" label="Mooresville High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760817" start="2915" end="2930" title="Andy Hillenburg" label="Andy Hillenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030184" start="3040" end="3063" title="Concord, North Carolina" label="Concord, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956837" start="3508" end="3529" title="Myrtle Beach Speedway" label="Myrtle Beach Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024296" start="3588" end="3617" title="Robersonville, North Carolina" label="Robersonville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881169" start="3888" end="3914" title="Mitchell Community College" label="Mitchell Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="3926" end="3942" title="associate degree" label="associate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q706835" start="3946" end="3967" title="Auto mechanic" label="automotive technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q645499" start="3993" end="4005" title="NASCAR Xfinity Series" label="Busch Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210420" start="4038" end="4058" title="Dale Earnhardt, Inc." label="Dale Earnhardt, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q17612046" start="4064" end="4075" title="Ed Whitaker" label="Ed Whitaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273479" start="4248" end="4260" title="Dick Trickle" label="Dick Trickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983496" start="4265" end="4279" title="Buckshot Jones" label="Buckshot Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593488" start="4332" end="4366" title="1998 Daytona 500" label="his first and only Daytona 500 win"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="4459" end="4471" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="4513" end="4531" title="Winston Cup Series" label="Winston Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420895" start="4568" end="4584" title="Twin Ring Motegi" label="Twin Ring Motegi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4588" end="4593" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="4657" end="4666" title="Budweiser" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959800" start="4949" end="4974" title="NASCAR Rookie of the Year" label="NASCAR Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="5031" end="5043" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q841738" start="5092" end="5103" title="Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636819" start="5158" end="5178" title="Texas Motor Speedway" label="Texas Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700358" start="5375" end="5405" title="Richmond International Raceway" label="Richmond International Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754612" start="5441" end="5452" title="2000 The Winston" label="The Winston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094440" start="5590" end="5599" title="Pepsi 400" label="Pepsi 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723278" start="5603" end="5634" title="Michigan International Speedway" label="Michigan International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q719215" start="5718" end="5727" title="Lee Petty" label="Lee Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q355130" start="5745" end="5752" title="Richard Petty" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105183" start="5757" end="5764" title="Maurice Petty" label="Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598619" start="5945" end="5961" title="2001 Daytona 500" label="2001 Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q946057" start="6026" end="6041" title="Michael Waltrip" label="Michael Waltrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061570" start="6219" end="6234" title="Sterling Marlin" label="Sterling Marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247417" start="6304" end="6308" title="Death of Dale Earnhardt" label="dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937676" start="6329" end="6351" title="basilar skull fracture" label="basilar skull fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033478" start="6698" end="6708" title="North Carolina Speedway" label="Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950921" start="6874" end="6883" title="2001 Pepsi 400" label="Pepsi 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950873" start="7169" end="7192" title="2001 MBNA Cal Ripken Jr. 400" label="MBNA Cal Ripken Jr. 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252953" start="7196" end="7201" title="Dover International Speedway" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="7261" end="7281" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815356" start="7316" end="7344" title="New Hampshire Motor Speedway" label="New Hampshire Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533265" start="7419" end="7437" title="Polish victory lap" label="Polish victory lap"/>
<link wikidata="Q474990" start="7587" end="7600" title="Good Sam Club 500" label="EA Sports 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547320" start="7604" end="7613" title="Talladega Superspeedway" label="Talladega"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="8103" end="8113" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863633" start="8166" end="8176" title="2002 NAPA Auto Parts 500" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547320" start="8363" end="8372" title="Talladega Superspeedway" label="Talladega"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="8996" end="9008" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307796" start="9094" end="9101" title="Can-Am 500" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602692" start="9353" end="9364" title="2004 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598619" start="9498" end="9507" title="2001 Daytona 500" label="2001 race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001620" start="9684" end="9702" title="Budweiser Shootout" label="Budweiser Shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q946087" start="9706" end="9718" title="Dale Jarrett" label="Dale Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071132" start="9784" end="9807" title="Chevrolet Corvette C5-R" label="Chevrolet Corvette C5-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q465450" start="9834" end="9857" title="American Le Mans Series" label="American Le Mans Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602832" start="9858" end="9878" title="2004 Grand Prix of Sonoma" label="Grand Prix of Sonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q112563" start="9882" end="9898" title="Infineon Raceway" label="Infineon Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q211003" start="10185" end="10194" title="Balaclava (clothing)" label="balaclava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377913" start="10286" end="10302" title="Martin Truex Jr." label="Martin Truex Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q377197" start="10343" end="10356" title="John Andretti" label="John Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q383490" start="10466" end="10473" title="Bristol Motor Speedway" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q541283" start="10941" end="10978" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy" label="Super Bowl half-time show controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822299" start="11681" end="11694" title="Tony Eury Jr." label="Tony Eury Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q946057" start="11721" end="11736" title="Michael Waltrip" label="Michael Waltrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104915" start="11968" end="11981" title="Coca-Cola 600" label="Coca-Cola 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="12146" end="12158" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="12254" end="12264" title="NEXTEL Cup" label="NEXTEL Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q784899" start="12319" end="12338" title="California Speedway" label="California Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094266" start="12669" end="12683" title="JR Motorsports" label="JR Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035963" start="13014" end="13024" title="Carfax 250" label="Carfax 250"/>
<link wikidata="Q659690" start="13045" end="13057" title="Robby Gordon" label="Robby Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377913" start="13062" end="13078" title="Martin Truex Jr." label="Martin Truex Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1547320" start="13241" end="13264" title="Talladega Superspeedway" label="Talladega Superspeedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298339" start="13323" end="13336" title="livery" label="paint schemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019969" start="13420" end="13437" title="Father&amp;#x27;s Day (United States)" label="Father&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q668638" start="13546" end="13561" title="Ralph Earnhardt" label="Ralph Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="13712" end="13723" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q172732" start="14227" end="14254" title="Indianapolis Motor Speedway" label="Indianapolis Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605949" start="14423" end="14452" title="2006 Chase for the NEXTEL Cup" label="2006 Chase for the NEXTEL Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q203712" start="14481" end="14504" title="Cook Out 400 (Richmond)" label="Chevy Rock and Roll 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700358" start="14508" end="14538" title="Richmond International Raceway" label="Richmond International Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112545" start="14636" end="14649" title="Brian Vickers" label="Brian Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="14701" end="14715" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183518" start="14975" end="15004" title="2007 NASCAR Nextel Cup Series" label="2007 NASCAR Nextel Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179235" start="15037" end="15048" title="2007 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q383490" start="15110" end="15132" title="Bristol Motor Speedway" label="Bristol Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q611260" start="15140" end="15153" title="Food City 500" label="Food City 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815381" start="15202" end="15223" title="Martinsville Speedway" label="Martinsville Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547320" start="15354" end="15377" title="Talladega Superspeedway" label="Talladega Superspeedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q303039" start="15421" end="15437" title="Aaron&amp;#x27;s 499" label="Aaron&amp;#x27;s 499"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702131" start="15512" end="15528" title="Teresa Earnhardt" label="Teresa Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636819" start="15743" end="15763" title="Texas Motor Speedway" label="Texas Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="15810" end="15820" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143037" start="15830" end="15843" title="Rick Hendrick" label="Rick Hendrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="15880" end="15890" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104915" start="15908" end="15921" title="Coca-Cola 600" label="Coca-Cola 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q371781" start="15925" end="15937" title="Memorial Day" label="Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="15990" end="16001" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="16003" end="16017" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q519609" start="16019" end="16030" title="Greg Biffle" label="Greg Biffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q719186" start="16032" end="16043" title="Mark Martin (NASCAR)" label="Mark Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464210" start="16045" end="16056" title="Ward Burton" label="Ward Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="16058" end="16070" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047250" start="16072" end="16083" title="Casey Mears" label="Casey Mears"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488105" start="16085" end="16098" title="Shane Huffman" label="Shane Huffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q862090" start="16103" end="16115" title="Bill Elliott" label="Bill Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047250" start="16255" end="16266" title="Casey Mears" label="Casey Mears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813430" start="16375" end="16389" title="Pocono Raceway" label="Pocono Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q201820" start="16400" end="16410" title="Kurt Busch" label="Kurt Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="16594" end="16620" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="16675" end="16685" title="Nextel Cup" label="Nextel Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q201820" start="16939" end="16949" title="Kurt Busch" label="Kurt Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700358" start="16994" end="17002" title="Richmond International Raceway" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210420" start="17089" end="17109" title="Dale Earnhardt, Inc." label="Dale Earnhardt, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q647527" start="17289" end="17312" title="Australian V8 Supercar Series" label="Australian V8 Supercars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="17672" end="17695" title="Sprint Cup Series" label="Sprint Cup Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096654" start="18106" end="18126" title="Hendrick Motorsports" label="Hendrick Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="18138" end="18148" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096654" start="18163" end="18171" title="Hendrick Motorsports" label="Hendrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="18185" end="18196" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="18198" end="18212" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047250" start="18218" end="18229" title="Casey Mears" label="Casey Mears"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="18317" end="18326" title="Budweiser (Anheuser-Busch)" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143037" start="18552" end="18565" title="Rick Hendrick" label="Rick Hendrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q668638" start="18856" end="18871" title="Ralph Earnhardt" label="Ralph Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q719186" start="19332" end="19343" title="Mark Martin" label="Mark Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q372297" start="19348" end="19361" title="Aric Almirola" label="Aric Almirola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074531" start="19429" end="19443" title="Ganassi Racing" label="Ganassi Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822299" start="19486" end="19499" title="Tony Eury Jr." label="Tony Eury Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4652696" start="19649" end="19665" title="Mountain Dew AMP" label="Mountain Dew AMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="19666" end="19680" title="United States National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q475610" start="20604" end="20622" title="2008 Budweiser Shootout" label="Budweiser Shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4611110" start="20829" end="20843" title="2008 Gatorade Duels" label="Gatorade Duels"/>
<link wikidata="Q529904" start="20948" end="20959" title="2008 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="20976" end="20987" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066379" start="21149" end="21160" title="Chad Walter" label="Chad Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143037" start="21266" end="21279" title="Rick Hendrick" label="Rick Hendrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4611428" start="21338" end="21346" title="2008 Lifelock 400" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610404" start="21640" end="21654" title="2008 AMP Energy 500" label="AMP Energy 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815381" start="21776" end="21797" title="Martinsville Speedway" label="Martinsville Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="21832" end="21846" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613639" start="22118" end="22129" title="2009 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112545" start="22486" end="22499" title="Brian Vickers" label="Brian Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="22647" end="22659" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171410" start="22661" end="22672" title="Scott Speed" label="Scott Speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="22674" end="22688" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="22690" end="22694" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201820" start="22699" end="22709" title="Kurt Busch" label="Kurt Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q659690" start="22711" end="22723" title="Robby Gordon" label="Robby Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q945765" start="22725" end="22739" title="Jamie McMurray" label="Jamie McMurray"/>
<link wikidata="Q704008" start="22745" end="22757" title="Carl Edwards" label="Carl Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047250" start="23362" end="23373" title="Casey Mears" label="Casey Mears"/>
<link wikidata="Q560164" start="23510" end="23525" title="Brad Keselowski" label="Brad Keselowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093976" start="23999" end="24011" title="Lance McGrew" label="Lance McGrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q764291" start="24429" end="24449" title="Chicagoland Speedway" label="Chicagoland Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4617052" start="25515" end="25526" title="2010 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q719186" start="25570" end="25581" title="Mark Martin" label="Mark Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001620" start="25683" end="25701" title="Budweiser Shootout" label="Budweiser Shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q597387" start="25835" end="25865" title="DRIVE4COPD 300" label="Daytona Nationwide Series race"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="26021" end="26035" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4617052" start="26117" end="26133" title="2010 Daytona 500" label="2010 Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q945765" start="26380" end="26394" title="Jamie McMurray" label="Jamie McMurray"/>
<link wikidata="Q374058" start="26563" end="26585" title="Atlanta Motor Speedway" label="Atlanta Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616959" start="26874" end="26887" title="2010 Coke Zero 400" label="Coke Zero 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815356" start="26930" end="26958" title="New Hampshire Motor Speedway" label="New Hampshire Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="27456" end="27465" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620568" start="27797" end="27820" title="2011 Budweiser Shootout" label="2011 Budweiser Shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667249" start="27985" end="28001" title="restrictor plate" label="restrictor plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620895" start="28130" end="28141" title="2011 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620251" start="28383" end="28392" title="2011 Aaron&amp;#x27;s 499" label="Talladega"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="28416" end="28430" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="28432" end="28443" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q719186" start="28445" end="28456" title="Mark Martin" label="Mark Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101597" start="28458" end="28470" title="Clint Bowyer" label="Clint Bowyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="28476" end="28489" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q560164" start="28757" end="28772" title="Brad Keselowski" label="Brad Keselowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068013" start="29190" end="29214" title="Chase for the Sprint Cup" label="Chase for the Sprint Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="29641" end="29653" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q640388" start="29655" end="29666" title="Joey Logano" label="Joey Logano"/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="29671" end="29684" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625652" start="29693" end="29706" title="2012 Gatorade Duels" label="Gatorade Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q380127" start="29864" end="29876" title="Tony Stewart" label="Tony Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="29914" end="29928" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625302" start="30026" end="30037" title="2012 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="30071" end="30083" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q519609" start="30099" end="30110" title="Greg Biffle" label="Greg Biffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626598" start="31422" end="31444" title="2012 Quicken Loans 400" label="2012 Quicken Loans 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113818" start="31936" end="31952" title="Quaker State 400 (Kentucky)" label="Quaker State 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="32348" end="32360" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626588" start="33038" end="33055" title="2012 Pure Michigan 400" label="Pure Michigan 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="33247" end="33258" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="33263" end="33274" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="33321" end="33335" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="33337" end="33348" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q380127" start="33354" end="33366" title="Tony Stewart" label="Tony Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q383490" start="33371" end="33393" title="Bristol Motor Speedway" label="Bristol Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q122577316" start="34363" end="34382" title="Bank of America 500" label="Bank of America 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505803" start="34404" end="34424" title="Hollywood Casino 400" label="Hollywood Casino 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q636178" start="34637" end="34650" title="Bobby Labonte" label="Bobby Labonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723946" start="34731" end="34746" title="Kansas Speedway" label="Kansas Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q977193" start="34748" end="34759" title="Regan Smith (racing driver)" label="Regan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578858" start="34983" end="35000" title="1979 Southern 500" label="1979 Southern 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q355420" start="35064" end="35078" title="Dale Earnhardt" label="Dale Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598619" start="35146" end="35162" title="2001 Daytona 500" label="2001 Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001620" start="36040" end="36056" title="Sprint Unlimited" label="Sprint Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q704008" start="36228" end="36240" title="Carl Edwards" label="Carl Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365984" start="36242" end="36254" title="Trevor Bayne" label="Trevor Bayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q977193" start="36260" end="36271" title="Regan Smith (racing driver)" label="Regan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q597387" start="36316" end="36330" title="DRIVE4COPD 300" label="DRIVE4COPD 300"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716717" start="36355" end="36366" title="Alex Bowman" label="Alex Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="36607" end="36621" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629280" start="36629" end="36640" title="2013 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q704008" start="36840" end="36852" title="Carl Edwards" label="Carl Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q560164" start="37215" end="37230" title="Brad Keselowski" label="Brad Keselowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="37356" end="37370" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112545" start="37382" end="37395" title="Brian Vickers" label="Brian Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q549284" start="37699" end="37718" title="Ricky Stenhouse Jr." label="Ricky Stenhouse Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q704008" start="37724" end="37736" title="Carl Edwards" label="Carl Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q925414" start="37923" end="37936" title="Travis Kvapil" label="Travis Kvapil"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="38338" end="38348" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="38874" end="38885" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="38890" end="38901" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="38936" end="38950" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q704008" start="39237" end="39249" title="Carl Edwards" label="Carl Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="39362" end="39374" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="39476" end="39490" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="39691" end="39702" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="40144" end="40155" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q764291" start="40755" end="40775" title="Chicagoland Speedway" label="Chicagoland Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815356" start="40873" end="40901" title="New Hampshire Motor Speedway" label="New Hampshire Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="41341" end="41355" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823059" start="41616" end="41629" title="Austin Dillon" label="Austin Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q945765" start="41642" end="41656" title="Jamie McMurray" label="Jamie McMurray"/>
<link wikidata="Q549284" start="41678" end="41697" title="Ricky Stenhouse Jr." label="Ricky Stenhouse Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1047250" start="41765" end="41776" title="Casey Mears" label="Casey Mears"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="42345" end="42357" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="42363" end="42375" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q862090" start="42686" end="42698" title="Bill Elliott" label="Bill Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q612944" start="43036" end="43049" title="NASCAR on NBC" label="NASCAR on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q719221" start="43076" end="43087" title="Jeff Burton" label="Jeff Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226019" start="43092" end="43102" title="Rick Allen (television announcer)" label="Rick Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157343" start="43263" end="43279" title="2014 Sprint Unlimited" label="Sprint Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q726806" start="43345" end="43359" title="Marcos Ambrose" label="Marcos Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157187" start="43420" end="43440" title="2014 Budweiser Duels" label="first Budweiser Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737163" start="43537" end="43548" title="2014 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="43805" end="43817" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q560164" start="43822" end="43837" title="Brad Keselowski" label="Brad Keselowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="43986" end="43999" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q560164" start="44158" end="44173" title="Brad Keselowski" label="Brad Keselowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q355130" start="44257" end="44270" title="Richard Petty" label="Richard Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="45186" end="45197" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="45350" end="45363" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q560164" start="46631" end="46646" title="Brad Keselowski" label="Brad Keselowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="46761" end="46775" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094245" start="47963" end="47976" title="Chase Elliott" label="Chase Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094266" start="48016" end="48030" title="JR Motorsports" label="JR Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q519609" start="48233" end="48244" title="Greg Biffle" label="Greg Biffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201820" start="48352" end="48362" title="Kurt Busch" label="Kurt Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="48575" end="48587" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="48639" end="48653" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q560164" start="48658" end="48673" title="Brad Keselowski" label="Brad Keselowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="48774" end="48785" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308142" start="48924" end="48935" title="Kyle Larson" label="Kyle Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="49873" end="49884" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="49886" end="49900" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q640388" start="49906" end="49917" title="Joey Logano" label="Joey Logano"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="50818" end="50832" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q519609" start="51132" end="51143" title="Greg Biffle" label="Greg Biffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308142" start="51409" end="51420" title="Kyle Larson" label="Kyle Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q726806" start="51425" end="51439" title="Marcos Ambrose" label="Marcos Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q380127" start="51555" end="51567" title="Tony Stewart" label="Tony Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="51647" end="51658" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094359" start="52336" end="52349" title="Steve Letarte" label="Steve Letarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q612944" start="52388" end="52401" title="NASCAR on NBC" label="NASCAR on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094245" start="52452" end="52465" title="Chase Elliott" label="Chase Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979886" start="52623" end="52643" title="Nationwide Insurance" label="Nationwide Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="53788" end="53801" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q380127" start="54058" end="54070" title="Tony Stewart" label="Tony Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="54357" end="54368" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="54539" end="54551" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377913" start="54556" end="54572" title="Martin Truex Jr." label="Martin Truex Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q560164" start="54815" end="54830" title="Brad Keselowski" label="Brad Keselowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962298" start="54959" end="54972" title="Brett Moffitt" label="Brett Moffitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647062" start="55361" end="55374" title="2015 Coke Zero 400" label="Coke Zero 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="55606" end="55620" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="55625" end="55637" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823059" start="55767" end="55780" title="Austin Dillon" label="Austin Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="56263" end="56277" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q201820" start="57351" end="57361" title="Kurt Busch" label="Kurt Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q945765" start="59378" end="59392" title="Jamie McMurray" label="Jamie McMurray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962298" start="59558" end="59571" title="Brett Moffitt" label="Brett Moffitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q704008" start="59933" end="59945" title="Carl Edwards" label="Carl Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112545" start="61079" end="61092" title="Brian Vickers" label="Brian Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q378806" start="61238" end="61249" title="Can-Am Duel" label="Can-Am Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343057" start="62538" end="62547" title="Ty Dillon" label="Ty Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716717" start="63273" end="63284" title="Alex Bowman" label="Alex Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q26155868" start="63293" end="63310" title="2016 New Hampshire 301" label="New Hampshire 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="63315" end="63326" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26155874" start="63334" end="63347" title="2016 Brickyard 400" label="Brickyard 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q27629688" start="63352" end="63368" title="2016 Pennsylvania 400" label="Pennsylvania 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128367" start="63955" end="63971" title="2017 Daytona 500" label="2017 Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q862090" start="64981" end="64993" title="Bill Elliott" label="Bill Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q64415943" start="65411" end="65439" title="2019 Sport Clips Haircuts VFW 200" label="Sport Clips Haircuts VFW 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="65680" end="65692" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233851" start="65760" end="65773" title="Daniel Hemric" label="Daniel Hemric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343692" start="65778" end="65788" title="Jeb Burton" label="Jeb Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q78684264" start="65797" end="65813" title="2020 Daytona 500" label="2020 Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65874" end="65884" title="Racing flags#Green flag" label="green flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436721" start="65968" end="65979" title="Hooters 250" label="Hooters 250"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626077" start="65983" end="66007" title="Homestead-Miami Speedway" label="Homestead-Miami Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q105122930" start="66116" end="66120" title="2021 NASCAR Xfinity Series" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280421" start="66136" end="66150" title="Go Bowling 250" label="Go Bowling 250"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="66220" end="66224" title="September 11th, 2001 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q809061" start="66534" end="66549" title="Hellmann&amp;#x27;s and Best Foods" label="Hellmann&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q122828225" start="66568" end="66575" title="2023 Food City 300" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867953" start="66593" end="66607" title="Bass Pro Shops" label="Bass Pro Shops"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754612" start="67193" end="67209" title="2000 The Winston" label="2000 The Winston"/>
<link wikidata="Q254255" start="67610" end="67617" title="iRacing" label="iRacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445287" start="67821" end="67837" title="North Wilkesboro Speedway" label="North Wilkesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377913" start="68303" end="68319" title="Martin Truex Jr." label="Martin Truex Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1094245" start="68890" end="68903" title="Chase Elliott" label="Chase Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970842" start="68920" end="68935" title="NAPA Auto Parts" label="NAPA Auto Parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192087" start="68947" end="68976" title="2014 NASCAR Nationwide Series" label="2014 NASCAR Nationwide Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240152" start="69073" end="69084" title="Cole Custer" label="Cole Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040329" start="69104" end="69119" title="Haas Automation" label="Haas Automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362127" start="69239" end="69263" title="Gateway Motorsports Park" label="Gateway Motorsports Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q21932103" start="69369" end="69379" title="Josh Berry" label="Josh Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617265" start="69516" end="69538" title="Hickory Motor Speedway" label="Hickory Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q612944" start="69712" end="69725" title="NASCAR on NBC" label="NASCAR on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334262" start="69815" end="69820" title="NBCSN" label="NBCSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182729" start="69834" end="69848" title="NASCAR America" label="NASCAR America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207168" start="69882" end="69894" title="Leigh Diffey" label="Leigh Diffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q719221" start="69896" end="69907" title="Jeff Burton" label="Jeff Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094359" start="69935" end="69948" title="Steve Letarte" label="Steve Letarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q54952982" start="69970" end="69993" title="2018 Overton&amp;#x27;s 400" label="2018 Overton&amp;#x27;s 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q764291" start="69997" end="70017" title="Chicagoland Speedway" label="Chicagoland Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="70074" end="70084" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308142" start="70089" end="70100" title="Kyle Larson" label="Kyle Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087006" start="70217" end="70229" title="The Athletic" label="The Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q612944" start="70290" end="70303" title="NASCAR on NBC" label="NASCAR on NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="70380" end="70386" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="70391" end="70394" title="TNT (American TV network)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q108372628" start="70554" end="70572" title="Sports on Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855963" start="70577" end="70580" title="TNT Sports (United States)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906353" start="70682" end="70697" title="Bleacher Report" label="Bleacher Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q355388" start="70747" end="70761" title="Dirty Mo Media" label="Dirty Mo Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839295" start="70918" end="70933" title="Back in the Day (2006 TV program)" label="Back in the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712505" start="70956" end="70961" title="SPEED (TV channel)" label="SPEED"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566015" start="71026" end="71031" title="ESPN2" label="ESPN2"/>
<link wikidata="Q192420" start="71274" end="71285" title="kart racing" label="kart racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123993" start="71358" end="71387" title="Paducah International Raceway" label="Paducah International Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q37043" start="71619" end="71639" title="Tallahassee, Florida" label="Tallahassee, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143037" start="71670" end="71683" title="Rick Hendrick" label="Rick Hendrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q583488" start="71870" end="71880" title="air filter" label="air filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924412" start="71930" end="71940" title="Blake Koch" label="Blake Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q719221" start="72180" end="72208" title="Jeff Burton" label="Jeff Burton Autosports, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6396457" start="72210" end="72236" title="Kevin Harvick Incorporated" label="Kevin Harvick Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q101738813" start="72242" end="72264" title="Trackhouse Racing Team" label="Trackhouse Racing Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721127" start="72279" end="72288" title="CARS Tour" label="CARS Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="72353" end="72360" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44900" start="72415" end="72432" title="Nicole, Erica, and Jaclyn Dahm" label="The Dahm Triplets"/>
<link wikidata="" start="72469" end="72512" title="Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby" label="Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q218503" start="72565" end="72577" title="Will Ferrell" label="Will Ferrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q172744" start="73168" end="73186" title="Juan Pablo Montoya" label="Juan Pablo Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="73191" end="73205" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620895" start="73297" end="73313" title="2011 Daytona 500" label="2011 Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794" start="73315" end="73327" title="Josh Duhamel" label="Josh Duhamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212006" start="73329" end="73354" title="Rosie Huntington-Whiteley" label="Rosie Huntington-Whiteley"/>
<link wikidata="Q59259" start="73359" end="73370" title="Michael Bay" label="Michael Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="73479" end="73490" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712505" start="73655" end="73668" title="Speed Channel" label="Speed Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q738447" start="73746" end="73755" title="Yes, Dear" label="Yes, Dear"/>
<link wikidata="Q687295" start="73805" end="73814" title="MTV Cribs" label="MTV Cribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056839" start="74030" end="74037" title="DirecTV" label="DirecTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489311" start="74193" end="74201" title="Shaq Vs." label="Shaq Vs."/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="74237" end="74258" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436973" start="74315" end="74332" title="Fast N&amp;#x27; Loud" label="Fast N&amp;#x27; Loud"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665908" start="74358" end="74374" title="Richard Rawlings" label="Richard Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982556" start="74494" end="74505" title="DIY Network" label="DIY Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809524" start="74648" end="74663" title="Teen Titans Go!" label="Teen Titans Go!"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738442" start="74740" end="74754" title="Lost Speedways" label="Lost Speedways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="74921" end="74931" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="74969" end="74975" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="74976" end="74981" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182153" start="75001" end="75005" title="Cars (film)" label="Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="75335" end="75349" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068815" start="75363" end="75374" title="Handy Manny" label="Handy Manny"/>
<link wikidata="" start="75514" end="75538" title="The Hangover: Part Tubbs" label="The Hangover: Part Tubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34397" start="75570" end="75588" title="The Cleveland Show" label="The Cleveland Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157840" start="75648" end="75670" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr. Jr." label="Dale Earnhardt Jr. Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q730938" start="75726" end="75749" title="Ellicott City, Maryland" label="Ellicott City, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728864" start="75760" end="75780" title="The Dangerous Summer (band)" label="The Dangerous Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="75798" end="75809" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287098" start="75956" end="75976" title="Show Me What You Got" label="Show Me What You Got"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="75986" end="75991" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="76004" end="76018" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299716" start="76046" end="76063" title="Matthew Good Band" label="Matthew Good Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613349" start="76073" end="76086" title="Steve McQueen (Sheryl Crow song)" label="Steve McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="76096" end="76107" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q967817" start="76142" end="76154" title="Trace Adkins" label="Trace Adkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761070" start="76164" end="76184" title="The Road I&amp;#x27;m On" label="The Road I&amp;#x27;m On"/>
<link wikidata="Q175097" start="76194" end="76206" title="3 Doors Down" label="3 Doors Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q380127" start="76219" end="76231" title="Tony Stewart" label="Tony Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975153" start="76264" end="76270" title="O.A.R. (band)" label="O.A.R."/>
<link wikidata="Q2315723" start="76280" end="76288" title="Rockstar (Nickelback song)" label="Rockstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q483802" start="76298" end="76308" title="Nickelback" label="Nickelback"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="76335" end="76343" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277465" start="76385" end="76400" title="Sirius XM Radio" label="Sirius XM Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530406" start="76408" end="76431" title="Sirius XM Sports Nation" label="Sirius XM Sports Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q96408571" start="76625" end="76646" title="The Dale Jr. Download" label="The Dale Jr. Download"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334262" start="77083" end="77088" title="NBCSN" label="NBCSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q67765302" start="77207" end="77214" title="Peacock (streaming service)" label="Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q869106" start="77366" end="77375" title="EA Sports" label="EA Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056955" start="77388" end="77407" title="NASCAR Thunder 2003" label="NASCAR Thunder 2003"/>
<link wikidata="" start="77462" end="77490" title="NASCAR The Game: Inside Line" label="NASCAR The Game: Inside Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q254255" start="77552" end="77559" title="iRacing" label="iRacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376833" start="77677" end="77709" title="eNASCAR Coca-Cola iRacing Series" label="eNASCAR Coca-Cola iRacing Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q325487" start="77775" end="77787" title="Mike Wallace" label="Mike Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="77821" end="77831" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="77874" end="77884" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="77904" end="77913" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="77914" end="77928" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q221852" start="77987" end="78002" title="Fahrenheit 9/11" label="Fahrenheit 9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q20644256" start="78437" end="78475" title="modern display of the Confederate flag" label="modern display of the Confederate flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700358" start="78651" end="78667" title="Richmond Raceway" label="Richmond Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153714" start="78673" end="78686" title="2000 NASCAR Winston Cup Series" label="previous year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214578" start="78921" end="78931" title="Dan Wetzel" label="Dan Wetzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151959" start="78935" end="78948" title="Yahoo! Sports" label="Yahoo! Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q20154675" start="79274" end="79300" title="Charleston church shooting" label="Charleston church shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="79592" end="79614" title="President Barack Obama" label="President Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743430" start="79855" end="79900" title="American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity" label="American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104713" start="79932" end="79967" title="2012 Democratic National Convention" label="2012 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="80107" end="80120" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892464" start="80129" end="80153" title="United States elections, 2014" label="U.S. elections that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="80202" end="80216" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q434121" start="80217" end="80230" title="Jack Kingston" label="Jack Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="80234" end="80241" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="80448" end="80455" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q301585" start="80479" end="80500" title="religious persecution" label="religious persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q36248530" start="80639" end="80664" title="Unite the Right rally" label="Charlottesville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37001445" start="80669" end="80685" title="2017 Barcelona attacks" label="Barcelona, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q26878551" start="80707" end="80743" title="U.S. national anthem protests (2016–present)" label="protests of the U.S. national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="80795" end="80807" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="80887" end="80902" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="80906" end="80913" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="81060" end="81081" title="Washington Commanders" label="Washington Commanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267393" start="81855" end="81865" title="Learjet 60" label="Learjet 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q172744" start="82025" end="82043" title="Juan Pablo Montoya" label="Juan Pablo Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625302" start="82051" end="82067" title="2012 Daytona 500" label="2012 Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q897267" start="82104" end="82119" title="David Gilliland" label="David Gilliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955813" start="82127" end="82149" title="2014 5-hour Energy 400" label="2014 5-hour Energy 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157228" start="82242" end="82265" title="2014 Duck Commander 500" label="2014 Duck Commander 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324733" start="82602" end="82619" title="Richard Childress" label="Richard Childress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098602" start="82626" end="82645" title="Childress Vineyards" label="Childress Vineyards"/>
<link wikidata="Q181370" start="82649" end="82674" title="Lexington, North Carolina" label="Lexington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192980" start="83309" end="83331" title="Make-A-Wish Foundation" label="Make-A-Wish Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057283" start="83388" end="83412" title="Cessna Citation Latitude" label="Cessna Citation Latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226653" start="83509" end="83524" title="bounced landing" label="bounced landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363857" start="83528" end="83558" title="Elizabethton Municipal Airport" label="Elizabethton Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389138" start="83562" end="83585" title="Elizabethton, Tennessee" label="Elizabethton, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="83666" end="83673" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166378" start="83783" end="83793" title="Darlington Raceway" label="Darlington"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158461" wikidata="Q523057" url="?curid=158461" title="Bromley Contingent">
<text>The Bromley Contingent were a group of followers of the Sex Pistols. The name was coined by &quot;Melody Maker&quot; journalist Caroline Coon, after the town of Bromley where some of them lived. They helped popularise the fashion of the early UK punk movement. 
==Members==
The core members of the group included Siouxsie Sioux, Steven Severin, Billy Idol, Simon &#x27;Six&#x27; Barker, Debbie Juvenile (née Wilson), Linda Ashby, Philip Sallon, Simone Thomas, Bertie &#x27;Berlin&#x27; Marshall, Tracie O&#x27;Keefe, and Sharon Hayman. Soo Catwoman, another early punk aficionado, is often described as a member in later press, though Catwoman and members of the Bromley Contingent later dispute this.

==History==

The term Bromley Contingent first appeared in the UK music press after the Sex Pistols&#x27; gig in Paris on 3 September 1976, when journalist Caroline Coon decided to write an article about &quot;the fans rather about the band&quot;. The label was a bit of a misnomer as some members came from other places, including Kentish Town and Burnt Oak. Of those with a Bromley connection, Siouxsie was from Chislehurst and Idol had lived in Orpington. Severin, Barker and Berlin came from other parts of Bromley. Severin stated: &quot;we certainly never referred to ourselves as that&quot;. Siouxsie said: &quot;After we got back from Paris, resentments from some of the other people we used to see began to creep in. Those people all thought we&#x27;d called ourselves the Bromley Contingent, when we hadn&#x27;t&quot;.

The Bromley Contingent attained a degree of notoriety on 1 December 1976 when Siouxsie, Severin, Thomas and Barker appeared on ITV with the Sex Pistols on Thames Television&#x27;s early evening television programme &quot;Today&quot;. Interviewed by television journalist Bill Grundy, Sex Pistols singer Johnny Rotten used the word &quot;shit&quot;. Siouxsie then told Grundy, &quot;I&#x27;ve always wanted to meet you&quot;, to which he replied; &quot;Did you really? We&#x27;ll meet afterwards, shall we?&quot; This comment provoked guitarist Steve Jones to call Grundy a &quot;dirty sod&quot;, a &quot;dirty old man&quot;, a &quot;dirty bastard&quot;, a &quot;dirty fucker&quot; and a &quot;fucking rotter&quot;.

That was the first time in the history of UK television that viewers had heard swearing at this hour of the day. Although the programme was only seen in the Thames Television region, the ensuing furore occupied the tabloid newspapers for days and, shortly afterwards, the Sex Pistols were dropped by their record label, EMI. This episode changed the face of music in Britain. Up until December 1976, punk rock was a relatively low-key fashion, apart from appearing from time to time in small parts in music papers. In the following week, Siouxsie appeared on the front page of the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; with the legend &quot;Siouxsie&#x27;s a Punk Shocker&quot;. The last time Siouxsie and Severin attended a Sex Pistols gig was at Notre Dame Hall in London on 15 December 1976. 

The notoriety of the Bromley Contingent in the press continued in June 1977, when Sex Pistols manager Malcolm McLaren rented a boat for the band and fans to sail down the River Thames during Queen Elizabeth II&#x27;s Silver Jubilee anniversary celebration. When the police forced the boat to dock, several Pistols fans were arrested and injured in the melee. Bromley Contingent members Debbie Juvenile and Tracie O&#x27;Keefe (both employees of McLaren in his King&#x27;s Road clothing boutique Seditionaries) were charged with obstruction and assaulting a police officer. Juvenile was acquitted. O&#x27;Keefe was sentenced to one month&#x27;s imprisonment, later acquitted on appeal. O&#x27;Keefe died unexpectedly in early 1978 of bone marrow cancer at the age of 18.

===Aftermath===
Many of the Bromley Contingent went on to form bands themselves: Siouxsie and Severin respectively became singer and bassist of Siouxsie and the Banshees and Idol became the leader of Generation X. The fashion statements made by Siouxsie, in particular, incorporating fetish and bondage clothing, and her innovative style of makeup, had a lasting influence.

Barker became a photographer, using the nickname &#x27;Six&#x27;. Bertie &#x27;Berlin&#x27; Marshall became a writer, publishing a novel, &quot;Psychoboys&quot; in 1999 and a memoir &quot;Berlin Bromley&quot; in 2001 which received favourable reviews from &quot;The Guardian&quot; and &quot;Time Out London&quot; magazine. Philip Sallon became a fixture of the New Romantic club scene in the early 1980s alongside the likes of Steve Strange and Boy George.

==References==
=== Sources ===

==External links==
*Bill Grundy interview with The Sex Pistols and the Bromley Contingent
*Berlin, Bromley - an extract from Marshall&#x27;s book on SpikeMagazine.com
*an interview with Bertie Marshall by Andrew Gallix in &quot;3:AM Magazine&quot;, October 2001</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q523057" start="4" end="22" title="Bromley Contingent" label="Bromley Contingent"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="56" end="67" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="98" end="110" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247061" start="128" end="141" title="Caroline Coon" label="Caroline Coon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122892" start="161" end="168" title="Bromley" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423086" start="222" end="229" title="punk fashion" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="246" end="250" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q243041" start="313" end="327" title="Siouxsie Sioux" label="Siouxsie Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345722" start="329" end="343" title="Steven Severin" label="Steven Severin"/>
<link wikidata="Q73437" start="345" end="355" title="Billy Idol" label="Billy Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q28963281" start="430" end="443" title="Philip Sallon" label="Philip Sallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3964932" start="536" end="548" title="Soo Catwoman" label="Soo Catwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247061" start="859" end="872" title="Caroline Coon" label="Caroline Coon"/>
<link wikidata="Q149782" start="1035" end="1047" title="Kentish Town" label="Kentish Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q150193" start="1052" end="1061" title="Burnt Oak" label="Burnt Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q122917" start="1117" end="1128" title="Chislehurst" label="Chislehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q123977" start="1151" end="1160" title="Orpington" label="Orpington"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="1659" end="1662" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q541667" start="1687" end="1704" title="Thames Television" label="Thames Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q862151" start="1803" end="1814" title="Bill Grundy" label="Bill Grundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="1835" end="1848" title="John Lydon" label="Johnny Rotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q519" start="1869" end="1873" title="shit" label="shit"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="2076" end="2087" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q541667" start="2405" end="2422" title="Thames Television" label="Thames Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="2463" end="2480" title="tabloid newspaper" label="tabloid newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="2568" end="2571" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="2835" end="2847" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q325377" start="3134" end="3149" title="Malcolm McLaren" label="Malcolm McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="3203" end="3215" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="3223" end="3241" title="Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516094" start="3249" end="3263" title="Silver Jubilee of Elizabeth II" label="Silver Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q373302" start="3492" end="3508" title="King&amp;#x27;s Road" label="King&amp;#x27;s Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480869" start="3527" end="3540" title="SEX (boutique)" label="Seditionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509220" start="3765" end="3783" title="bone marrow cancer" label="bone marrow cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="3947" end="3972" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157004" start="4003" end="4015" title="Generation X (band)" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q207791" start="4087" end="4093" title="sexual fetishism" label="fetish"/>
<link wikidata="Q273972" start="4098" end="4105" title="Bondage (BDSM)" label="bondage"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="4144" end="4150" title="cosmetics" label="makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="4440" end="4452" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q597240" start="4539" end="4551" title="New Romantic" label="New Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005601" start="4605" end="4618" title="Steve Strange" label="Steve Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q312883" start="4623" end="4633" title="Boy George" label="Boy George"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="4715" end="4730" title="The Sex Pistols" label="The Sex Pistols"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158464" wikidata="Q2413375" url="?curid=158464" title="Open University">
<text>The Open University (OU) is a public research university and the largest university in the United Kingdom by number of students. The majority of the OU&#x27;s undergraduate students are based in the United Kingdom and principally study off-campus; many of its courses (both undergraduate and postgraduate) can also be studied anywhere in the world. There are also a number of full-time postgraduate research students based on the university campus at Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, where they use the staff facilities for research, as well as more than 1,000 members of academic and research staff and over 2,500 administrative, operational and support staff.

The OU was established in 1969 and was initially based at Alexandra Palace, north London, using the television studios and editing facilities which had been vacated by the BBC. The first students enrolled in January 1971. The university administration is now based at Walton Hall, but has administration centres in other parts of the United Kingdom. It also has a presence in other European countries. The university awards undergraduate and postgraduate degrees, as well as non-degree qualifications such as diplomas and certificates or continuing education units. It also offers unique Open Degrees, in which students may study any combination of modules across all subjects.

With around 200,000 students including around 34% of new undergraduates aged under 25 and more than 8,599 overseas students, it is the largest academic institution in the United Kingdom (and one of the largest in Europe) by student number, and qualifies as one of the world&#x27;s largest universities. Since it was founded, more than 2.3 million students have achieved their learning goals by studying with the Open University. The Open University is one of only two United Kingdom higher education institutions to gain accreditation in the United States by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education. It also produces more CEOs than any other United Kingdom university. Former United Kingdom Prime Minister Gordon Brown, astrophysicist Jocelyn Bell Burnell, broadcaster Anna Ford and actress Glenda Jackson are among those who have tutored for the OU.

== History ==

The Open University was founded by the Labour government under Prime Minister Harold Wilson. Wilson was a strong advocate, using the vision of Michael Young. Planning commenced in 1965 under Minister of State for Education Jennie Lee, who established a model for the OU as one of widening access to the highest standards of scholarship in higher education, and set up a planning committee consisting of university vice-chancellors, educationalists and television broadcasters, chaired by Sir Peter Venables. The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) Assistant Director of Engineering at the time James Redmond, had obtained most of his qualifications at night school, and his natural enthusiasm for the project did much to overcome the technical difficulties of using television to broadcast teaching programmes.
Wilson envisaged The Open University as a major marker in the Labour Party&#x27;s commitment to modernising British society. He believed that it would help build a more competitive economy while also promoting greater equality of opportunity and social mobility. The planned use of television and radio to broadcast its courses was also supposed to link The Open University to the technological revolution under way, which Wilson saw as a major ally of his modernisation schemes. However, from the start, Lee encountered widespread scepticism and even opposition from within and without the Labour Party, including senior officials in the Department of Education and Science (DES), her departmental head Anthony Crosland, the Treasury, ministerial colleagues, such as Richard Crossman and commercial broadcasters. The Open University was realised due to Lee&#x27;s unflagging determination and tenacity in 1965–67, the steadfast support from Wilson, and the fact that the anticipated costs, as reported to Lee and Wilson by Arnold Goodman, seemed very modest. By the time the actual, much higher costs became apparent, it was too late to scrap the fledgling university. The university was granted a royal charter by the Privy Council on 23 April 1969.

== Organisation and administration ==

=== Staff ===

The majority of staff are part-time associate lecturers and, as of the 2021–22 academic year, almost 5,000 work for the OU. There are also 1,427 (mostly full-time) salaried academic employees (central academics based at Walton Hall and staff tutors based in a variety of regional locations) who are research active and responsible for the production and presentation of teaching materials, 2,502 who are academic-related and 1,905 support staff (including secretaries and technicians). Salaries are the OU&#x27;s main cost—over £598 million for the 2021–22 academic year. In 2010 the OU became one of the &quot;Sunday Times&quot;″ Best Places to Work in the Public Sector.

==== Credit union ====
Open University Employees Credit Union is a savings and loans co-operative established by the university for staff in 1994. A member of the Association of British Credit Unions, it is authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and the PRA. Ultimately, like the banks and building societies, members’ savings are protected against business failure by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme.

=== Academic divisions ===
==== Faculties ====
In 2016, the university reorganised its departments and now operates with the Faculty of Arts &amp; Social Sciences (FASS); the Faculty of Business and Law (FBL); the Faculty of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM); and the Faculty of Wellbeing, Education and Language Studies (WELS). It also runs Open and Access programmes via PVC-Students, and programmes from the Institute of Educational Technology (IET) via WELS.

==== Business school ====
In 1982, Open University offered a course titled, &quot;The Effective Manager&quot;, developed by a team that was led by Charles Handy. After the reported success of the course, Derek S. Pugh proposed the establishment of a business school. In 1988, the Open University Business School (OUBS) was founded by the Faculty of Management department, for which professor Andrew Thomson was appointed to head. Thomson&#x27;s main goal was the offering of an MBA programme, which was eventually funded through a grant from the DES. In 1989, the first class of MBA students were enrolled.

The Open University Business School is accredited by the international accrediting bodies AACSB, AMBA, and EQUIS, known as triple accreditation.

Some selected rankings:

* The OU Business School&#x27;s MBA programme was ranked 13th in the &quot;Financial Times&quot;’ global rankings of online and distance learning MBA providers which featured five European schools, four of which were in the UK.
* Ranked fifth in the Global Online MBA Rankings by CEO Magazine and 1st for UK institutions (2019)
* Ranked sixth in the world for the QS Distance Online MBA Rankings (2016)

===Singapore Institute of Management Open University Centre===
From 1992 to 2005, the Singapore Institute of Management (SIM) ran the Open University Degree Programme (OUDP), in collaboration with The Open University, United Kingdom (OUUK), which was renamed the Singapore Institute of Management&#x27;s Open University Centre (SIM-OUC) as one of SIM&#x27;s autonomous entity. In 2005, after SIM formed SIM University (UniSIM), it took over SIM-OUC students and granted those who graduated in 2006 a choice between a UniSIM or OUUK degree.

== Academic profile ==
=== Teaching methods ===

The OU has used a variety of methods for teaching, including written and audio materials, the Internet, disc-based software and television programmes on DVD. Course-based television broadcasts by the BBC, which started on 3 January 1971, ceased on 15 December 2006. Materials comprise originally authored work by in-house and external academic contributors, and from third-party materials licensed for use by OU students. For most modules, students are supported by tutors (&quot;associate lecturers&quot;) who provide feedback on their work and are generally available to them at face-to-face tutorials, by telephone, and/or on the Internet. A number of short courses worth ten credits are now available that do not have an assigned tutor but offer an online conferencing service (Internet forum) where help and advice are offered through conferencing &quot;moderators&quot;.

Some modules have mandatory day schools. Nevertheless, it is possible to be excused on the basis of ill health (or other extenuating circumstances) and many courses have no mandatory face-to-face component. Similarly, some modules have traditionally offered week-long summer schools offering an opportunity for students to remove themselves from the general distractions of their life and focus on their studies for a short time.

The university has separated residential modules from full-time distance-taught modules. Exemption from attendance at residential schools, always as an Alternative Learning Experience (ALE), is sometimes available for disabled students and others who find it impossible to attend in person (See &quot;Qualifications-Undergraduate&quot; section.)

For many years the OU produced television and radio programmes aimed at bringing learning to a wider audience. In its early years, most of these were in the form of documentaries or filmed lectures. Latterly, most OU-associated programming was mainstream and broadcast in peak hours, including series such as &quot;Rough Science&quot; and &quot;Battle of the Geeks&quot;, while older-style programming was carried in the BBC Learning Zone.

In 2004 the OU announced it was to stop its late-night programmes on BBC Two, and the last programme was broadcast at 5.30 am on 16 December 2006. The OU now plans to focus on semi-academic television programmes, such as many now broadcast on BBC Four.

The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education review published in December 2015 found five areas of good practice and made three recommendations for improvement. The English national survey of student satisfaction has twice put the Open University in first place.

In October 2006, the OU joined the open educational resources movement with the launch of OpenLearn. A growing selection of current and past distance learning course materials will be released for free access, including downloadable versions for educators to modify (under the Creative Commons BY-NC-SA licence), plus free collaborative learning-support tools.

In the early 2000s, the OU researched the use of virtual worlds in teaching and learning, and had two main islands in Second Life. In May 2009 these regions formed the basis of a case study by Linden Lab, the company which owns Second Life.

In mid-2010, the university led the list of contributing universities in the number of downloads of its material from the educational resources site iTunes U, with downloads of over 20 million. Open University continues to adopt Moodle as the Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) with their own team deploying custom plugins.

In 2013, the OU began a massive open online course (MOOC) platform called FutureLearn, which is the UK&#x27;s largest provider of free online courses.

=== Assessment methods ===

Open University modules are often assessed using an equal weighting of examinations and coursework. The coursework component normally takes the form of between two and seven tutor-marked assignments (TMAs), and may also include up to six multiple-choice or &quot;missing word&quot; 10-question interactive computer-marked assignments (iCMAs). The examinable component is usually an invigilated three-hour paper regardless of the size of the module (although on some modules it can be up to three three-hour papers), but an increasing number of modules instead have an EMA (End of Module Assessment) which is similar to a TMA, in that it is completed at home, but is regarded as an exam for grading purposes.

Modules results are sometimes issued on a graded basis, consisting of pass grades 1 (threshold 85%, a distinction), 2 (70–84%), 3 (55–69%) &amp; 4 (40–54%), and fail (below 40%). This grade is calculated as the lower of the overall continuous assessment score (OCAS) and overall examination score (OES).

These grades can be weighted according to their level, and combined to calculate the classification of a degree. An undergraduate degree will weigh level 3 modules twice as much as level 2, and in postgraduate programmes, all M-level modules are equally weighted.

=== Qualifications ===
==== Undergraduate ====
Open University modules have associated with them a number of Credit Accumulation and Transfer Scheme (CATS) credits – usually 30 or 60 – depending on the quantity of the material in the module and a level (1, 2, 3, or 4) corresponding to the complexity, with 120 credits roughly equating to the year of study for a full-time student.

The OU offers a large number of undergraduate qualifications, including certificates, diplomas, and bachelor&#x27;s degrees, based on both level and quantity of study. An OU undergraduate degree requires 300 (or 360 for honours) CATS credits.

Students are generally advised not to undertake more than 60 credits per year, meaning that an undergraduate degree will take typically six years to complete. With the exception of some degrees in fast-moving areas (such as computing), there is generally no limit on the time that a student may take. Students need special permission to take more than 120 credits (equivalent to full-time study) at any time; such permission is not usually granted.

Originally the BA was the only undergraduate degree, and it was unnamed. The modern OU grants degrees of Bachelor of Arts (BA), Science (BSc), Laws (LLB) and Engineering (BEng); the BA and BSc may be named (following a specified syllabus) or unnamed (constructed of courses chosen by the student) degrees.

Many OU faculties have now introduced short modules worth ten credits. Most of these modules are taught online and start at regular intervals throughout the year. They typically provide an introduction to a broader subject over a period of ten weeks, these are generally timed during vacations at conventional universities in order to take advantage of their facilities. Some science modules, which require only home study, are complemented by residential courses, in order to allow the student to gain practical laboratory experience in that field; typically, an award of a degree or diploma will require completion of both.

Different modules are run at different times of the year, but, typically, a 30 or 60-credit undergraduate module will run from October to June, with some dual-presentation modules also running from February to October. Assessment is by both continual assessment (with, normally, between four and eight assignments during the year) and, for most, a major assignment or, on some modules, a final examination.

===== Open degree =====
As well as degrees in named subjects, the Open University also grants multidisciplinary &quot;Open&quot; degrees. Open degrees provide students with access to a wide variety of subjects to develop a personalised curriculum to meet their vocational needs and personal interests. The Open degree may be awarded as a Bachelor of Arts Open, a Bachelor of Science Open (either with or without honours), a Master of Arts Open or a Master of Science Open.

The Open degree is the most popular qualification at the university, followed by BSc (Hons) Psychology; Cert of HE in Psychology; Bachelor of Laws (Hons); and BA (Hons) Business Management. Around 20,000 students are enrolled on the Open degree, which makes the Open University the UK&#x27;s largest multidisciplinary education provider. As of 2018, over 236,000 alumni have graduated with an Open degree, and in 2019, the Open University celebrated its 50th anniversary; as did its flagship Open Programme.

===== Other qualifications =====
The Open University grants undergraduate &quot;Certificates&quot; (abbreviated Cert) typically awarded after 120 completed credits at Level 1 (where each credit corresponds to roughly 10 hours of study, therefore 120 credits represent about 1200 hours of effort), &quot;Diplomas&quot; (abbreviated Dip) after 240 credits – typically 120 credits at Level 1 and 120 credits at Level 2. Open University also awards &quot;Foundation degrees&quot; (abbreviated FD).

OU also offers a limited number of CertHE (120 CATS) and DipHE (240 CATS).

==== Postgraduate ====
The Open University provides the opportunity to study for a PhD on a part-time distance, or a full-time basis (on-site for science subjects and most social sciences, off-site with some supervisions on-site for arts) in a wide range of disciplines as well as an EdD for professionals in education. Since 2019 the Open University has also offered a professional doctorate for healthcare workers. The university offers a range of Master&#x27;s levels modules such as the MBA and MPA, MSc, MA and MEd, and MRes, and a number of postgraduate diplomas and certificates including innovative practice-based modules and postgraduate computing qualifications for professionals. Postgraduate certificates are awarded for 120 credits of study on specified modules; postgraduate diplomas are awarded for 240 credits of study on specified modules. The university offers &quot;Advanced Diplomas&quot; that involve 60 credits at the undergraduate level and 60 credits at the postgraduate level – these are designed as &quot;bridges&quot; between undergraduate and postgraduate study.

Its master&#x27;s degrees in the field of engineering are accredited to support registration as a Chartered Engineer, the highest level of engineering professional registration in the United Kingdom.

=== Degree ceremonies ===

Unlike most United Kingdom universities, degree ceremonies at the Open University are not graduation ceremonies as such (the occasion on which degrees are &quot;formally&quot; conferred on those who have achieved substantive degrees)—although honours degrees are also normally conferred on these occasions. The Open University degree ceremony is officially known as a &quot;Presentation of Graduates&quot; at which those who have already had a degree bestowed on them are presented to the University Chancellor or his/her representative. Open University graduates normally graduate &quot;&quot; at a joint meeting of the university&#x27;s council and senate (&quot;congregation&quot;) which takes place at a meeting entirely separate from the degree ceremony.

The university&#x27;s degree ceremonies occur throughout the year at various prestigious auditorium venues located throughout England, as well as in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, and the Republic of Ireland, including London, Manchester, Birmingham, Ely, Glasgow, Cardiff, Belfast and Dublin. In the year 2018 the OU held 29 degree ceremonies in total. These ceremonies are presided over by a senior academic at the Pro-Vice-Chancellor level or higher, and have the normal formal rituals associated with a graduation ceremony, including academic dress, procession and university mace.

==== Academic dress ====
Academic dress for the Open University is based on the colours blue and gold (yellow). No headwear is worn at degree ceremonies.
In the year 2000, the Open University was the first to host an online &quot;virtual&quot; graduation ceremony in the United Kingdom together with an audience at the OU&#x27;s campus in Milton Keynes. Twenty-six students in eight countries, from the United States of America to Hong Kong, were presented for their master&#x27;s degrees in online graduation, including, from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) – Tim Berners-Lee, one of the founders of the World Wide Web, who was conferred an honorary doctorate.

===Rankings===
The university is included in major world university rankings such as Times Higher Education World University Rankings, U.S. News &amp; World Report and Academic Ranking of World Universities.

The OU ranked in the top third of UK universities in the Research Excellence Framework (REF) 2014 using the Times Higher Education Power Score.

The Open University ranked third in National Student Survey 2021 achieving 88.24% for overall student satisfaction.

=== Research ===
Like other UK universities, the OU actively engages in research. The OU&#x27;s Planetary and Space Sciences Research Institute has become particularly well known to the public through its involvement in space missions. In October 2006, the Cassini-Huygens mission including 15 people from the OU received the 2006 &quot;Laurels for Team Achievement Award&quot; from the International Academy of Astronautics (IAA). Cassini-Huygens&#x27; successful completion of its seven-year, two billion-mile journey in January 2005 to Saturn ended with Huygens landing farther away from Earth than any previous probe or craft in the history of space exploration. The first instrument to touch Saturn&#x27;s moon Titan was the &quot;Surface Science Package&quot; containing nine sensors to investigate the physical properties of Titan&#x27;s surface. It was built by a team at the OU led by Professor John Zarnecki.

The OU employs over 500 people engaged in research in over 25 areas, and there are over 1,200 research students. It spends approximately £20 million each year on research, around £6 million from the Higher Education Funding Council for England, and the remainder from external funders. 

The Open University also runs the Open Research Online (ORO) website. ORO is a collection of over 40,000 open-access research outputs across a broad range of research areas.

The Open University produced in collaboration with Springer Nature the Computer Science Ontology, which is a large-scale automatically generated taxonomy of research topics in the field of computer science.

=== OpenScience Observatories ===

The university operates a collection of telescopes and other instruments at the Observatorio del Teide, Tenerife. Its facilities compromise the COmpletely Autonomous Service Telescope (COAST), the Physics Innovations Robotic Telescope Explorer (PIRATE) and an associated weather station.

== Students ==
In the 2021–22 academic year, there were 208,308 enrolled students.

===Demographics===
In 2019/20, 99,834 students were from England, 14,903 were from Scotland, 6,668 from Wales, 3,667 from Northern Ireland and 4,900 from the European Union, with others elsewhere. 60% of undergraduates were female, with 53% of those taking postgraduate modules being male.

According to &quot;The Guardian&quot;, a cross-sector fall in the number of part-time students was accelerated in 2012 when tuition fees rose and there was limited financial support for part-time students. The Open University saw a 30% drop in part-time students between 2010–11 and 2015–16. Enrollment numbers show a tremendous difference from 2009–2010 to 2016–2017.

While most of those studying are mature students, an increasingly large proportion of new undergraduates are aged between 17 and 25, to the extent that in 2010/11 the OU had more students in this age range than any other UK university. In the 2003–2004 academic year around 20% of new undergraduates were under 25, up from 12.5% in 1996–1997 (the year before top-up fees were announced). In 2010 approximately 55% of those under 25 were also in full-time employment. In 2010, 29,000 undergraduates were in this age range. By 2011, 32,000 undergraduates were under 25 years old, representing around 25% of new students. The majority of students in the 2015–16 academic year were aged between 25 and 34 years old, with the median age of new undergraduates being 28.

As of 2014, the OU&#x27;s youngest graduate was a fifteen-year-old boy from Wales who gained a BSc with First Class Honours in 2014.

The OU works with some schools to introduce A-Level students to OU study and in 2009–10 3% of undergraduates were under 18 years old. 

=== Courses ===
Unlike other universities, where students register for a programme, OU students register separately for individual modules (which may be 30 or 60 CATS credits (and formerly available in 10, 15, or 20 credits), equivalent to 15 or 30 ECTS credits). These modules may then be linked to degree programmes.

During the 2009–10 academic year social studies was the most popular study area (with 16,381 full-time equivalent students), followed by biological and physical sciences (12,357) and historical and philosophical studies (8,686); student numbers even on smaller undergraduate programmes, such as creative arts and design are still significant (2,528) as are postgraduate registrations on programmes such as mass communications and documentation (123 full-time equivalent students).

The most popular module during 2009–10 was &quot;DD101 An introduction to the social sciences&quot; (7,512 students), followed by &quot;AA100 The Arts Past and Present&quot;, &quot;B120 An Introduction to Business Studies&quot;, &quot;K101 An Introduction to Health and Social Care&quot; and &quot;Y163 Starting with Psychology&quot;.

=== Fees and financial assistance ===
17,634 students received financial assistance for their studies in 2015–16. The typical cost for United Kingdom-based students of a Bachelor&#x27;s honours degree at the OU was between £3,780 and £5,130 in 2009–10. From September 2012 the Government reduced its funding for all students residing in England and fees went up to compensate. English students pay higher fees than those living in the rest of the United Kingdom. The average cost of one full-time year or 120 credits rose to £6,336 in 2021, bringing the cost of an average Bachelor&#x27;s honours degree for an English student to £19,008. (European Union and international students pay more as the university does not receive government funding for them). The most important revenue stream to the Open University is now academic fees paid by the students, which totalled about £157 million in 2009–10 and £248 million in 2015–16.

=== Qualifications awarded ===
The university enrolled fewer than 50,000 students in the 1970–71 academic year, but it quickly exceeded that number by 1974–75. By 1987–88 yearly enrolment had doubled to 100,000 students, passing 200,000 by 2001–02 and 250,000 in 2009–10. Numbers fell when the fee regime changed.

Cumulatively, by the end of 2009–10, the OU had educated more than 1.5 million students and awarded 819,564 qualifications after successful assessment.

In addition, the Open University provides certification for qualifications at Ruskin College in Oxford and Richmond, the American International University in London, a private liberal arts institution. (Until 2008, it provided the same service for the University of the Highlands and Islands in Scotland).

=== Open University Students Association ===
The Open University Students Association is the Students&#x27; Union for Open University students and is a registered charity wholly funded by the Open University (OU). The Association is governed by a Board of Trustees, made up of internal student and external members, and a Student Leadership Team who are elected on a bi-yearly basis. The current team run from 2022-2024. Each student registered with the OU automatically becomes part of the Students Association unless they elect to formally opt out. It offers opportunities to meet up, volunteer, find information and access services to support learning along with a range of student clubs and societies typical of those found in other UK Universities.

The current President is Natalie Baker and Deputy President is Andrew Wilson.

== Notable current and former academics ==
* Jocelyn Bell Burnell – astronomer
* Tim Benton – art historian
* Andrew Blowers – geographer
* Neil Chalmers – zoologist
* Catherine Cooke – architectural historian
* Nigel Cross – design researcher
* Katharine Ellis – music historian
* Dimitra Fimi – Tolkien scholar
* Monica Grady – meteoricist
* Brian Goodwin – biologist
* David Gow – composer
* Norman Gowar – mathematician
* Oswald Hanfling – philosopher
* Stuart Hall – social scientist
* Christopher Hill – historian
* Arthur Marwick – historian
* Doreen Massey – geographer
* Bob Moon – educationist
* John Naughton – technologist
* Oliver Penrose – mathematician
* Mike Pentz – physicist
* Colin Pillinger – planetary scientist
* Steven Rose – biologist
* David Gordon Scott - criminologist
* Russell Stannard – physicist
* Hilary Wainwright – sociologist
* Nigel Warburton – philosopher
* Clare Warren – geologist
* Margaret Wetherell – social psychologist
* Glenn White – astronomer
* Robin Wilson – mathematician
* John Zarnecki – space scientist

== Notable alumni, graduates and honorees ==
===Graduates and alumni===
===Honorary graduates===

== Honours and awards ==
, the Open University has twice won the BBC&#x27;s University Challenge quiz, in 1984 and 1999 respectively.
== In fiction ==
The Open University has been featured in many films and television programmes. The plot of &quot;Educating Rita&quot; surrounds the working-class titular character aiming to &quot;improve&quot; herself by studying English literature. She attends private tutorials run by alcoholic lecturer Frank.

Television characters have also followed OU courses. These include Anne Bryce in the BBC sit-com &quot;Ever Decreasing Circles&quot;, Yvonne Sparrow in &quot;Goodnight Sweetheart&quot; and George Bulman in &quot;Bulman&quot;, in the ITV spin-off from the series &quot;Strangers&quot;. Sheila Grant (Sue Johnston) was accused of having an affair with her tutor in &quot;Brookside&quot;. Onslow, a character from &quot;Keeping up Appearances&quot;, watches Open University programming on television from time to time.

In autumn 2006, Lenny Henry was a star in &quot;Slings and Arrows&quot;, a one-off BBC television drama which he also wrote, about someone who falls in love while on an OU English Literature course. (Henry has himself completed an OU degree in English.)

In the 2006–07 TV series &quot;Life on Mars&quot;, Sam Tyler received messages from the real world via Open University programmes late at night.

Dorian Green from &quot;Birds of a Feather&quot; announced she had been accepted by the Open University to do a degree in psychology and began studying with the university in series 3.

In the 2014 Booker Prize long-listed novel &quot;The Bone Clocks&quot; by David Mitchell (author), the protagonist Holly Sykes is referenced studying Psychology at the Open University. 

In the 2016 novel &quot;Swing Time&quot; by Zadie Smith, the narrator&#x27;s mother is a student at the Open University.

In the TV series &quot;Bottom&quot;, specifically the episode &quot;Accident&quot;, Eddie, Spudgun, and Dave Hedgehog watch TV while playing hide-and-seek with Ritchie. They fall asleep, leaving Ritchie in a cupboard until they finally awaken to an OU lecture on &#x27;Medieval population distribution patterns in Lower Saxony&#x27;.

== Partnerships ==

=== Armed Forces ===
Through an agreement between the Ministry of Defence and the OU going back to the early 1970s, a wide range of courses is available to members of the British armed forces, with course materials supplied via the student&#x27;s BFPO address. OU study centres have been established in Cyprus and Germany. Many have studied while on active service, even in conflict situations.

=== Partner institutions ===
The Open University has a diverse network of partners across the globe. Once approved, partner institutions offer Open University validated awards, granted under the university&#x27;s royal charter. As of October 2021, the Open University has over 40 international partners, including for example Union School of Theology, Regent&#x27;s University London, York College, Belfast Metropolitan College, American College of Greece, Leeds City College and Ruskin College Oxford.

=== Doctoral training partnerships ===

==== The Grand Union ====
The Grand Union is an ESRC Doctoral Training Partnership uniting The Open University, the University of Oxford and Brunel University London. The partnership is committed to a student-centred approach to training researchers, increasing access to postgraduate study, and advancing disciplinary and interdisciplinary research.

==== Open-Oxford-Cambridge AHRC Doctoral Training ====
Open-Oxford-Cambridge AHRC Doctoral Training Partnership is a consortium of the Open University, University of Oxford and University of Cambridge providing funding and training for doctoral students in the arts and humanities.

==== Imperial-Cambridge-Open Centre for Doctoral Training ====
From 2014 to 2022, the Open University is working with Imperial College London and the University of Cambridge to establish a new EPSRC-funded Centre for Doctoral Training (CDT) to develop skills in civil nuclear energy for global markets.

==Coat of Arms==
== See also ==
* Armorial of UK universities
* Futurelearn
* OpenLearn
* Open College of the Arts
* Open University Press
* List of Open University Alumni
* List of universities in the United Kingdom
* University of Hagen

==Notes==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Dorey, Pete. &quot;‘Well, Harold Insists on Having It!’—The Political Struggle to Establish The Open University, 1965–67.&quot; &quot;Contemporary British History&quot; 29#2 (2015): 241–272.
* Perry, Walter. &quot;The Open University&quot; &quot;Proceedings of the Royal Institution of Great Britain&quot;. (1971), Vol. 44 Issue 203, pp 95–112.
* Purvis, June. &quot;Some problems of teaching and learning within the Open University.&quot; &quot;Educational Research&quot; 21#3 (1979): 163–177.
* Tunstall, Jeremy. &quot;The Open University Opens&quot; (1974).
* Dalgleish, Tim. &quot;Lifting It Off The Page: An Oral Portrait of OU People&quot; 1995, The Open University.

== External links ==
* Open University Students Association
*Parliament &amp; the Sixties – Jennie Lee &amp; The University of the Air – UK Parliament Living Heritage
* OpenLearn online learning from the Open University
* Video clip of BBC Open University programme circa 1982</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="0" end="19" title="Open University" label="The Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="21" end="23" title="Open University" label="OU"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="30" end="36" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="37" end="56" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="91" end="105" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644419" start="109" end="127" title="List of universities in the United Kingdom by enrolment" label="number of students"/>
<link wikidata="Q209465" start="240" end="246" title="campus" label="campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="274" end="287" title="undergraduate" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="292" end="304" title="postgraduate education" label="postgraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761927" start="451" end="462" title="Walton Hall, Milton Keynes" label="Walton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q204234" start="464" end="477" title="Milton Keynes" label="Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="479" end="494" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q254650" start="733" end="749" title="Alexandra Palace" label="Alexandra Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="847" end="850" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="1130" end="1137" title="academic degree" label="degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q217577" start="1184" end="1191" title="diploma" label="diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339727" start="1197" end="1209" title="Academic certificate" label="certificates"/>
<link wikidata="Q828748" start="1213" end="1233" title="continuing education" label="continuing education"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098461" start="1622" end="1655" title="world&amp;#x27;s largest universities" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q419911" start="1875" end="1888" title="Educational accreditation" label="accreditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841600" start="1917" end="1961" title="Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Middle States Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="2069" end="2081" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q233974" start="2098" end="2118" title="Jocelyn Bell Burnell" label="Jocelyn Bell Burnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850499" start="2132" end="2141" title="Anna Ford" label="Anna Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q182408" start="2154" end="2168" title="Glenda Jackson" label="Glenda Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="2269" end="2275" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="2308" end="2321" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q336683" start="2373" end="2386" title="Michael Young, Baron Young of Dartington" label="Michael Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477306" start="2421" end="2452" title="Secretary of State for Education and Skills" label="Minister of State for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686926" start="2453" end="2463" title="Jennie Lee, Baroness Lee of Asheridge" label="Jennie Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2776" end="2779" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141906" start="2827" end="2840" title="James Redmond (broadcaster)" label="James Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q319004" start="2885" end="2897" title="night school" label="night school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612019" start="3683" end="3718" title="Department for Education" label="Department of Education and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q301252" start="3748" end="3764" title="Anthony Crosland" label="Anthony Crosland"/>
<link wikidata="Q328681" start="3812" end="3828" title="Richard Crossman" label="Richard Crossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="4243" end="4256" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="4264" end="4277" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="5110" end="5122" title="co-operative" label="co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q19654692" start="5188" end="5224" title="Association of British Credit Unions" label="Association of British Credit Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252987" start="5250" end="5281" title="Prudential Regulation Authority (United Kingdom)" label="Prudential Regulation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449586" start="5303" end="5330" title="Financial Conduct Authority" label="Financial Conduct Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416205" start="5458" end="5496" title="Financial Services Compensation Scheme" label="Financial Services Compensation Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064743" start="6132" end="6145" title="Charles Handy" label="Charles Handy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200104" start="6189" end="6202" title="Derek S. Pugh" label="Derek S. Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18977430" start="6377" end="6391" title="Andrew Thomson (academic)" label="Andrew Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q744144" start="6683" end="6688" title="AACSB" label="AACSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q392156" start="6690" end="6694" title="Association of MBAs" label="AMBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376925" start="6700" end="6705" title="EQUIS" label="EQUIS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6716" end="6736" title="Triple accreditation#UK" label="triple accreditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="6839" end="6854" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q30104861" start="6944" end="6960" title="European schools" label="European schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523020" start="7254" end="7287" title="Singapore Institute of Management" label="Singapore Institute of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q54321638" start="7571" end="7585" title="SIM University" label="SIM University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="7911" end="7914" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="7958" end="7961" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183710" start="8437" end="8444" title="Credit Accumulation and Transfer Scheme" label="credits"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="8540" end="8554" title="Internet forum" label="Internet forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370861" start="9729" end="9742" title="Rough Science" label="Rough Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834829" start="9835" end="9852" title="BBC Learning Zone" label="BBC Learning Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="9924" end="9931" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="10098" end="10106" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606488" start="10113" end="10158" title="Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education" label="Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q116781" start="10413" end="10439" title="open educational resources" label="open educational resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558085" start="10468" end="10477" title="OpenLearn" label="OpenLearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="10655" end="10671" title="Creative Commons" label="Creative Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q284742" start="10672" end="10680" title="BY-NC-SA" label="BY-NC-SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="10858" end="10869" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11131" end="11139" title="ITunes U#iTunes U" label="iTunes U"/>
<link wikidata="Q190434" start="11211" end="11217" title="Moodle" label="Moodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q967853" start="11331" end="11357" title="massive open online course" label="massive open online course"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732971" start="11381" end="11392" title="FutureLearn" label="FutureLearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183710" start="12875" end="12914" title="Credit Accumulation and Transfer Scheme" label="Credit Accumulation and Transfer Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="13323" end="13343" title="Honours graduate" label="undergraduate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474382" start="16619" end="16636" title="Foundation degree" label="Foundation degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065093" start="16698" end="16704" title="CertHE" label="CertHE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279886" start="16720" end="16725" title="DipHE" label="DipHE"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="16822" end="16825" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q837184" start="17023" end="17026" title="Doctorate in Education" label="EdD"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="17189" end="17202" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Master&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="17230" end="17233" title="Master of Business Administration" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907898" start="17238" end="17241" title="Master of Public Administration" label="MPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="17243" end="17246" title="Master of Science" label="MSc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="17248" end="17250" title="Master of Arts" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787220" start="17255" end="17258" title="Master of Education" label="MEd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785239" start="17264" end="17268" title="Master of Research" label="MRes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185073" start="17929" end="17947" title="Chartered Engineer" label="Chartered Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054021" start="18149" end="18159" title="graduation" label="graduation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862985" start="18302" end="18316" title="honours degree" label="honours degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061" start="18548" end="18569" title="Chancellor (education)" label="University Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349227" start="19362" end="19376" title="academic dress" label="academic dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671287" start="19378" end="19388" title="academic procession" label="procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432431" start="19404" end="19408" title="ceremonial mace" label="mace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="19842" end="19851" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="19942" end="19979" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="19988" end="20003" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="20032" end="20046" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="20069" end="20087" title="honorary doctorate" label="honorary doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="20175" end="20223" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="Times Higher Education World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="20225" end="20253" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="20258" end="20296" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="Academic Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978750" start="20480" end="20503" title="National Student Survey" label="National Student Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="21100" end="21106" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="21455" end="21464" title="Professor" label="Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265300" start="21465" end="21478" title="John Zarnecki" label="John Zarnecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758074" start="21680" end="21724" title="Higher Education Funding Council for England" label="Higher Education Funding Council for England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096172" start="21803" end="21823" title="Open Research Online" label="Open Research Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096327" start="21995" end="22010" title="Springer Nature" label="Springer Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843592" start="22015" end="22040" title="Computer Science Ontology" label="Computer Science Ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="22089" end="22097" title="Taxonomy (general)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="22133" end="22149" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013047" start="22267" end="22289" title="Teide Observatory" label="Observatorio del Teide"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="22718" end="22732" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566099" start="23254" end="23268" title="mature student" label="mature student"/>
<link wikidata="Q915466" start="23474" end="23487" title="academic year" label="academic year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851778" start="23580" end="23591" title="top-up fees" label="top-up fees"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="23942" end="23948" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981711" start="24164" end="24171" title="Advanced Level (UK)" label="A-Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183710" start="24418" end="24422" title="Credit Accumulation and Transfer Scheme" label="CATS"/>
<link wikidata="Q749620" start="24505" end="24509" title="European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System" label="ECTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565700" start="24609" end="24623" title="social studies" label="social studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="24713" end="24745" title="biological and physical sciences" label="biological and physical sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="24759" end="24769" title="history" label="historical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="24774" end="24787" title="philosophy" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="24871" end="24884" title="creative arts" label="creative arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="24889" end="24895" title="design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q853710" start="24982" end="25001" title="mass communications" label="mass communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q788790" start="25006" end="25019" title="documentation" label="documentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862985" start="25580" end="25594" title="honours degree" label="honours degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909413" start="25647" end="25738" title="Timeline of tuition fees in the United Kingdom" label="From September 2012 the Government reduced its funding for all students residing in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862985" start="25983" end="25997" title="honours degree" label="honours degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="26034" end="26048" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627864" start="26871" end="26885" title="Ruskin College" label="Ruskin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330738" start="26900" end="26957" title="Richmond, The American International University in London" label="Richmond, the American International University in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470817" start="27045" end="27084" title="University of the Highlands and Islands" label="University of the Highlands and Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="27193" end="27213" title="Students&amp;#x27; Union" label="Students&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q233974" start="27979" end="27999" title="Jocelyn Bell Burnell" label="Jocelyn Bell Burnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803166" start="28015" end="28025" title="Tim Benton" label="Tim Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q61729410" start="28044" end="28058" title="Andrew Blowers (academic)" label="Andrew Blowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988367" start="28074" end="28087" title="Neil Chalmers" label="Neil Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052600" start="28102" end="28117" title="Catherine Cooke" label="Catherine Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728271" start="28146" end="28157" title="Nigel Cross" label="Nigel Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q42535119" start="28180" end="28195" title="Katharine Ellis" label="Katharine Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q52736360" start="28216" end="28228" title="Dimitra Fimi" label="Dimitra Fimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899969" start="28249" end="28261" title="Monica Grady" label="Monica Grady"/>
<link wikidata="Q912244" start="28278" end="28291" title="Brian Goodwin" label="Brian Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110213209" start="28306" end="28315" title="David Gow (composer)" label="David Gow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052284" start="28329" end="28341" title="Norman Gowar" label="Norman Gowar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108123" start="28360" end="28375" title="Oswald Hanfling" label="Oswald Hanfling"/>
<link wikidata="Q450741" start="28392" end="28403" title="Stuart Hall (cultural theorist)" label="Stuart Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q719787" start="28425" end="28441" title="Christopher Hill (historian)" label="Christopher Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799660" start="28456" end="28470" title="Arthur Marwick" label="Arthur Marwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156266" start="28485" end="28498" title="Doreen Massey (geographer)" label="Doreen Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q98918738" start="28514" end="28522" title="Bob Moon (scholar)" label="Bob Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327692" start="28540" end="28553" title="John Naughton" label="John Naughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q339385" start="28571" end="28585" title="Oliver Penrose" label="Oliver Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994683" start="28604" end="28614" title="Mike Pentz" label="Mike Pentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408121" start="28629" end="28644" title="Colin Pillinger" label="Colin Pillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q902813" start="28669" end="28680" title="Steven Rose" label="Steven Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q57422846" start="28695" end="28713" title="David Gordon Scott" label="David Gordon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453501" start="28732" end="28748" title="Russell Stannard" label="Russell Stannard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761098" start="28763" end="28780" title="Hilary Wainwright" label="Hilary Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085691" start="28797" end="28812" title="Nigel Warburton" label="Nigel Warburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104414989" start="28829" end="28841" title="Clare Warren" label="Clare Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760016" start="28856" end="28874" title="Margaret Wetherell" label="Margaret Wetherell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569178" start="28899" end="28910" title="Glenn White" label="Glenn White"/>
<link wikidata="Q945772" start="28926" end="28938" title="Robin Wilson (mathematician)" label="Robin Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265300" start="28957" end="28970" title="John Zarnecki" label="John Zarnecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q287137" start="29164" end="29184" title="University Challenge" label="University Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682792" start="29336" end="29350" title="Educating Rita" label="Educating Rita"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="29622" end="29625" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416856" start="29640" end="29663" title="Ever Decreasing Circles" label="Ever Decreasing Circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572022" start="29671" end="29685" title="Yvonne Sparrow" label="Yvonne Sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583544" start="29695" end="29715" title="Goodnight Sweetheart (TV series)" label="Goodnight Sweetheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537413" start="29726" end="29739" title="George Bulman (fictional character)" label="George Bulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997112" start="29749" end="29755" title="Bulman" label="Bulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="29770" end="29773" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975910" start="29805" end="29814" title="Strangers (1978 TV series)" label="Strangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493058" start="29822" end="29834" title="Sheila Grant" label="Sheila Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335065" start="29836" end="29848" title="Sue Johnston" label="Sue Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q181321" start="29906" end="29915" title="Brookside (TV series)" label="Brookside"/>
<link wikidata="Q922616" start="29923" end="29929" title="Onslow (Keeping Up Appearances)" label="Onslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q922616" start="29954" end="29976" title="Keeping up Appearances" label="Keeping up Appearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175896" start="30070" end="30081" title="Lenny Henry" label="Lenny Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="30137" end="30140" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071501" start="30340" end="30352" title="Life on Mars (UK TV series)" label="Life on Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408266" start="30360" end="30369" title="Sam Tyler" label="Sam Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916117" start="30479" end="30497" title="Birds of a Feather (TV series)" label="Birds of a Feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="30653" end="30665" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512402" start="30690" end="30705" title="The Bone Clocks" label="The Bone Clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q40479" start="30715" end="30738" title="David Mitchell (author)" label="David Mitchell (author)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22674238" start="30852" end="30862" title="Swing Time (novel)" label="Swing Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q140052" start="30872" end="30883" title="Zadie Smith" label="Zadie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q634199" start="30973" end="30979" title="Bottom (TV series)" label="Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672552" start="31018" end="31026" title="Accident (Bottom)" label="Accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160202" start="31034" end="31039" title="Adrian Edmondson" label="Eddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800093" start="31041" end="31048" title="Steven O&amp;#x27;Donnell (British actor)" label="Spudgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360810" start="31054" end="31067" title="Christopher Ryan" label="Dave Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q439095" start="31110" end="31117" title="Rik Mayall" label="Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="31264" end="31276" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q591534" start="31552" end="31556" title="BFPO" label="BFPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961765" start="32027" end="32051" title="Union School of Theology" label="Union School of Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308066" start="32053" end="32084" title="Regent&amp;#x27;s University London" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s University London"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055404" start="32086" end="32098" title="York College (York)" label="York College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882301" start="32100" end="32128" title="Belfast Metropolitan College" label="Belfast Metropolitan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983711" start="32130" end="32156" title="American College of Greece" label="American College of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515867" start="32158" end="32176" title="Leeds City College" label="Leeds City College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627864" start="32181" end="32202" title="Ruskin College" label="Ruskin College Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="32361" end="32381" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q932411" start="32386" end="32410" title="Brunel University London" label="Brunel University London"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="32749" end="32769" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="32774" end="32797" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="32998" end="33021" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="33030" end="33053" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377871" start="33073" end="33078" title="Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council" label="EPSRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359871" start="33218" end="33245" title="Armorial of UK universities" label="Armorial of UK universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732971" start="33248" end="33259" title="Futurelearn" label="Futurelearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558085" start="33262" end="33271" title="OpenLearn" label="OpenLearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095982" start="33274" end="33298" title="Open College of the Arts" label="Open College of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153156" start="33301" end="33322" title="Open University Press" label="Open University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593046" start="33325" end="33355" title="List of Open University Alumni" label="List of Open University Alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746976" start="33358" end="33400" title="List of universities in the United Kingdom" label="List of universities in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q687017" start="33403" end="33422" title="University of Hagen" label="University of Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965822" start="33668" end="33681" title="Walter Perry" label="Perry, Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171086" start="33721" end="33774" title="Proceedings of the Royal Institution of Great Britain" label="Proceedings of the Royal Institution of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712316" start="33822" end="33834" title="Purvis, June" label="Purvis, June"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158465" wikidata="Q6410897" url="?curid=158465" title="GKT School of Medical Education">
<text>GKT School of Medical Education (abbreviated: GKT) is the medical school of King&#x27;s College London. The school has campuses at three institutions, Guy&#x27;s Hospital (Southwark), King&#x27;s College Hospital (Denmark Hill) and St Thomas&#x27; Hospital (Lambeth) in Londonwith the initial of each hospital making up the acronymous name of the school. The school in its current guise was formed following a merger with the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; Hospitals on 1 August 1998. , the medical school is ranked 5th best in the UK for clinical medicine by U.S. News &amp; World Report, and 10th best worldwide by Times Higher Education.

The medical school has an annual intake of around 400 places on the standard MBBS Programme, 50 places on the Extended Medical Degree Programme (EMDP) and 23 places on the Graduate/Professional Entry Programme (GPEP), and an additional 2 places on the GPEP course for Maxillofacial (MaxFax) Entry. The intake numbers vary year to year. It receives more applications for medicine than any other UK medical school and applicants were required to sit the University Clinical Aptitude Test.

The medical school is also home to the world&#x27;s oldest hospital gazette, originally published in 1872 as the &quot;Guy&#x27;s Hospital Gazette&quot;, which continues to run under the name &quot;GKT Gazette&quot;.

==Name==
The school was named the &quot;GKT School of Medicine&quot; between 1998 and 2005. However, due to confusion over the official name of the institute, especially with regards to research emerging from the university, it was rebranded as the &quot;King&#x27;s College London School of Medicine and Dentistry at Guy&#x27;s, King&#x27;s College and St Thomas&#x27; Hospitals&quot;.

In 2015, to reflect the strong history of the multiple institutions that comprise the medical school, the school once again rebranded as the &quot;King&#x27;s College London GKT School of Medical Education&quot;.

==History==


The hospitals associated with King&#x27;s College London GKT School of Medical Education, i.e., Guy&#x27;s Hospital, King&#x27;s College Hospital and St Thomas&#x27; Hospital (hence the GKT name and abbreviation), are: &quot;amongst the oldest hospitals in the world, having endured the Black Death, the plague, the War of the Roses, the Great Fire of London, the Blitz and over 60 years of NHS reforms.&quot;

Of the GKT School of Medical Education teaching hospitals, St Thomas&#x27; Hospital is the oldest and was founded in 1173 but whose roots can be traced to the establishment of St Mary Overie Priory in 1106. Thomas Guy, a governor of St Thomas&#x27;, founded Guy&#x27;s Hospital in 1721 as a place to treat &#x27;incurables&#x27; discharged from St Thomas&#x27;.

St Thomas&#x27;s Hospital Medical School was founded in 1550 and was sited across St Thomas&#x27; Hospital and Guy&#x27;s Hospital. In 1769 it was decided that Guy&#x27;s would teach mainly medical subjects, whereas St Thomas&#x27; would focus on surgery and the joint teaching institution was generally known as The Borough Hospitals. However, a dispute between the two hospitals regarding the successor to Sir Astley Cooper resulted in Guy&#x27;s Hospital establishing its own medical school in 1825. After this, students of surgeons attended operations at both hospitals until 1836. A riot between students of the two hospitals broke out in the operating theatre at St. Thomas&#x27;s in 1836 which ended the arrangement. St Thomas&#x27;s Hospital Medical School and Guy&#x27;s Hospital Medical School were two of the oldest and most prestigious medical schools in the UK.

In 1982, the two medical schools merged to form the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; Hospitals, more commonly known as UMDS. It was enlarged in 1983 when the Royal Dental Hospital of London School of Dental Surgery merged with Guy&#x27;s Hospital Dental School, and again in 1985 with the addition of the Postgraduate Institute of Dermatology.

Initially, students of UMDS were allocated to one of the two campuses, with most preclinical teaching and all clinical teaching being separate. With the intake of 1989, students ceased being allocated in this way, and teaching for all students was divided between the campuses and their peripheral hospitals.

Discussions between King&#x27;s College London (which had trained medical students since its establishment and founding of its own hospital, King&#x27;s College Hospital, in 1840) and UMDS regarding a further merger began in 1992. UMDS was subsequently absorbed into King&#x27;s College London on 1 August 1998, forming the &quot;Guy&#x27;s, King&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; School of Medicine&quot;, more commonly known as GKT. In 2005, the entity was rebranded as the &quot;King&#x27;s College London School of Medicine and Dentistry at Guy&#x27;s, King&#x27;s College and St Thomas&#x27; Hospitals&quot; (KCLMS). However, it is still widely known as GKT amongst current students, graduates, and consultants who consider themselves affiliated to the hospitals rather than the university.

In 2005, the dental school became the Dental Institute and the remainder was renamed the King&#x27;s College School of Medicine.

Before the start of the 2010/11 academic year, Physiotherapy became a part of the School of Medicine, having previously been run by the School of Biomedical and Health Sciences.

==Hospitals==
King&#x27;s College London GKT School of Medical Education is associated with the following hospitals:
* Guy&#x27;s Hospital
* St Thomas&#x27; Hospital
* King&#x27;s College Hospital
* Maudsley Hospital
* University Hospital Lewisham
* Bethlem Royal Hospital
* Evelina London Children&#x27;s Hospital

It is also associated with several peripheral hospitals around the South East of the UK, including Medway Maritime Hospital, William Harvey Hospital and Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Hospital. Students are required to spend at least part of their training at these peripheral locations.

==Campuses==

=== Guy&#x27;s Campus ===
Guy&#x27;s Campus is situated close to London Bridge and the Shard on the South Bank of the River Thames. It holds New Hunt&#x27;s House Library and building, Hodgkin Building and Wills&#x27; Library, Henriette Raphael House and Guy&#x27;s Hospital.

The nearest Underground station is London Bridge.

=== St Thomas&#x27; Campus ===

The St Thomas&#x27; Campus in the London Borough of Lambeth, facing the Houses of Parliament across the Thames, houses parts of the School of Medicine and the Dental Institute. The Florence Nightingale Museum is also located here. The museum is dedicated to Florence Nightingale, the founder of the Nightingale Training School of St Thomas&#x27; Hospital (now King&#x27;s Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery). St Thomas&#x27; Hospital became part of King&#x27;s College London School of Medicine in 1998. The St Thomas&#x27; Hospital and Campus were named after St Thomas Becket. The Department of Twin Research (TwinsUk), King&#x27;s College London is located in St. Thomas&#x27; Hospital.

The nearest Underground station is Westminster.

=== Denmark Hill Campus ===
Denmark Hill Campus is situated in south London near the borders of the London Borough of Lambeth and the London Borough of Southwark in Camberwell and is the only campus not situated on the River Thames. The campus consists of King&#x27;s College Hospital, the Maudsley Hospital and the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience (IoPPN). In addition to the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, parts of the Dental Institute and School of Medicine, and a large hall of residence, King&#x27;s College Hall, are situated here. Other buildings include the campus library known as the Weston Education Centre (WEC), the James Black Centre, the Rayne Institute (haemato-oncology) and the Cicely Saunders Institute (palliative care), the world&#x27;s first purpose-built institute for palliative care

The Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute was opened by the Princess Royal in 2015 at the Denmark Hill Campus. It is named after British philanthropist Maurice Wohl, who had a long association with King&#x27;s and supported many medical projects.

The nearest Overground station is Denmark Hill.

==Admissions==

King&#x27;s College London, generally in 2005, is the sixth-most difficult UK university to gain admission to, as ranked as &quot;Sunday Times&quot;. A freedom-of-information request in 2015 revealed that for every 1,764 applications that School of Medical Education received, only 39 offers were made thereby resulting in an offer rate of just 2.2%. For other subjects: Nursery &amp; Midwifery, Physiotherapy and Clinical Dentistry also had one of the lowest offer rates of 14%, 16% and 17%, respectively.

==Graduation==
&quot;Also see Graduation Dress of King&#x27;s College London&quot;

Graduation ceremonies for School of Medical Education are normally held in June or July (summer). During summer graduation, the graduation ceremonies are held in Southwark Cathedral; this is owing to St Thomas&#x27;s Medical School roots that could be traced to St Mary Overie Priory. For those who happen to finish during January (winter), graduands could opt for attending the graduation ceremonies held in the Barbican Centre.

==Research==

The School&#x27;s research excellence is recognised worldwide and the 2008 Research Assessment Exercise confirmed King&#x27;s as one of the top two universities in the UK for health research strength. Around 70 percent of health science submissions from King&#x27;s were ranked in the top six within the UK.

Currently, the School hosts six MRC Centres,

* MRC-Asthma UK Centre in Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma
* MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology
* MRC Centre for Neurodegenerative Research
* MRC Centre for Social Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry
* MRC Centre for Transplantation
* MRC-HPA Centre for Environment and Health (awarded in 2009 in collaboration with Imperial College London)
* MRC National Institute for Medical Research (MRC NIMR) including the MRC Biomedical NMR Centre (planned to move to the new Francis Crick Institute in 2015, a partnership between the MRC, Cancer Research UK, Imperial College London, King&#x27;s College London, the Wellcome Trust and University College London)

The two MRC Centres in Transplantation and the Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma in 2008 alone were awarded &#x27;Centre of Excellence&#x27; status by the British Heart Foundation with funding of £9 million and a £4 million Breakthrough Breast Cancer Unit was opened in 2009.

The School is also host to its own &#x27;Centre of Medical Law and Ethics&#x27;, the first of its kind in the UK, and in March 2009, the school was accredited as an Academic health science centre, one of only five in the UK.

==Sports teams==

Like other medical schools in the UK, GKT has its own sports teams which compete in various student sports leagues and tournaments.

Like most other universities in London, GKT sports teams take part in the BUCS leagues and cups and the University of London Union leagues and cups. The GKT teams also take part in the United Hospitals Cup, which is a sporting competition played between the medical, dental and veterinary schools of London in all sports. The two most popular and biggest of the competitions include the United Hospitals Bumps (rowing) and the men&#x27;s rugby.

GKT has a fierce sporting rivalry with King&#x27;s College London. This rivalry led to the founding of the Macadam Cup in 2004, which pits GKT and KCL sports teams against each other. The championship is named in honour of Sir Ivison Macadam, an alumnus of King&#x27;s. So far in Macadam Cup&#x27;s history, the GKT Team has the most wins.

==Notable alumni, academics and staff==


* Recep Akdağ, Turkish Health Minister
* Eric Anson, New Zealand&#x27;s first specialist anaesthetist
* Thomas Armitage, British physician and founder of the Royal National Institute of Blind People
* William Bowman, ophthalmic surgeon, helped found Ophthalmological Society of the United Kingdom
* Sir James Black, Nobel Prize laureate for Medicine in 1988 for work leading to the development of propranolol and cimetidine
* William Bowman, ophthalmic surgeon, helped found Ophthalmological Society of the United Kingdom
* Richard Bright, discoverer of Bright&#x27;s disease
* Russell Brock, Baron Brock, pioneering cardiothoracic surgeon
* Sir Astley Cooper, discoverer of the Cooper&#x27;s ligaments of the breasts
* John Leonard Dawson, Serjeant Surgeon to the Royal Household of the United Kingdom
* Richard Doll, epidemiologist and physiologist; established link between smoking and cancer
* Havelock Ellis, physician, sexual psychologist and social reformer
* Reita Faria, Indian model and Miss World 1966
* William Fergusson, surgeon who introduced the practice of conservative amputation
* David Ferrier, pioneering experimental neurologist
* Abraham Pineo Gesner, surgeon and inventor of kerosene refining
* John Hilton, great anatomist and surgeon
* Thomas Hodgkin, discoverer of Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma
* Sir Frederick Hopkins, discoverer of vitamins
* Takaki Kanehiro, Japanese naval doctor, first person to discover the link between beriberi and diet
* John Keats, writer
* Joseph Lister, pioneer of aseptic surgery
* W. Somerset Maugham, playwright, novelist, short story writer
* Alex Mowat, professor of paediatric hepatology
* Kypros Nicolaides - Fetal medicine pioneer, most cited OB/GYN in the world, professor of Fetal Medicine at King&#x27;s
* Uchenna Okoye, cosmetic dentist and media personality
* Humphry Osmond, psychiatrist who worked with psychedelic drugs and coined the term
* David Owen, Labour Foreign Secretary and founder of the Social Democratic Party
* Sir Alfred Poland, the first to describe Poland syndrome
* Sir Andrew Pollard, Chief Investigator on the Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine
* Dame Cecily Saunders, nurse, physician and social worker who developed the concept of the hospice and was a pioneer of palliative care
* Audrey Smith, cryobiologist who discovered the use of glycerol to protect human red blood cells during freezing
* Jeffrey Tate, conductor
* Max Theiler, virologist, awarded the 1951 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for developing a vaccine for yellow fever
* Sheo Bhagwan Tibrewal, Orthopedic surgeon and Padma Shri awardee
* Robert Bentley Todd, known for discovering and describing the condition postictal paralysis now known as Todd&#x27;s palsy
* Gerard Folliott Vaughan, UK psychiatrist, who became a politician and minister of state during Margaret Thatcher&#x27;s government
* Sir Samuel Wilks, pathologist
* Claire Windsor, wife of the Earl of Ulster and physician by profession
* Fiona Wood AM, plastic surgeon, Australian of the Year 2005

== References ==
==External links==
*King&#x27;s College London School of Medicine
*GKT Medical Students&#x27; Association (MSA)
*King&#x27;s College London School of Medicine student lists
*King&#x27;s College London School of Medicine military personnel,1914–1918</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6410897" start="0" end="31" title="GKT School of Medical Education" label="GKT School of Medical Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410897" start="46" end="49" title="GKT School of Medical Education" label="GKT"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="76" end="102" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q777039" start="151" end="170" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q730706" start="172" end="181" title="London Borough of Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="184" end="212" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q730706" start="214" end="226" title="London Borough of Southwark" label="Denmark Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="232" end="256" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="258" end="265" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028979" start="426" end="503" title="United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospitals" label="United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q13948235" start="756" end="760" title="MBBS" label="MBBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627873" start="1073" end="1090" title="List of medical schools in the United Kingdom" label="UK medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864838" start="1131" end="1164" title="UKCAT" label="University Clinical Aptitude Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q777039" start="2097" end="2116" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="2118" end="2146" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="2151" end="2175" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="2288" end="2299" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q917048" start="2301" end="2311" title="Great Plague of London" label="the plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="2317" end="2333" title="War of the Roses" label="War of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="2339" end="2359" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="2361" end="2370" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251481" start="2392" end="2395" title="National Health Service (England)" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q922967" start="2588" end="2602" title="St Mary Overie" label="St Mary Overie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525181" start="2619" end="2629" title="Thomas Guy" label="Thomas Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q749557" start="3187" end="3200" title="Astley Cooper" label="Astley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q107653617" start="3844" end="3875" title="Royal Dental Hospital" label="Royal Dental Hospital of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="4482" end="4510" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q777039" start="5559" end="5578" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="5581" end="5605" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="5608" end="5636" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792344" start="5639" end="5656" title="Maudsley Hospital" label="Maudsley Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956783" start="5659" end="5687" title="University Hospital Lewisham" label="University Hospital Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q831377" start="5690" end="5712" title="Bethlem Royal Hospital" label="Bethlem Royal Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416238" start="5715" end="5754" title="Evelina London Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Evelina London Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555690" start="6087" end="6104" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Campus" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="6126" end="6139" title="London Bridge" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18536" start="6144" end="6153" title="the Shard" label="the Shard"/>
<link wikidata="Q154322" start="6161" end="6171" title="South Bank" label="South Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q801125" start="6373" end="6386" title="London Bridge station" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="6425" end="6447" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="6455" end="6480" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="London Borough of Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="6493" end="6513" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460739" start="6602" end="6629" title="Florence Nightingale Museum" label="Florence Nightingale Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q841076" start="6793" end="6846" title="Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery" label="Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410897" start="6889" end="6934" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London School of Medicine" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="7001" end="7017" title="St Thomas Becket" label="St Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014610" start="7052" end="7059" title="TwinsUk" label="TwinsUk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135834" start="7166" end="7177" title="Westminster tube station" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="7280" end="7305" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="London Borough of Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q730706" start="7314" end="7341" title="London Borough of Southwark" label="London Borough of Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q385060" start="7345" end="7355" title="Camberwell" label="Camberwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="7436" end="7464" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792344" start="7470" end="7487" title="Maudsley Hospital" label="Maudsley Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q631045" start="7496" end="7548" title="Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience" label="Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q29483" start="7946" end="7961" title="palliative care" label="palliative care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052964" start="8095" end="8113" title="the Princess Royal" label="the Princess Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793544" start="8191" end="8203" title="Maurice Wohl" label="Maurice Wohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="8299" end="8309" title="London Overground" label="Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257939" start="8321" end="8333" title="Denmark Hill" label="Denmark Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="8482" end="8494" title="Sunday Times" label="Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500727" start="8504" end="8534" title="Freedom of information in the United Kingdom" label="freedom-of-information request"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8890" end="8936" title=":Academic dress of King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="Graduation Dress of King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q922967" start="9106" end="9125" title="Southwark Cathedral" label="Southwark Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q922967" start="9206" end="9220" title="St Mary Overie" label="St Mary Overie"/>
<link wikidata="Q653858" start="9357" end="9372" title="Barbican Centre" label="Barbican Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427676" start="9464" end="9492" title="Research Assessment Exercise" label="Research Assessment Exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q746879" start="9730" end="9733" title="Medical Research Council (United Kingdom)" label="MRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="10065" end="10088" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732774" start="10096" end="10135" title="National Institute for Medical Research" label="National Institute for Medical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q326044" start="10215" end="10238" title="Francis Crick Institute" label="Francis Crick Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q326079" start="10279" end="10297" title="Cancer Research UK" label="Cancer Research UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="10324" end="10350" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q326276" start="10356" end="10370" title="Wellcome Trust" label="Wellcome Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671274" start="10841" end="10871" title="Academic health science centre" label="Academic health science centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895640" start="11157" end="11183" title="University of London Union" label="University of London Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887856" start="11238" end="11258" title="United Hospitals Cup" label="United Hospitals Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="11538" end="11564" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722421" start="11606" end="11617" title="Macadam Cup" label="Macadam Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099018" start="11722" end="11740" title="Ivison Macadam" label="Sir Ivison Macadam"/>
<link wikidata="Q713551" start="11884" end="11895" title="Recep Akdağ" label="Recep Akdağ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386032" start="11923" end="11933" title="Eric Anson" label="Eric Anson"/>
<link wikidata="Q615057" start="11971" end="11983" title="anaesthetist" label="anaesthetist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426797" start="11986" end="12001" title="Thomas Armitage" label="Thomas Armitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374516" start="12040" end="12080" title="Royal National Institute of Blind People" label="Royal National Institute of Blind People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352869" start="12083" end="12097" title="Sir William Bowman, 1st Baronet" label="William Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q110974" start="12185" end="12196" title="James Black (pharmacologist)" label="James Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352869" start="12308" end="12322" title="Sir William Bowman, 1st Baronet" label="William Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q945492" start="12406" end="12420" title="Richard Bright (physician)" label="Richard Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246646" start="12436" end="12457" title="Bright&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Bright&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176907" start="12460" end="12486" title="Russell Brock, Baron Brock" label="Russell Brock, Baron Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q749557" start="12528" end="12541" title="Astley Cooper" label="Astley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073253" start="12561" end="12584" title="Cooper&amp;#x27;s ligaments" label="Cooper&amp;#x27;s ligaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q9103" start="12592" end="12598" title="breast" label="breast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244600" start="12602" end="12621" title="John Leonard Dawson" label="John Leonard Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454935" start="12623" end="12639" title="Serjeant Surgeon" label="Serjeant Surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146103" start="12647" end="12662" title="Royal Household" label="Royal Household"/>
<link wikidata="Q740803" start="12687" end="12699" title="Richard Doll" label="Richard Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="12701" end="12715" title="epidemiologist" label="epidemiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="12720" end="12732" title="physiologist" label="physiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="12759" end="12766" title="tobacco smoking" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q552983" start="12780" end="12794" title="Havelock Ellis" label="Havelock Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273463" start="12849" end="12860" title="Reita Faria" label="Reita Faria"/>
<link wikidata="Q173402" start="12879" end="12894" title="Miss World 1966" label="Miss World 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464929" start="12897" end="12914" title="William Fergusson" label="William Fergusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174416" start="12981" end="12994" title="David Ferrier" label="David Ferrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q330006" start="13034" end="13054" title="Abraham Pineo Gesner" label="Abraham Pineo Gesner"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="13080" end="13088" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239327" start="13100" end="13111" title="John Hilton (surgeon)" label="John Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="13119" end="13128" title="anatomist" label="anatomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q456820" start="13143" end="13157" title="Thomas Hodgkin" label="Thomas Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209369" start="13173" end="13196" title="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q233976" start="13203" end="13220" title="Frederick Hopkins" label="Frederick Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="13236" end="13243" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q438528" start="13247" end="13262" title="Takaki Kanehiro" label="Takaki Kanehiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="13349" end="13359" title="John Keats" label="John Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="13370" end="13383" title="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister" label="Joseph Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q134942" start="13414" end="13433" title="W. Somerset Maugham" label="W. Somerset Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q65048455" start="13478" end="13488" title="Alex Mowat" label="Alex Mowat"/>
<link wikidata="Q668064" start="13514" end="13524" title="hepatology" label="hepatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795145" start="13527" end="13544" title="Kypros Nicolaides" label="Kypros Nicolaides"/>
<link wikidata="Q125372952" start="13648" end="13661" title="Uchenna Okoye" label="Uchenna Okoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275370" start="13704" end="13718" title="Humphry Osmond" label="Humphry Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="13749" end="13766" title="psychedelic drugs" label="psychedelic drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q333085" start="13789" end="13799" title="David Owen" label="David Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="13801" end="13807" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="13808" end="13825" title="Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q40052" start="13845" end="13868" title="Social Democratic Party (UK)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723304" start="13875" end="13888" title="Alfred Poland" label="Alfred Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q633859" start="13912" end="13927" title="Poland syndrome" label="Poland syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q64861148" start="13934" end="13948" title="Andrew Pollard (immunologist)" label="Andrew Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q95042269" start="13976" end="14011" title="Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine" label="Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q290524" start="14019" end="14034" title="Cecily Saunders" label="Cecily Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q15432673" start="14151" end="14163" title="Audrey Smith" label="Audrey Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="14205" end="14213" title="glycerol" label="glycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q948893" start="14265" end="14277" title="Jeffrey Tate" label="Jeffrey Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q46928" start="14291" end="14302" title="Max Theiler" label="Max Theiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7215" start="14304" end="14314" title="virologist" label="virologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="14333" end="14370" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23761543" start="14415" end="14436" title="Sheo Bhagwan Tibrewal" label="Sheo Bhagwan Tibrewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q949193" start="14461" end="14471" title="Padma Shri" label="Padma Shri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746634" start="14482" end="14501" title="Robert Bentley Todd" label="Robert Bentley Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q495068" start="14587" end="14604" title="Todd&amp;#x27;s palsy" label="Todd&amp;#x27;s palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549999" start="14607" end="14630" title="Gerard Vaughan (British politician)" label="Gerard Folliott Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="14635" end="14647" title="psychiatrist" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="14677" end="14685" title="political minister" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="14702" end="14719" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471273" start="14744" end="14756" title="Samuel Wilks" label="Samuel Wilks"/>
<link wikidata="Q644800" start="14772" end="14786" title="Claire Windsor, Countess of Ulster" label="Claire Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q644800" start="14800" end="14814" title="Earl of Ulster" label="Earl of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794421" start="14845" end="14855" title="Fiona Wood" label="Fiona Wood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158466" wikidata="Q186309" url="?curid=158466" title="Madame Tussauds">
<text>Madame Tussauds (, ) is a wax museum founded in London in 1835 by the French wax sculptor Marie Tussaud. One of the early main attractions was the Chamber of Horrors, which appeared in advertising in 1843.

In 1883, the restricted space of the original Baker Street site prompted Tussaud&#x27;s grandson (Joseph Randall) to commission the building at its current London location on Marylebone Road. The new exhibition galleries were opened on 14 July 1884 and were a great success. Madame Tussaud &amp; Sons was incorporated as a private limited company (Ltd.) in 1889. 

A major tourist attraction in London since the Victorian era, Madame Tussauds displays the waxworks of famous and historical figures, as well as popular film and television characters played by famous actors. Operated by the British entertainment company Merlin Entertainments, the museum now has locations in cities across four continents, with the first overseas branch opening in Amsterdam in 1970.

==History==

===Background===
Marie Tussaud was born as Marie Grosholtz in 1761 in Strasbourg, France. Her mother worked for Philippe Curtius in Bern, Switzerland; he was a physician skilled in wax modelling. Curtius taught Tussaud the art of wax modelling when she was a child; when he moved to Paris, Marie and her mother followed.

Grosholtz created her first wax sculpture, of Voltaire, in 1777. At 17, according to her memoirs, she became art tutor to Madame Elizabeth, the sister of King Louis XVI. During the French Revolution, she was imprisoned for three months, but was subsequently released. During the Revolution, she made models of many prominent victims.
Grosholtz inherited Curtius&#x27; vast collection of wax models following his death in 1794. For the next 33 years, she travelled around Europe with a touring show from the collection. She married Francois Tussaud in 1795, took his surname, and renamed her show as Madame Tussaud&#x27;s. In 1802 she accepted an invitation from lantern and phantasmagoria pioneer Paul Philidor to exhibit her work alongside his show at the Lyceum Theatre, London. A wave of creativity was in vogue in London when Tussaud arrived in the city, with new West End stage plays which included the first to be called a melodrama, the first appearance of Joseph Grimaldi in his whiteface clown character, and poet William Wordsworth&#x27;s poem &quot;Composed upon Westminster Bridge, 3 September 1802&quot; describing London and the Thames. Adding her own creativity to the mix, Tussaud brought with her all her death masks, wax faces and busts. Complaining that Philidor failed to promote her, Tussaud then decided to go into business alone.

Unable to return to France because of the Napoleonic Wars, she travelled throughout Great Britain and Ireland exhibiting her collection and made her home in London. From 1831, she took a series of short leases on the upper floor of &quot;Baker Street Bazaar&quot; (on the west side of Baker Street, Dorset Street, and King Street in London). This site was later featured in the Druce-Portland case sequence of trials of 1898–1907. This became Tussaud&#x27;s first permanent home in 1836.

===Origins===

By 1835, Marie Tussaud had settled down in Baker Street and opened a museum. One of her museum&#x27;s main attractions was the Chamber of Horrors. The name is often credited to a contributor to &quot;Punch&quot; in 1845, but Tussaud appears to have originated it herself, using it in advertising as early as 1843. This part of the exhibition included victims of the French Revolution and newly created figures of murderers and other criminals. Other famous people were added to the museum, including Lord Nelson, the Duke of Wellington, Henry VIII, and Queen Victoria. The early commercial success of Madame Tussaud&#x27;s saw it establish itself as a brand, and the museum became a pioneer in innovating various forms of publicity when the advertising industry was in its infancy. The Hall of Fame attraction exerted great influence among the public of Victorian London, and inclusion in it was definitive proof one had attained celebrity status.

Other businesses in Baker Street profited from being within close proximity to Madame Tussaud&#x27;s, and in 1860 Charles Dickens hailed the museum as one of London&#x27;s most popular entertainments, writing in &quot;All the Year Round&quot;: &quot;Madame Tussaud&#x27;s is something more than an exhibition, it is an institution.&quot; A waxwork of Dickens appeared at the museum in 1873, three years after his death. Some sculptures still exist that were made by Marie Tussaud herself. The gallery originally contained some 400 different figures, but fire damage in 1925 coupled with bombs during the Blitz on London in 1941, severely damaged most of such older models. The casts themselves have survived, allowing the historical waxworks to be remade, and these can be seen in the museum&#x27;s history exhibit. The oldest figure on display is that of Madame du Barry, the work of Curtius from 1765 and part of the waxworks left to Grosholtz at his death. Other faces from the time of Tussaud include Robespierre and George III. In 1842, she made a self-portrait, which is now on display at the entrance of her museum. She died in her sleep in London on 16 April 1850. 
By 1883, the restricted space and rising cost of the Baker Street site prompted her grandson Joseph Randall to commission construction of a building at the museum&#x27;s current location on Marylebone Road. The new exhibition galleries were opened on 14 July 1884 and were a great success. But Randall had bought out his cousin Louisa&#x27;s half-share in the business in 1881, and that plus the building costs resulted in his having too little capital. He formed a limited company in 1888 to attract fresh capital but it had to be dissolved after disagreements between the family shareholders. In February 1889 Tussaud&#x27;s was sold to a group of businessmen led by Edwin Josiah Poyser. Tussaud&#x27;s great-grandson, John Theodore Tussaud, continued in his role as the museum&#x27;s manager and chief artist. The first wax sculpture of a young Winston Churchill was made in 1908; a total of ten have been made since. The first overseas branch of Madame Tussauds was opened in Amsterdam in 1970.

===Ownership changes===
In 2005, Madame Tussauds was sold to a company in Dubai, Dubai International Capital, for £800m (US$1.5bn). In May 2007, The Blackstone Group purchased The Tussauds Group from then-owner Dubai International Capital for US$1.9 billion; the company was merged with Blackstone&#x27;s Merlin Entertainments and operation of Madame Tussauds was taken over by Merlin. After the Tussauds acquisition, Dubai International Capital gained 20% of Merlin Entertainment.

On 17 July 2007, as part of the financing for the Tussauds deal, Merlin sold the freehold of Madame Tussauds to private investor Nick Leslau and his investment firm Prestbury under a sale and leaseback agreement. Although the attraction sites are owned by Prestbury, they are operated by Merlin based on a renewable 35-year lease.

===Recent status===

Madame Tussaud&#x27;s wax museum has been a major tourist attraction in London since it opened in the 1830s, an era viewed as being when the city&#x27;s tourism industry began. In 2006 it incorporated the London Planetarium to its west wing. A large animated dark ride, &quot;The Spirit of London&quot;, opened in 1993. Today&#x27;s wax figures at Tussauds include historical and royal figures, film stars, sports stars, and famous murderers. It has been known since 2007 as &quot;Madame Tussauds&quot; museums (no apostrophe). In 2009, a waxwork of Tinker Bell (the fairy from J. M. Barrie&#x27;s &quot;Peter Pan&quot;) became the museum&#x27;s smallest figure of all time when it was unveiled in London.

In July 2008, Madame Tussauds&#x27; Berlin branch became embroiled in controversy when a 41-year-old German man brushed past two guards and decapitated a wax figure depicting Adolf Hitler. This was believed to be an act of protest against showing the ruthless dictator alongside sports heroes, movie stars, and other historical figures. The statue has since been repaired, and the perpetrator has admitted that he attacked the statue to win a bet. The original model of Hitler was unveiled in Madame Tussauds London in April 1933; it was frequently vandalised and a 1936 replacement had to be carefully guarded. In January 2016, the statue of Hitler was removed from the Chamber of Horrors section in the London museum in response to an open letter sent by a staff writer of &quot;The Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles&quot;, followed by significant support for its removal from social media.

The first Madame Tussauds in India opened in New Delhi on 1 December 2017. Its operator, Merlin Entertainments, planned an investment of 50 million pounds over the next 10 years. It features over 50 wax models, including political and entertainment figures such as Ariana Grande, Amitabh Bachchan, Salman Khan, Katrina Kaif, Sachin Tendulkar, Kim Kardashian, Tom Cruise, Leonardo DiCaprio, Scarlett Johansson, Angelina Jolie, Asha Bhosle, Kapil Dev, and Mary Kom. On 30 December 2020, the holding company of Madame Tussauds in Delhi confirmed a temporary shutdown of the museum. It reopened in 2022.

==Museum locations==
===Asia===
* Beijing, China (2014)
* Chongqing, China (2016)
* Shanghai, China (2006)
* Wuhan, China (2013)
* Hong Kong (2000)
* Delhi, India (2017–2020, 2023)
* Tokyo, Japan (2013)
* Singapore (2014)
* Bangkok, Thailand (2010)
* Dubai, United Arab Emirates (2021)

===Europe===
* Amsterdam, Netherlands (1970)
* Berlin, Germany (2008)
* Blackpool, United Kingdom (2011)
* Budapest, Hungary (2023)
* London, United Kingdom (1835)
* Prague, Czech Republic (2019)
* Vienna, Austria (2011)
* Istanbul, Turkey (2016–2024)

===North America===
* Hollywood, United States (2009)
* Las Vegas, United States (1999)
* Nashville, United States (2017)
* New York City, United States (2000)
* Orlando, United States (2015)
* San Francisco, United States (2014–2024)
* Washington, D.C., United States (2007–2021)

===Oceania===
* Sydney, Australia (2012)

==In popular culture==
===Celebrity poses with their wax figures===
Celebrities have often posed like their wax figures as pranks and publicity stunts:
* On 3 November 2009, the museum&#x27;s New York City branch was featured in a segment on NBC&#x27;s &quot;Today&quot; in which weatherman Al Roker posed in place of his lifelike wax figure for two hours and startled unsuspecting visitors, who were at first led to believe they were viewing Roker&#x27;s wax counterpart.
* NBA players Carmelo Anthony and Jeremy Lin pranked fans during the unveiling of their statues at the New York and San Francisco museums, respectively.
* In 2015, Arnold Schwarzenegger posed as the Terminator statue in the Hollywood museum, to promote a charity event.
*Ant and Dec pranked Olly Murs by tricking him into using a machine that will &quot;scan every part of Olly&#x27;s face and body to create the most accurate wax figure ever&quot; as a part of their annual Undercover segment on their ITV show, &quot;Ant &amp; Dec&#x27;s Saturday Night Takeaway&quot;.

===Music===
* Madame Tussauds is the focus of Steve Taylor&#x27;s song &quot;Meltdown (at Madame Tussauds)&quot;, which describes someone turning up the thermostat and causing the wax figures to melt. Taylor wrote the song as &quot;a new metaphor to ask [the] same question&quot; as Jesus, &quot;What good is it for a man to gain the whole world, yet forfeit his soul?&quot;
* The Beatles had their wax figures featured along with cardboard cutouts of various famous people in the cover art for &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; (1967).
* Several sculptures from the London branch (including George W. Bush and Tony Blair) appear in the 2004 music video &quot;Pop!ular&quot; by singer-songwriter Darren Hayes.
* Madame Tussauds sculptures are used on the cover of Rick Wakeman&#x27;s album &quot;The Six Wives of Henry VIII&quot;. A waxwork of Richard Nixon also appears in the background.

==List of wax figures==

==Gallery==
==See also==
* :Category:Madame Tussauds
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186309" start="0" end="15" title="Madame Tussauds" label="Madame Tussauds"/>
<link wikidata="Q667018" start="26" end="36" title="wax museum" label="wax museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q219572" start="90" end="103" title="Marie Tussaud" label="Marie Tussaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987949" start="147" end="165" title="Chamber of Horrors (Madame Tussauds)" label="Chamber of Horrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q804402" start="253" end="265" title="Baker Street" label="Baker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365199" start="382" end="397" title="Marylebone Road" label="Marylebone Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832945" start="530" end="553" title="Private company limited by shares" label="private limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633706" start="580" end="608" title="Tourism in London" label="tourist attraction in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q573278" start="827" end="848" title="Merlin Entertainments" label="Merlin Entertainments"/>
<link wikidata="Q219572" start="1005" end="1018" title="Marie Tussaud" label="Marie Tussaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="1058" end="1068" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380351" start="1100" end="1116" title="Philippe Curtius" label="Philippe Curtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="1120" end="1124" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055622" start="1169" end="1178" title="wax model" label="wax model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055622" start="1338" end="1351" title="wax sculpture" label="wax sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="1356" end="1364" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="1469" end="1478" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1491" end="1508" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q654393" start="1972" end="1979" title="Magic lantern" label="lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760363" start="1984" end="1998" title="phantasmagoria" label="phantasmagoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152941" start="2007" end="2020" title="Paul Philidor" label="Paul Philidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661445" start="2067" end="2081" title="Lyceum Theatre, London" label="Lyceum Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="2178" end="2186" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q375106" start="2274" end="2289" title="Joseph Grimaldi" label="Joseph Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2297" end="2306" title="Clown#History" label="whiteface"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="2333" end="2351" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156720" start="2370" end="2420" title="Composed upon Westminster Bridge, 3 September 1802" label="Composed upon Westminster Bridge, 3 September 1802"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="2706" end="2721" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="2748" end="2773" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q804402" start="2949" end="2961" title="Baker Street" label="Baker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q334530" start="3042" end="3061" title="Druce-Portland case" label="Druce-Portland case"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987949" start="3295" end="3313" title="Chamber of Horrors (Madame Tussauds)" label="Chamber of Horrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="3368" end="3373" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="3668" end="3679" title="Lord Nelson" label="Lord Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="3685" end="3703" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="3705" end="3715" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="3721" end="3735" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="4231" end="4246" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237117" start="4335" end="4353" title="All the Year Round" label="All the Year Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="4717" end="4726" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q230677" start="4973" end="4988" title="Madame du Barry" label="Madame du Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="5122" end="5133" title="Robespierre" label="Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="5138" end="5148" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q192110" start="5170" end="5183" title="self-portrait" label="self-portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365199" start="5481" end="5496" title="Marylebone Road" label="Marylebone Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429833" start="6012" end="6033" title="John Theodore Tussaud" label="John Theodore Tussaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="6139" end="6156" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310562" start="6372" end="6399" title="Dubai International Capital" label="Dubai International Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q880942" start="6436" end="6456" title="The Blackstone Group" label="The Blackstone Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q460540" start="6467" end="6485" title="The Tussauds Group" label="The Tussauds Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q573278" start="6596" end="6617" title="Merlin Entertainments" label="Merlin Entertainments"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193211" start="6903" end="6914" title="Nick Leslau" label="Nick Leslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q570116" start="7177" end="7195" title="tourist attraction" label="tourist attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561816" start="7332" end="7350" title="London Planetarium" label="London Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934961" start="7386" end="7395" title="dark ride" label="dark ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q853847" start="7677" end="7688" title="Tinker Bell" label="Tinker Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="7705" end="7717" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435337" start="7731" end="7740" title="Peter and Wendy" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="8009" end="8021" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743221" start="8615" end="8656" title="The Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles" label="The Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q151892" start="8997" end="9010" title="Ariana Grande" label="Ariana Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q9570" start="9012" end="9028" title="Amitabh Bachchan" label="Amitabh Bachchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9543" start="9030" end="9041" title="Salman Khan" label="Salman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9550" start="9043" end="9055" title="Katrina Kaif" label="Katrina Kaif"/>
<link wikidata="Q9488" start="9057" end="9073" title="Sachin Tendulkar" label="Sachin Tendulkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q186304" start="9075" end="9089" title="Kim Kardashian" label="Kim Kardashian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="9091" end="9101" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="9103" end="9120" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34436" start="9122" end="9140" title="Scarlett Johansson" label="Scarlett Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13909" start="9142" end="9156" title="Angelina Jolie" label="Angelina Jolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q38393" start="9158" end="9169" title="Asha Bhosle" label="Asha Bhosle"/>
<link wikidata="Q558189" start="9171" end="9180" title="Kapil Dev" label="Kapil Dev"/>
<link wikidata="Q328951" start="9186" end="9194" title="Mary Kom" label="Mary Kom"/>
<link wikidata="Q55697123" start="9367" end="9374" title="Madame Tussauds Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="9391" end="9400" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948372" start="9417" end="9425" title="Madame Tussauds Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="9442" end="9447" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262481" start="9464" end="9473" title="Madame Tussauds Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q48782907" start="9483" end="9488" title="Madame Tussauds Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="9516" end="9521" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840386" start="9538" end="9547" title="Madame Tussauds Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="9557" end="9564" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359897" start="9584" end="9589" title="Madame Tussauds Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275333" start="9635" end="9644" title="Madame Tussauds Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="9667" end="9673" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28449245" start="9692" end="9701" title="Madame Tussauds Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="9727" end="9735" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="9754" end="9760" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="9786" end="9792" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q28549691" start="9818" end="9824" title="Madame Tussauds Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q110538685" start="9843" end="9851" title="Madame Tussauds Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726337" start="9895" end="9904" title="Madame Tussauds Hollywood" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q27308329" start="9929" end="9938" title="Madame Tussauds Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="9963" end="9972" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q21903395" start="9997" end="10010" title="Madame Tussauds New York" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="10035" end="10042" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712582" start="10067" end="10080" title="Madame Tussauds San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q20011434" start="10110" end="10126" title="Madame Tussauds Washington D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q22271907" start="10171" end="10177" title="Madame Tussauds Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999003" start="10331" end="10346" title="publicity stunt" label="publicity stunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="10439" end="10442" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q130838" start="10456" end="10461" title="Today (American TV program)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240869" start="10488" end="10496" title="Al Roker" label="Al Roker"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="10672" end="10675" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q129041" start="10684" end="10699" title="Carmelo Anthony" label="Carmelo Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q309590" start="10704" end="10714" title="Jeremy Lin" label="Jeremy Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="10834" end="10855" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976616" start="10869" end="10879" title="Terminator (character)" label="Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596068" start="10941" end="10952" title="Ant &amp;amp; Dec" label="Ant and Dec"/>
<link wikidata="Q552770" start="10961" end="10970" title="Olly Murs" label="Olly Murs"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="11173" end="11176" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770849" start="11189" end="11233" title="Ant &amp;amp; Dec&amp;#x27;s Saturday Night Takeaway" label="Ant &amp;amp; Dec&amp;#x27;s Saturday Night Takeaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497711" start="11288" end="11300" title="Steve Taylor" label="Steve Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813744" start="11319" end="11348" title="Meltdown (Steve Taylor album)" label="Meltdown (at Madame Tussauds)"/>
<link wikidata="Q187665" start="11395" end="11405" title="thermostat" label="thermostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="11619" end="11630" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q461394" start="11673" end="11715" title="List of images on the cover of Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="cardboard cutouts of various famous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="11743" end="11785" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="11855" end="11869" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="11874" end="11884" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228924" start="11923" end="11931" title="Popular (Darren Hayes song)" label="Pop!ular"/>
<link wikidata="Q527055" start="11959" end="11971" title="Darren Hayes" label="Darren Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q312053" start="12027" end="12039" title="Rick Wakeman" label="Rick Wakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321882" start="12059" end="12086" title="The Six Wives of Henry VIII (album)" label="The Six Wives of Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="12107" end="12120" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12206" end="12231" title=":Category:Madame Tussauds" label=":Category:Madame Tussauds"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158468" wikidata="Q247319" url="?curid=158468" title="King's College">
<text>King&#x27;s College or The King&#x27;s College often refers to two higher education institutions in the United Kingdom:
*King&#x27;s College, Cambridge, a constituent of the University of Cambridge
*King&#x27;s College London, a constituent of the University of London

King&#x27;s College or The King&#x27;s College may also refer to:
==Australia==
*King&#x27;s College, University of Queensland, in St Lucia, Brisbane
*King&#x27;s College, Warrnambool, an independent coeducational Presbyterian school
*King&#x27;s College, a former school now incorporated into Pembroke School, Adelaide

==Canada==
*University of King&#x27;s College, in Halifax, Nova Scotia
*King&#x27;s University College, University of Western Ontario, in London, Ontario
*King&#x27;s University (Edmonton), formerly King&#x27;s University College
*King&#x27;s College, the predecessor institution to the University of New Brunswick
*King&#x27;s College, the predecessor institution to the University of Toronto

==United Kingdom==
*King&#x27;s College, Aberdeen, the oldest part of the University of Aberdeen
*King&#x27;s College School, Cambridge, a preparatory school linked to King&#x27;s College, Cambridge
*King&#x27;s College, Guildford, an International Baccalaureate school
*King&#x27;s College, Newcastle, a former college of Durham University, which left to form Newcastle University
*King&#x27;s College, Taunton, a private boarding secondary school in Taunton, Somerset
*King&#x27;s College Hospital, a hospital in the Borough of Southwark, London
*King&#x27;s College School, Wimbledon, London, a leading Eton Group school founded by King George IV linked to King&#x27;s College London

==United States==
*King&#x27;s College, the colonial-era name of Columbia College, part of Columbia University, in New York City, New York
*King&#x27;s College (Charlotte, North Carolina) in Charlotte, North Carolina
*King&#x27;s College (Pennsylvania) in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania
*King&#x27;s College (New York City), a Christian liberal arts college in New York City
*King&#x27;s University (Texas) in Southlake, Texas

==Other locations==
*King&#x27;s College, Auckland, New Zealand
*King&#x27;s College Budo, in Wakiso district, Uganda
*King&#x27;s College, Hong Kong, a secondary school in Hong Kong
*King&#x27;s College, Kathmandu, Nepal
*King&#x27;s College, Lagos, Nigeria
*King&#x27;s College, Madrid, Spain
*King&#x27;s College, Panama, a British international school

==See also==
*Kings International College, a secondary school in Camberley, Surrey
*Oriel College, Oxford, known as King&#x27;s College from about 1326 to 1526
*Eton College, founded in 1440 by King Henry VI as &quot;The King&#x27;s College of Our Lady of Eton besides Wyndsor&quot;
*King&#x27;s School (disambiguation)
*Kings (disambiguation)
* King College (disambiguation)
*King&#x27;s University College (disambiguation)
*King&#x27;s University (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q247319" start="0" end="19" title="King&amp;#x27;s College" label="King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q247319" start="23" end="46" title="King&amp;#x27;s College" label="The King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="121" end="151" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="199" end="225" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q247319" start="270" end="289" title="King&amp;#x27;s College" label="King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q247319" start="293" end="316" title="King&amp;#x27;s College" label="The King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315477" start="351" end="396" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, University of Queensland" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935182" start="421" end="453" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Warrnambool" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Warrnambool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161975" start="564" end="589" title="Pembroke School, Adelaide" label="Pembroke School, Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551609" start="603" end="636" title="University of King&amp;#x27;s College" label="University of King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411130" start="663" end="724" title="King&amp;#x27;s University College, University of Western Ontario" label="King&amp;#x27;s University College, University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411128" start="746" end="779" title="King&amp;#x27;s University (Canada)" label="King&amp;#x27;s University (Edmonton)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112515" start="878" end="905" title="University of New Brunswick" label="University of New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="963" end="984" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410877" start="1006" end="1035" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Aberdeen" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410901" start="1084" end="1121" title="King&amp;#x27;s College School, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College School, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410880" start="1186" end="1216" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Guildford" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q837164" start="1257" end="1287" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Newcastle" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742183" start="1369" end="1397" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Taunton" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Taunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="1457" end="1485" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410900" start="1535" end="1561" title="King&amp;#x27;s College School" label="King&amp;#x27;s College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569677" start="1693" end="1712" title="Columbia College, Columbia University" label="King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410885" start="1814" end="1861" title="King&amp;#x27;s College (Charlotte, North Carolina)" label="King&amp;#x27;s College (Charlotte, North Carolina)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410887" start="1892" end="1926" title="King&amp;#x27;s College (Pennsylvania)" label="King&amp;#x27;s College (Pennsylvania)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521483" start="1958" end="1993" title="King&amp;#x27;s College (New York City)" label="King&amp;#x27;s College (New York City)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744487" start="2046" end="2076" title="King&amp;#x27;s University (Texas)" label="King&amp;#x27;s University (Texas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410878" start="2119" end="2148" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Auckland" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495779" start="2163" end="2187" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Budo" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Budo"/>
<link wikidata="Q838926" start="2217" end="2247" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Hong Kong" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616025" start="2282" end="2312" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Kathmandu" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410881" start="2321" end="2347" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Lagos" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412880" start="2358" end="2385" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Madrid" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q21072122" start="2394" end="2421" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Panama" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412937" start="2469" end="2496" title="Kings International College" label="Kings International College"/>
<link wikidata="Q81170" start="2539" end="2560" title="Oriel College, Oxford" label="Oriel College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="2616" end="2628" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411087" start="2739" end="2774" title="King&amp;#x27;s School (disambiguation)" label="King&amp;#x27;s School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q410333" start="2776" end="2798" title="Kings (disambiguation)" label="Kings (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22348601" start="2801" end="2830" title="King College (disambiguation)" label="King College (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411126" start="2832" end="2879" title="King&amp;#x27;s University College (disambiguation)" label="King&amp;#x27;s University College (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887727" start="2881" end="2920" title="King&amp;#x27;s University (disambiguation)" label="King&amp;#x27;s University (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158471" wikidata="Q181341" url="?curid=158471" title="Godspeed You! Black Emperor">
<text>Godspeed You! Black Emperor (sometimes abbreviated to GY!BE or Godspeed) is a Canadian post-rock band that originated in Montreal, Quebec in 1994. The group releases recordings through Constellation, an independent record label also located in Montreal. 

The group released their debut album &quot;F♯ A♯ ∞&quot;, in 1997 and toured regularly from 1998 to 2003. Their second album &quot;Lift Your Skinny Fists Like Antennas to Heaven&quot; (2000) received critical acclaim and has been named as one of the best albums of the decade. Following the release of &quot;Yanqui U.X.O.&quot; (2002), the band went on hiatus in 2003 to pursue other musical interests. 

The band was rumored to have broken up, but reformed in 2010. Their first post-reunion album &quot;Allelujah! Don&#x27;t Bend! Ascend!&quot; (2012) won the 2013 Polaris Music Prize. This was followed by &quot;Asunder, Sweet and Other Distress&quot; (2015), &quot;Luciferian Towers&quot; (2017), &quot;G_d&#x27;s Pee at State&#x27;s End!&quot; (2021) and &quot;No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead&quot; (2024). 

The band has a dedicated cult following and is renowned for being influential in the post-rock genre. Their music, mainly instrumental in nature, has been noted for its contrasts between ambient soundscapes and chaotic crescendos; use of field recordings and spoken word monologues; and focus on dystopian, anarchist and anti-war themes. Members of the group have formed a number of side projects, including Thee Silver Mt. Zion Memorial Orchestra &amp; Tra-La-La Band, Fly Pan Am, HṚṢṬA, Esmerine, and Set Fire to Flames. 

==History==

=== First run (1994–2003) ===
Godspeed You! Black Emperor was formed in 1994 in Montreal, Quebec, by Efrim Menuck (guitar), Mike Moya (guitar), and Mauro Pezzente (bass). The band took its name from &quot;God Speed You! Black Emperor&quot;, a 1976 Japanese black-and-white documentary by director Mitsuo Yanagimachi, which follows the exploits of a Japanese biker gang, the Black Emperors. The band initially assembled after being offered a supporting act for another local band named Steak 72. Thereafter, the trio performed live on a few separate occasions. Previously, the name &quot;God Speed You Black Emperor!&quot; had been used by Menuck on a limited cassette entitled &quot;All Lights Fucked on the Hairy Amp Drooling&quot; that had been recorded the year prior, with limited contributions by Pezzente on bass, although it would not be until 1994 that the actual band formed. 

The band expanded and continued to perform live. According to Menuck, joining the group was simple: &quot;It was like if anyone knew anybody who played an instrument and seemed like an okay person, they would sort of join up.&quot; The group&#x27;s number of members frequently changed during this time. Local musicians would often join the band for a handful of performances, then depart. The revolving door nature of the group&#x27;s membership frequently caused it strain before the release of &quot;F♯ A♯ ∞&quot;. After that release, the group stabilized around a nine-person lineup with Menuck, Moya and David Bryant on guitars, Pezzente and Thierry Amar on bass guitars, Aidan Girt and Bruce Cawdron on drums, and Sophie Trudeau and Norsola Johnson on violin and cello respectively. Moya would depart in 1998 to focus on HṚṢṬA, being replaced by Roger Tellier-Craig of Fly Pan Am. Tellier-Craig left in 2004 to devote more time to Fly Pan Am. In 2002, the band released their third album &quot;Yanqui U.X.O.&quot;, which was recorded in Chicago and engineered by Steve Albini.

The group was once misconstrued as being a band of terrorists. After stopping at a local gas station for fuel in the town of Ardmore, Oklahoma, during their 2003 tour of the United States, the station attendant working that day believed the group of Canadians to be terrorists. She quickly passed a note to another customer asking them to call the police. When the local police appeared, the group was held until it could be questioned by the FBI. Although the police were suspicious of the band&#x27;s anti-government documents and some photos it had (such as those of oil rigs), they found no incriminating evidence. After background checks were run, the ensemble was released from custody and continued on its way to its next show in Saint Louis. Efrim Menuck later spoke to the crowd during their appearance in Missouri about what happened to them and speculated that their origin was a motive for being released quickly (&quot;It&#x27;s a good thing we&#x27;re nice white kids from Canada&quot;). The incident was mentioned in Michael Moore&#x27;s book &quot;Dude, Where&#x27;s My Country?&quot;.

In July 2003, Constellation Records posted a note on their website reading: &quot;godspeed will be on hiatus for the better part of a year, while the band members work on their many other projects&quot;.

=== Reunion (2010–present) ===
On April 9, 2010, the band announced it was reuniting for an All Tomorrow&#x27;s Parties music event in the UK as well as further US dates. &quot;after a decade’s retreat, god’s pee has decided to roll again&quot;, read the statement. Mike Moya re-joined the band for the reunion, while original cellist Norsola Johnson declined to participate. The band played a full North American and European tour in 2011, and more dates in the UK including an appearance at the ATP &#x27;I&#x27;ll Be Your Mirror&#x27; music festival in London.

The following year, the band appeared at the Pitchfork Music Festival in Chicago, Coachella in California, and the All Tomorrow&#x27;s Parties I&#x27;ll Be Your Mirror festival in New York. Drummer Timothy Herzog began touring with the band after the departure of Bruce Cawdron.

In 2013, the band won the Polaris Music Prize for their fourth album &quot;&#x27;Allelujah! Don&#x27;t Bend! Ascend!&quot;, but it criticized the cost of the ceremony during the time of austerity, stating, &quot;Maybe the next celebration should happen in a cruddier hall, without the corporate banners and culture overlords.&quot; The band&#x27;s fifth album &quot;Asunder, Sweet and Other Distress&quot; was released on March 31, 2015, and the sixth album &quot;Luciferian Towers&quot; came out on September 22, 2017.

In August 2019, the band played new songs tentatively titled &quot;Glaciers&quot; and &quot;Cliff&quot;. They would appear on the band&#x27;s seventh album &quot;G_d&#x27;s Pee at State&#x27;s End!,&quot; which was released on April 2, 2021.

In February 2022, a copy of &quot;All Lights Fucked on the Hairy Amp Drooling&quot; was posted to 4chan&#x27;s music board. The band eventually uploaded the full audio of the tape to its official Bandcamp page on February 14.

On February 24, 2024, the band debuted three new untitled songs at the Knockdown Center in New York City. On August 28, 2024, the band announced its eighth album, &quot;No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead&quot;, supported by the lead single &quot;Grey Rubble – Green Shoots&quot;. Its title references the death toll of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip during the Israel–Hamas war at the time of the album&#x27;s conception.

==Live concerts==

Film loop projections are an important aspect of the group&#x27;s live performances, explained by Efrim Menuck as &quot;[putting] the whole into context&quot;.

The band is taper-friendly; they allow audience members to record their live performances, and fans often release new material before the band makes an official recording.

The band toured Australia and New Zealand for the first time in February 2013, including a performance at the All Tomorrow&#x27;s Parties I&#x27;ll Be Your Mirror festival in Melbourne. They toured China for the first time in April 2013, giving performances in Shanghai and Beijing, and revisited China in March 2016.

The band supported Nine Inch Nails on its Tension tour in October 2013.

In 2015 and 2016, the band performed numerous concert and festival shows around the world. Two new songs were previewed in many of the shows picking up the fan titles &quot;Buildings&quot; and &quot;Railroads&quot; from the projections that accompanied them. The band also lent live performances of their songs to a revival of the 2005 work &quot;monumental&quot; by Canadian dance troupe Holy Body Tattoo in 2016.

The band is set to perform in ten countries across Europe and North America in 2024 and 2025.

== Politics ==
&quot;The Guardian&quot; wrote that Godspeed You! Black Emperor &quot;don&#x27;t simply espouse anti-capitalism but embody it, rejecting the selfish individualism at its core&quot;, pointing out how the band&#x27;s operation as a collective challenges traditional notions of hierarchy. In a 2012 interview, Menuck said, &quot;All music is political, right? You either make music that pleases the king and his court, or you make music for the serfs outside the walls ... We started making this noise together when we were young and broke. Whatever politics we had were born out of living through a time when the dominant narrative was that everything was fine.&quot; Several of its songs also incorporate voice samples which express political sentiments, most notably &quot;The Dead Flag Blues&quot; (on &quot;F♯ A♯ ∞&quot;) and &quot;BBF3&quot; (on &quot;Slow Riot for New Zerø Kanada&quot;).

In 2014 Menuck identified himself as an anarchist. This perspective has influenced the band&#x27;s political activism. The back cover of &quot;Yanqui U.X.O.&quot; depicts the relationships of several major record labels to the military–industrial complex. The liner notes of &quot;&#x27;Allelujah! Don&#x27;t Bend! Ascend!&quot; criticize anti-environmentalist economic development and student protest suppression. 

Menuck is a vocal critic of Israeli policy towards Palestinians. The liner notes to &quot;Yanqui U.X.O.&quot; (2002) describe the song &quot;09-15-00&quot; as &quot;Ariel Sharon surrounded by 1,000 Israeli soldiers marching on al-Haram Ash-Sharif &amp; provoking another Intifada&quot;. The title of &quot;No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead&quot; references the death toll of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip during the Gaza war at the time of the album&#x27;s conception. In 2021, the band joined more than 600 other musicians in pledging to boycott Israel.

==Members==
Current
*Efrim Menuck – guitar, tape loops, keyboards (1994–2003, 2010–present)
*Mauro Pezzente – bass guitar (1994–2003, 2010–present)
*Mike Moya – guitar (1994–1998, 2010–present)
*Thierry Amar – double bass, bass guitar (1997–2003, 2010–present)
*David Bryant – guitar, tape loops (1997–2003, 2010–present)
*Aidan Girt – drums, percussion (1997–2003, 2010–present)
*Sophie Trudeau – violin (1997–2003, 2010–present)
*Karl Lemieux – film projections (2010–present)
*Timothy Herzog – drums, percussion (2012–present)
*Philippe Léonard – film projections (2015–present)

Former
*Mark Littlefair – film projections (1998–2000)
*Thea Pratt – French horn (1995–1997)
*Bruce Cawdron – drums, percussion (1997–2003, 2010–2012)
*Norsola Johnson – cello (1997–2003)
*Grayson Walker – accordion (1997)
*Christophe Comte – violin (1997; died 2023)
*Roger Tellier-Craig – guitar (1998–2003)
*Fluffy Erskine – film projections (2003)
*Jean-Sébastian Truchy – film projections (2000-2002)
*Dano LeBlanc – drums (1995; died 2023)
*Jesse Pratt – violin (bef. 1997)
Timeline


==Discography==
Studio albums
*&quot;F♯ A♯ ∞&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Lift Your Skinny Fists like Antennas to Heaven&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Yanqui U.X.O.&quot; (2002)
*&quot;&#x27;Allelujah! Don&#x27;t Bend! Ascend!&quot; (2012)
*&quot;Asunder, Sweet and Other Distress&quot; (2015)
*&quot;Luciferian Towers&quot; (2017)
*&quot;G_d&#x27;s Pee at State&#x27;s End!&quot; (2021)
*&quot;No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead&quot; (2024)

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Godspeed You! Black Emperor on Constellation Records
* 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q181341" start="0" end="27" title="Godspeed You! Black Emperor" label="Godspeed You! Black Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181341" start="54" end="59" title="Godspeed You! Black Emperor" label="GY!BE"/>
<link wikidata="Q181341" start="63" end="71" title="Godspeed You! Black Emperor" label="Godspeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q209137" start="87" end="96" title="post-rock" label="post-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="121" end="129" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="131" end="137" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128185" start="185" end="198" title="Constellation Records (Canada)" label="Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="203" end="227" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483981" start="299" end="306" title="F♯ A♯ ∞" label="F♯ A♯ ∞"/>
<link wikidata="Q920503" start="387" end="433" title="Lift Your Skinny Fists Like Antennas to Heaven" label="Lift Your Skinny Fists Like Antennas to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338941" start="564" end="577" title="Yanqui U.X.O." label="Yanqui U.X.O."/>
<link wikidata="Q3612456" start="760" end="795" title="&amp;#x27;Allelujah! Don&amp;#x27;t Bend! Ascend!" label="Allelujah! Don&amp;#x27;t Bend! Ascend!"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823486" start="817" end="841" title="2013 Polaris Music Prize" label="2013 Polaris Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363378" start="870" end="903" title="Asunder, Sweet and Other Distress" label="Asunder, Sweet and Other Distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101613" start="924" end="941" title="Luciferian Towers" label="Luciferian Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q106040617" start="962" end="997" title="G_d&amp;#x27;s Pee at State&amp;#x27;s End!" label="G_d&amp;#x27;s Pee at State&amp;#x27;s End!"/>
<link wikidata="Q130060587" start="1021" end="1064" title="No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead" label="No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="1106" end="1120" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q209137" start="1166" end="1175" title="post-rock" label="post-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q113558" start="1300" end="1310" title="crescendo" label="crescendos"/>
<link wikidata="Q360982" start="1319" end="1335" title="field recordings" label="field recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428637" start="1340" end="1351" title="spoken word" label="spoken word"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="1377" end="1386" title="dystopian" label="dystopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="1388" end="1397" title="anarchist" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="1402" end="1410" title="anti-war" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707384" start="1464" end="1476" title="side project" label="side project"/>
<link wikidata="Q300557" start="1489" end="1549" title="Thee Silver Mt. Zion Memorial Orchestra &amp;amp; Tra-La-La Band" label="Thee Silver Mt. Zion Memorial Orchestra &amp;amp; Tra-La-La Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q784664" start="1551" end="1561" title="Fly Pan Am" label="Fly Pan Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q472281" start="1563" end="1568" title="HṚṢṬA" label="HṚṢṬA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398543" start="1570" end="1578" title="Esmerine" label="Esmerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129668" start="1584" end="1602" title="Set Fire to Flames" label="Set Fire to Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1699" end="1707" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1709" end="1715" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q454876" start="1720" end="1732" title="Efrim Menuck" label="Efrim Menuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="1734" end="1740" title="Electric guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848128" start="1743" end="1752" title="Mike Moya" label="Mike Moya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793918" start="1767" end="1781" title="Mauro Pezzente" label="Mauro Pezzente"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="1783" end="1787" title="Bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q866882" start="1824" end="1852" title="God Speed You! Black Emperor" label="God Speed You! Black Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q838368" start="1876" end="1891" title="black-and-white" label="black-and-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="1892" end="1903" title="Documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066464" start="1916" end="1934" title="Mitsuo Yanagimachi" label="Mitsuo Yanagimachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022116" start="1968" end="1987" title="Bōsōzoku" label="Japanese biker gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q603379" start="2302" end="2345" title="All Lights Fucked on the Hairy Amp Drooling" label="All Lights Fucked on the Hairy Amp Drooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483981" start="3009" end="3016" title="F♯ A♯ ∞" label="F♯ A♯ ∞"/>
<link wikidata="Q37764783" start="3115" end="3127" title="David Bryant (musician)" label="David Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q472281" start="3333" end="3338" title="HṚṢṬA" label="HṚṢṬA"/>
<link wikidata="Q784664" start="3381" end="3391" title="Fly Pan Am" label="Fly Pan Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338941" start="3506" end="3519" title="Yanqui U.X.O." label="Yanqui U.X.O."/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3549" end="3556" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="3575" end="3587" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="3641" end="3651" title="terrorists" label="terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q639640" start="3715" end="3732" title="Ardmore, Oklahoma" label="Ardmore, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="4033" end="4036" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087682" start="4215" end="4231" title="background check" label="background check"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="4327" end="4338" title="St. Louis, MO" label="Saint Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q454876" start="4340" end="4352" title="Efrim Menuck" label="Efrim Menuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="4622" end="4635" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400963" start="4654" end="4684" title="Dude, Where&amp;#x27;s My Country?" label="Dude, Where&amp;#x27;s My Country?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941020" start="4990" end="5017" title="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties (music festival)" label="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941020" start="5405" end="5429" title="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties (music festival)" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Be Your Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274477" start="5508" end="5532" title="Pitchfork Music Festival" label="Pitchfork Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q889872" start="5545" end="5554" title="Coachella (festival)" label="Coachella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941020" start="5578" end="5605" title="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties (festival)" label="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q685954" start="5769" end="5788" title="Polaris Music Prize" label="Polaris Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612456" start="5812" end="5865" title="&amp;#x27;Allelujah! Don&amp;#x27;t Bend! Ascend!" label="&amp;quot;&amp;#x27;Allelujah! Don&amp;#x27;t Bend! Ascend!&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363378" start="6109" end="6142" title="Asunder, Sweet and Other Distress" label="Asunder, Sweet and Other Distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101613" start="6207" end="6224" title="Luciferian Towers" label="Luciferian Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q106040617" start="6426" end="6461" title="G_d&amp;#x27;s Pee at State&amp;#x27;s End!" label="G_d&amp;#x27;s Pee at State&amp;#x27;s End!"/>
<link wikidata="Q603379" start="6541" end="6584" title="All Lights Fucked on the Hairy Amp Drooling" label="All Lights Fucked on the Hairy Amp Drooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q238330" start="6605" end="6610" title="4chan" label="4chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q545966" start="6703" end="6711" title="Bandcamp" label="Bandcamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q113987454" start="6805" end="6821" title="Knockdown Center" label="Knockdown Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6825" end="6838" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6903" end="6946" title="No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead" label="No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="7082" end="7092" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="7104" end="7120" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q454876" start="7283" end="7295" title="Efrim Menuck" label="Efrim Menuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q558325" start="7358" end="7363" title="Bootleg recording" label="taper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941020" start="7629" end="7656" title="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties (music festival)" label="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="7857" end="7872" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151529" start="7880" end="7892" title="Twenty Thirteen Tour" label="Tension tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884949" start="8300" end="8316" title="Holy Body Tattoo" label="Holy Body Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="8443" end="8455" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q389647" start="8533" end="8548" title="anti-capitalism" label="anti-capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849370" start="9292" end="9321" title="Slow Riot for New Zerø Kanada" label="Slow Riot for New Zerø Kanada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="9371" end="9380" title="Anarchism" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338941" start="9474" end="9487" title="Yanqui U.X.O." label="Yanqui U.X.O."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9531" end="9550" title="Music industry#Sales statistics" label="major record labels"/>
<link wikidata="Q744593" start="9558" end="9585" title="military–industrial complex" label="military–industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612456" start="9606" end="9659" title="&amp;#x27;Allelujah! Don&amp;#x27;t Bend! Ascend!" label="&amp;quot;&amp;#x27;Allelujah! Don&amp;#x27;t Bend! Ascend!&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="9817" end="9828" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338941" start="9838" end="9851" title="Yanqui U.X.O." label="Yanqui U.X.O."/>
<link wikidata="Q60206" start="9913" end="9925" title="Ariel Sharon" label="Ariel Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="9946" end="9962" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israeli soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="9975" end="9994" title="Temple Mount" label="al-Haram Ash-Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q49106" start="10019" end="10027" title="Second Intifada" label="Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10054" end="10097" title="No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead" label="No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="10153" end="10163" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="10175" end="10183" title="Gaza war" label="Gaza war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923009" start="10298" end="10312" title="Boycotts of Israel" label="boycott Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q454876" start="10336" end="10348" title="Efrim Menuck" label="Efrim Menuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274615" start="10359" end="10369" title="tape loops" label="tape loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793918" start="10408" end="10422" title="Mauro Pezzente" label="Mauro Pezzente"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848128" start="10464" end="10473" title="Mike Moya" label="Mike Moya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784025" start="10510" end="10522" title="Thierry Amar" label="Thierry Amar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37764783" start="10577" end="10589" title="David Bryant (musician)" label="David Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696692" start="10638" end="10648" title="Aidan Girt" label="Aidan Girt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563076" start="10696" end="10710" title="Sophie Trudeau (musician)" label="Sophie Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q30727048" start="10747" end="10759" title="Karl Lemieux" label="Karl Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q668500" start="10762" end="10777" title="film projection" label="film projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q668500" start="10865" end="10880" title="film projection" label="film projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q163759" start="10967" end="10978" title="French horn" label="French horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="11104" end="11113" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483981" start="11426" end="11433" title="F♯ A♯ ∞" label="F♯ A♯ ∞"/>
<link wikidata="Q920503" start="11454" end="11500" title="Lift Your Skinny Fists like Antennas to Heaven" label="Lift Your Skinny Fists like Antennas to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338941" start="11521" end="11534" title="Yanqui U.X.O." label="Yanqui U.X.O."/>
<link wikidata="Q3612456" start="11555" end="11596" title="&amp;#x27;Allelujah! Don&amp;#x27;t Bend! Ascend!" label="&amp;#x27;Allelujah! Don&amp;#x27;t Bend! Ascend!"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363378" start="11617" end="11650" title="Asunder, Sweet and Other Distress" label="Asunder, Sweet and Other Distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101613" start="11671" end="11688" title="Luciferian Towers" label="Luciferian Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q106040617" start="11709" end="11744" title="G_d&amp;#x27;s Pee at State&amp;#x27;s End!" label="G_d&amp;#x27;s Pee at State&amp;#x27;s End!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11765" end="11808" title="No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead" label="No Title as of 13 February 2024 28,340 Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128185" start="11903" end="11924" title="Constellation Records (Canada)" label="Constellation Records"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158478" wikidata="Q8010" url="?curid=158478" title="Pedestrian crossing">
<text>A pedestrian crossing (or crosswalk in American and Canadian English) is a place designated for pedestrians to cross a road, street or avenue. The term &quot;pedestrian crossing&quot; is also used in the Vienna and Geneva Conventions, both of which pertain to road signs and road traffic.

Marked pedestrian crossings are often found at intersections, but may also be at other points on busy roads that would otherwise be too unsafe to cross without assistance due to vehicle numbers, speed or road widths. They are also commonly installed where large numbers of pedestrians are attempting to cross (such as in shopping areas) or where vulnerable road users (such as school children) regularly cross. Rules govern usage of the pedestrian crossings to ensure safety; for example, in some areas, the pedestrian must be more than halfway across the crosswalk before the driver proceeds, and in other areas, jaywalking laws are in place which restrict pedestrians from crossing away from marked crossing facilities.

Pedestrian crossings using signals clearly separate when each type of traffic (pedestrians or road vehicles) can use the crossing. Crossings without signals generally assist pedestrians, and usually prioritise pedestrians, depending on the locality. Pelican crossings use signals to keep pedestrians together where they can be seen by motorists, and where they can cross most safely across the flow of vehicular traffic, whereas zebra crossings are uncontrolled and more appropriate for lower flow numbers. What appears to be just pedestrian crossings can also be created largely as a traffic calming technique, especially when combined with other features like pedestrian priority, refuge islands, or raised surfaces.

==History==

Pedestrian crossings already existed more than 2,000 years ago, as can be seen in the ruins of Pompeii. Blocks raised on the road allowed pedestrians to cross the street without having to step onto the road itself which doubled up as Pompeii&#x27;s drainage and sewage disposal system. The spaces between the blocks allowed horse-drawn carts to pass along the road.

The first pedestrian crossing signal was erected in Bridge Street, Westminster, London, in December 1868. It was the idea of John Peake Knight, a railway engineer, who thought that it would provide a means to safely allow pedestrians to cross this busy thoroughfare. The signal consisted of a semaphore arm (manufactured by Saxby and Farmer, who were railway signaling makers), which was raised and lowered manually by a police constable who would rotate a handle on the side of the pole. The semaphore arms were augmented by gas illuminated lights at the top (green and red) to increase visibility of the signal at night. However, in January 1869, the gas used to illuminate the lights at the top leaked and caused an explosion, injuring the police operator. No further work was done on signalled pedestrian crossings until fifty years later.

On October 31, 1951, in the town of Slough, west of London, United Kingdom, the first pedestrian crossing in history was marked. The exact source of the name &quot;zebra crossing&quot; cannot be confirmed with certainty, but it is believed that it came from the visual similarity of the crossing with the stripes on zebra fur. It is believed that the term &quot;zebra crossing&quot; was first used by British politician and military officer James Callaghan. 

In the early 20th century, car traffic increased dramatically. A reader of &quot;The Times&quot; wrote to the editor in 1911:

&quot;Could you do something to help the pedestrian to recover the old margin of safety on our common streets and roads? It is heartrending to read of the fearful deaths taking place. If a pedestrian now has even one hesitation or failure the chance of escape from a dreadful death is now much less than when all vehicles were much slower. There is, too, in the motor traffic an evident desire not to slow down before the last moment. It is surely a scandal that on the common ways there should be undue apprehension in the minds of the weakest users of them. While the streets and roads are for all, of necessity the pedestrians, and the feeblest of these, should receive the supreme consideration.&quot;

According to Zegeer,
&quot;Pedestrians have a right to cross roads safely and, therefore, planners and engineers have a professional responsibility to plan, design, and install safe crossing facilities.&quot; 

== Criteria ==
Pedestrian crossing warrants are guidelines for the appropriate pedestrian crossing type for a site&#x27;s traffic conditions. There are several guidelines in use across the world, and guidance and practice differ between jurisdictions. An over-emphasis by traffic engineers on vehicular movement in these criteria is criticised for neglecting the safety of pedestrians.

PV2 warrants have been used in the UK, among other countries such as India, since they were developed in 1987. This warrant uses a calculation of peak pedestrian volume and peak vehicular volume to determine which type of crossing, if any, should be installed. For example, if 500 pedestrians cross the road per hour and 600 vehicles per hour use that road section, PV2 dictates that a pelican crossing should be installed.

The US Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) advises that crosswalk markings should &#x27;not be used indiscriminately&#x27; and encourages engineering studies at sites away from signalized intersections and STOP or Yield signs. Its guidance is against installing crossing markings (without extra engineering interventions) on high-traffic routes if the speed limit exceeds .

== Types and design ==
===Unmarked crossings===


In some countries, including the US, &quot;unmarked crosswalks&quot; are presumed to occur at intersections even if a crossing is not marked, except at locations where pedestrian crossing is expressly prohibited.

Pedestrian refuges are uncontrolled crossings with two dropped kerbs and a central traffic island, protected by kerbs. The island allows pedestrians to cross the road one direction of traffic at a time, which can be quicker and safer (they decrease pedestrian accidents by around 40%) than a lack of crossing. Additionally, they can narrow the road, slowing down vehicles and preventing them from overtaking. However, they may not afford pedestrians priority, meaning pedestrians may have a longer wait than a controlled crossing. They can also create pinch points, which can be dangerous for cyclists.

Courtesy crossings are uncontrolled crossings with coloured surfacing or some other non-formal suggestion that pedestrians may cross. They aim to encourage concentrated pedestrian crossings and to encourage drivers to let pedestrians cross the roads out of courtesy, rather than obligation. The inclusion of stripes (e.g. in paving), the presence of narrowing and visual narrowings of the road positively affect courtesy.

===Marked crossings===

The simplest marked crossings may just consist of some markings on the road surface. In the US these are known as &quot;marked crosswalks&quot;. In the UK these are often called zebra crossings, referring to the alternate white and black stripes painted on the road surface. If the pedestrian has priority over vehicular traffic when using the crossing, then they have an incentive to use the crossing instead of crossing the road at other places. In some countries, pedestrians may not have priority, but may be committing an offence if they cross the road elsewhere, or &quot;jaywalk&quot;. Special markings are often made on the road surface, both to direct pedestrians and to prevent motorists from stopping vehicles in the way of foot traffic. There are many varieties of signal and marking layouts around the world and even within single countries. In the United States, there are many inconsistencies, although the variations are usually minor. There are several distinct types in the United Kingdom, each with their own name.

Pedestrian cross striping machines are special equipment professionally used to paint zebra lines on the intersections or other busy road sections. Because of the characteristics of zebra crossings, parallel stripes that are wide but not long, the striping machine is often a small hand-guided road marking machine, which can easily be made to change direction. There are differences between the engineering regulations in different countries. The marking shoe of a pedestrian cross striping machine, which determines marking lines&#x27; width, is much wider than on other marking machines. A smaller marking shoe with wheels may be used to perform the road striping.

The section of road should be swept clean and kept dry. The painter first pulls a guiding line straight and fix the two ends on the ground. Then they spray or brush a primer layer on the asphalt or concrete surface. The thermoplastic paint in powder form is then melted into a molten liquid state for painting. Finally, the painter pulls or pushes the striping machine with the guide rod along the guiding line. As an alternative to thermoplastics, household paint or epoxy can be used to mark crosswalks.

===Signal-controlled crossings===

Some crossings have pedestrian traffic signals that allow pedestrians and road traffic to use the crossing alternately. On some traffic signals, pressing a call button is required to trigger the signal. Audible or tactile signals may also be included to assist people who have poor sight. In many cities, some or most signals are equipped with countdown timers to give notice to both drivers and pedestrians the time remaining on the crossing signal. In places where there is very high pedestrian traffic, Embedded pavement flashing-light systems are used to signal traffic of pedestrian presence, or exclusive traffic signal phases for pedestrians (also known as Barnes Dances) may be used, which stop vehicular traffic in all directions at the same time.

==== Pedestrian scramble ====

Some intersections display red lights to vehicles in all directions for a period of time. Known as a pedestrian scramble, this type of vehicle all-way stop allows pedestrians to cross safely in any direction, including diagonally.

===Footbridges and tunnels===

Footbridges or pedestrian tunnels may be used in lieu of crosswalks at very busy intersections as well as at locations where limited-access roads and controlled-access highways must be crossed. They can also be beneficial in locations where the sidewalk or pedestrian path naturally ascends or descends to a different level than the intersection itself, and the natural &quot;desire line&quot; leads to a footbridge or tunnel, respectively. 

However, pedestrian bridges are ineffective in most locations; due to their expense, they are typically spaced far apart. Additionally, ramps, stairs, or elevators present additional obstacles, and pedestrians tend to use an at-grade pedestrian crossing instead. A variation on the bridge concept, often called a skyway or skywalk, is sometimes implemented in regions that experience inclement weather.

===Crosswalk shortening===
Pedestrian refuges or small islands in the middle of a street may be added when a street is very wide, as these crossings can be too long for some individuals to cross in one cycle. These pedestrian refuges may consist of building traffic islands in the middle of the road; extending an existing island or median strip to the crosswalk to provide a refuge; or simply cutting through the existing island or median strip where the median is already continuous.

Another relatively widespread variation is the curb/kerb extension (also known as a bulb-out), which narrows the width of the street and is used in combination with crosswalk markings. They can also be used to slow down cars, potentially creating a safer crossing for pedestrians.

===Artwork crossings===

Some crosswalks, known as colourful crossings, include unique designs, many of which take the form of artwork. These works of art may serve many different purposes, such as attracting tourism or catching drivers&#x27; attention.

Cities and towns worldwide have held competitions to paint crosswalks, usually as a form of artwork. In Santiago, Chile, a 2013 work by Canadian artist Roadsworth features yellow-and-blue fish overlaid on the existing crosswalk. Other crossings worldwide also feature some of Roadsworth&#x27;s work, including a crosswalk in Montreal where the zebra stripes are shaped like bullets, as well as &quot;conveyor belt&quot; crosswalk in Winston-Salem, North Carolina. In Lompoc, California, several artists were commissioned to create an artwork as part of its &quot;Creative Crossings&quot; competition. Artist Marlee Bedford painted the first set of four crosswalks as part of the 2015 competition, and Linda Powers painted two more crosswalks in 2016 following that year&#x27;s competition.

In Tbilisi, Georgia, some Tbilisi Academy of Arts students and government officials jointly created a crossing that is designed to look like it is in 3D. A message on the white bars of the crosswalk reads, &quot;for your safety.&quot; 3D crosswalk designs have also been installed in China, with a &quot;floating zebra crossing&quot; implemented in a village in Luoyuan County to boost tourism; a multicolored 3-D crossing installed in Changsha, China to catch drivers&#x27; attention; and another multicolored crossing in Sichuan Province that serves the same purpose as the colored Changsha crosswalk.

Colored crosswalks might have themes that reflect the immediate area. For instance, Chengdu, China had a red-and-white zebra crossing with hearts painted on it, reflecting its location near a junction of two rivers. In Curitiba, Brazil, a crosswalk with its bars irregularly painted like a barcode served as an advertisement for a nearby shopping center, but was later painted over. A pedestrian scramble in the Chinatown section of Oakland, California, is painted with red-and-yellow colors to signify the colors of the flag of China.
Sometimes, different cities around the world may have similar art concepts for their crosswalks. Rainbow flag-colored crosswalks, which are usually painted to show support for the locality&#x27;s LGBT cultures, have been installed in San Francisco; West Hollywood; Philadelphia; and Tel Aviv. Crosswalks painted like piano keyboards have been painted in Long Beach; Warsaw; and Chongqing.

The United States Federal Highway Administration prohibits crosswalk art due to concerns about safety and visibility, but U.S. cities have chosen to install their own designs. Seattle had 40 crosswalks with unique designs, including the rainbow flag in Capitol Hill and the Pan-African flag in the Central District.

Colourful crossings have been criticised for creating accessibility issues. For blind and visually impaired pedestrians, consistency in design is important to ensure a safe crossing. Visually impaired people with limited sight and neurodivergent people may experience pain or confusion in interpreting colourful crossings or distress from visual noise. These crossings may therefore discriminate against marginalised groups in accessing public spaces.

===Raised crossings===

Raised crossings are a traffic calming measure that contains speed tables spanning the crossing. The crossings are demarcated with paint and/or have special paving materials. These crossings allow the pedestrian to cross at grade with the sidewalk and has been shown to reduce pedestrian crashes by 45% due to reduction of vehicular speeds and the prominence of the pedestrian in the driver&#x27;s field of vision.

==Distinctions by region==

===North America===


In the United States, crosswalks are sometimes marked with white stripes, though many municipalities have slightly different styles. The designs used vary widely between jurisdictions, and often vary even between a city and its county (or local equivalents). Most frequently, they are marked with two parallel white lines running from one side of the road to the other, with the width of the lines being typically wide.

Marked crosswalks are usually placed at traffic intersections or crossroads, but are occasionally used at mid-block locations, which may include additional regulatory signage such as &quot;PED XING&quot; (for &quot;pedestrian crossing&quot;), flashing yellow beacons (also known as rectangular rapid-flashing beacons or RRFBs), stop or yield signs, or by actuated or automatic signals. Some more innovative crossing treatments include in-pavement flashers, yellow flashing warning lights installed in the roadway, or HAWK beacon.

Crossing laws vary between different states and provinces and sometimes at the local level. All U.S. states require vehicles to yield to a pedestrian who has entered a marked crosswalk, and in most states crosswalks exist at all intersections meeting at approximately right angles, whether they are marked or not.

At crossings controlled by signals, generally the poles at both ends of the crosswalk also have the pedestrian signal heads. For many years these bore white and Portland Orange legends, but pictograms of an &quot;upraised hand&quot; (symbolizing ) and a &quot;walking person&quot; (symbolizing ) have been required since 2009.

===Europe===
In Spain, the United Kingdom, Germany and other European countries, 90% of pedestrian fatalities occur outside of pedestrian crossings. The highest rate is in the UK, which has fewer crossings than neighbouring European countries.

====Continental Europe====

Nearly every country of Continental Europe is party to (though has not necessarily ratified) the Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals (1968), which says of pedestrian crossings: &#x27;to mark pedestrian crossings, relatively broad stripes, parallel to the axis of the carriageway, should preferably be used&#x27;. This means that pedestrian crossing styles are quite uniform across the Continent. However, while the stripes are normally white, in Switzerland they are yellow.

Furthermore, the Vienna Convention on Road Traffic (1968) states that pedestrians should use pedestrian crossings when one is nearby (§6.c) and prohibits the overtaking of other vehicles approaching crossings, unless the driver would be able to stop for a pedestrian. The 1971 European supplement to that Convention re-iterates the former and outlaws the standing or parking of vehicles around pedestrian crossings. It also specifies signs and markings: the &quot;pedestrian crossing sign&quot; is on a blue or black ground, with a white or yellow triangle where the symbol is displayed in black or dark blue, and that the minimum width recommended for pedestrian crossings is 2.5 m (or 8-foot) on roads on which the speed limit is lower than 60 km/h (or 37 mph), and 4 m (or 13-foot) on roads with a higher or no speed limit.

In France, it is not mandatory that crosswalks exist. However, if there is one less than 50 meters (55 yards) away, pedestrians are obliged to use it.

In the east of Germany, including Berlin, the unique &quot;Ampelmännchen&quot; design for pedestrian lights are widely used. These signals originated in the former East Germany and have become an icon of the city and of ostalgie – nostalgia for East German life. A study has shown they are more effective than Western-style icons.

====United Kingdom and Ireland====

The United Kingdom and Ireland&#x27;s pedestrian crossings are quite distinct from the rest of Europe use animal names to distinguish different types of crossing. These conventions have been adapted in some ex-Empire countries, such as Hong Kong and Malta. &#x27;Look right&#x27; and &#x27;look left&#x27; markings are sometimes found in tourist areas, to remind pedestrians of the driving direction in the UK.

Zebra crossings are similar to their Continental counterparts, with white stripe markings, they must have orange flashing globes, called &#x27;belisha beacons&#x27;. They also normally have zig-zag markings to prevent overtaking and stopping of vehicles.

There are a number of different types of signal-controlled crossing. The traditional pelican crossing is no longer permitted in the UK, because it has been replaced with more intelligent puffin crossings – which have crossing sensors and low-level pedestrian signals – and pedex crossings, which features pedestrian countdown timers, however in Ireland only pelican crossings are installed. Puffin crossings are rare. Cyclists are sometimes permitted to use pedestrian crossings, such as toucan crossings (so named because TWO user types CAN cross) and sparrow crossings.

===Australia===
Pictograms are standard on all traffic light controlled crossings. Like some other countries, a flashing red sequence is used prior to steady red to clear pedestrians. Moments after, in some instances, a flashing yellow sequence (for motorists) can begin indicating that the vehicles may proceed through the crossing if safe to do so; this is fairly uncommon however.

There are two distinctive types of crossings in Australia: marked foot crossings and pedestrian crossing (also called zebra crossings). 

Marked foot crossings consist on two parallel broken white lines indicating where pedestrians must cross with pedestrian lights facing pedestrians and traffic lights facing drivers. These crossings are located at intersections with signals and may also be located between intersections. On most Australian foot crossings, PB/5 “Audio-Tactile Pedestrian Detector” push buttons are provided to allow pedestrians to request the green walk (green symbol) display.

On the other hand, zebra crossings are common in low traffic areas and their approaches may be marked by zigzag lines. When a pedestrian crossing is placed on a raised section of road they are known as wombat crossings and are usually accompanied by a 40km/h speed limit. Pedestrian crossings can have a yellow sign showing a pair of legs to indicate pedestrian priority. Children’s crossings are part-time crossings that usually operate during school zone hours, and at other approved times and locations, marked by red‑orange flags at both sides. Reflector signposting is also used at crossings in school zones.

==Signals==
===Pedestrian call buttons===

Pedestrian call buttons (also known as pedestrian push buttons or pedestrian beg buttons) are installed at traffic lights with a dedicated pedestrian signal, and are used to bring up the pedestrian &quot;walk&quot; indication in locations where they function correctly. In the majority of locations where call buttons are installed, pushing the button does not light up the pedestrian walk sign immediately. One Portland State University researcher notes of call buttons in the US, &quot;Most [call] buttons don&#x27;t provide any feedback to the pedestrian that the traffic signal has received the input. It may appear at many locations that nothing happens.&quot; However, there are some locations where call buttons do provide confirmation feedback. At such locations, pedestrians are more likely to wait for the &quot;walk&quot; indications.

Reports suggest that many walk buttons in some areas, such as New York City and the United Kingdom, may actually be either placebo buttons or nonworking call buttons that used to function correctly. In the former case, these buttons are designed to give pedestrians an illusion of control while the crossing signal continues its operation as programmed. However, in instances of the latter case, such as New York City&#x27;s, the buttons were simply deactivated when traffic signals were updated to automatically include pedestrian phases as part of every signal cycle. In such instances these buttons may be removed during future updates to the pedestrian signals. In the United Kingdom, pressing a button at a standalone pedestrian crossing that is unconnected to a junction will turn a traffic light red immediately, but this is not necessarily the case at a junction.

Sometimes, call buttons work only at some intersections, at certain times of day, or certain periods of the year, such as in New York City or in Boston, Massachusetts. In Boston, some busy intersections are programmed to give a pedestrian cycle during certain times of day (so pushing the button is not necessary) but at off-peak times a button push is required to get a pedestrian cycle. In neighboring Cambridge, a button press is always required if a button is available, though the city prefers to build signals where no button is present and the pedestrian cycle always happens between short car cycles. In both cases the light will not turn immediately, but will wait until the next available pedestrian slot in a pre-determined rotation.

===Countdown timers===
Some pedestrian signals integrate a countdown timer, showing how many seconds are remaining for the clearing phase. In the United States, San Francisco was the first major city to install countdown signals to replace older pedestrian modules, doing so on a trial basis starting in March 2001. The United States MUTCD added a countdown signal as an optional feature to its 2003 edition; if included, the countdown digits would be Portland Orange, the same color as the &quot;Upraised Hand&quot; indication. The MUTCD&#x27;s 2009 edition changed countdown timers to a mandatory feature on pedestrian signals at all signalized intersections with pedestrian clearance intervals (&quot;flashing upraised hand&quot; phases) longer than seven seconds. With the MUTCD guideline allotting at least one second to cross , this indicates that countdown timers are supposed to be installed on roads wider than . The countdown is not supposed to be displayed during the pedestrian &quot;walk&quot; interval (&quot;steady walking person&quot; phase).

Some municipalities have found that there are instances where pedestrian countdown signals may be less effective than standard hand/man or &quot;/&quot; signals. New York City started studying the pedestrian timers in an inconclusive 2006 study but only started rolling out pedestrian timers on a large scale in 2011 after the conclusion of a second study, which found that pedestrian countdown timers were ineffective at shorter crosswalks. Additionally, a 2000 study of pedestrian countdown timers in Lake Buena Vista, Florida, at several intersections near Walt Disney World, found that pedestrians were more likely to cross the street during the pedestrian clearance interval (flashing upraised hand) if there is a timer present, compared to at intersections where there was no timer present. A study in Toronto found similar results to the Florida study, determining that countdown timers may actually cause more crashes than standard hand/man signals. However, other cities such as London found that countdown timers were effective, and New York City found that countdown signals worked mainly at longer crosswalks.

Pedestrian countdown signals are also used elsewhere around the world, such as in Buenos Aires, India, Mexico, Taiwan, and the United Arab Emirates. In Mexico City, the walking man moves his feet during the countdown. In Taiwan, all the crossings feature animated men called xiaolüren (&quot;little green man&quot;), who will walk faster immediately before the traffic signal will change. There is also always a countdown timer.

===Variations===

In some countries, instead of &quot;don&#x27;t walk&quot;, a depiction of a red man or hand indicating when not to cross, the drawing of the person crossing appears with an &quot;X&quot; drawn over it.

Some countries around the Baltic Sea in Scandinavia duplicate the red light. Instead of one red light, there are two which both illuminate at the same time.

In many parts of eastern Germany, particularly the former German Democratic Republic, the design of the crossing man (Ampelmännchen) has a hat. There are also female &quot;Ampelmännchen&quot; in western Germany and the Netherlands. Other countries also use unusual &quot;walk&quot; and &quot;don&#x27;t walk&quot; pedestrian indicators. In southwest Yokohama, Kanagawa Prefecture, there are pedestrian signal lights that resemble Astro Boy. In Lisbon, some signals have a &quot;don&#x27;t walk&quot; indicator that dances; these &quot;dancing man&quot; signals, created by Daimler AG, were created to encourage pedestrians to wait for the &quot;walk&quot; indicator, with the result that 81% more pedestrians stopped and waited for the &quot;walk&quot; light compared to at crosswalks with conventional signals.

=== Leading Pedestrian Interval ===
In some areas, the signal timing technique of a Leading Pedestrian Interval (LPI) allows pedestrians exclusive access to a crosswalk, typically 3–7 seconds, before vehicular traffic is permitted. Depending on intersection volume and safety history, a normal right-turn-on-red (RTOR) might be explicitly prohibited during the LPI phase. LPI benefits include increased visibility and greater likelihood of vehicles yielding. LPI is among the tools being considered in the fatality-elimination toolkit of Vision Zero planners and advocates.

===Temporary signals===

In certain circumstances, there are needs to install temporary pedestrian crossing signals. The reasons may include redirecting traffic due to roadworks, closing of the permanent crossing signals due to repairs or upgrades, and establishing new pedestrian crossings for the duration of large public events.

The temporary pedestrian crossings can be integrated into portable traffic signals that may be used during the roadworks, or it can be stand-alone just to stop vehicles to allow pedestrians to safely cross the road without directing vehicle movements. When using the temporary pedestrian crossings signals for roadworks, there should be consideration on signal cycle time. The pedestrian crossing cycles may add longer delay to the traffics which may require additional planning on road work traffic flows.

Depending on the duration and the nature of the temporary signals, the equipment can be installed in different way. One way is to use the permanent traffic signals mounted temporary poles such as poles in concrete-filled barrels. Another way is to use portable pedestrian crossing signals.

==Enhancements for disabled people==

Pedestrian controlled crossings are sometimes provided with enhanced features to assist disabled people.

===Tactile indications===

Tactile cones near or under the control button may rotate or shake when the pedestrian signal is in the pedestrian &quot;walk&quot; phase. This is for pedestrians with visual impairments. A vibrating button is used in Australia, Germany, some parts of the United States, Greece, Ireland, and Hong Kong to assist hearing-impaired people. Alternatively, electrostatic, touch-sensitive buttons require no force to activate. To confirm that a request has been registered, the buttons usually emit a chirp or other sound. They also offer anti-vandalism benefits due to not including moving parts which are sometimes jammed on traditional push-button units.

Tactile surfacing patterns (or tactile pavings) may be laid flush within the adjacent footways (US: sidewalks), so that visually impaired pedestrians can locate the control box and cone device and know when they have reached the other side. In Britain, different colours of tactile paving indicate different types of crossings; yellow (referred to as buff coloured) is used at non-controlled (no signals) crossings, and red is used at controlled (signalised) locations.
Some crossing include a tactile map of the crossing geometry. For example, this crossing from Oslo shows (starting at the bottom) that the crossing consists of a curb, a bicycle lane, two lanes of traffic, a pedestrian island, two tram tracks, another island, then three more traffic lanes.
===Audible signals===

Crosswalks have adaptations, mainly for people with visual impairments, through the addition of accessible pedestrian signals (APS) that may include speakers at the pushbutton, or under the signal display, for each crossing location. These types of signals have been shown to reduce conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles. However, without other indications such as tactile pavings or cones, these APS units may be hard for visually impaired people to locate.

In the United States, the standards in the 2009 MUTCD require APS units to have a pushbutton locator tone, audible and vibrotactile walk indications, a tactile arrow aligned with the direction of travel on the crosswalk, and to respond to ambient sound. The pushbutton locator tone is a beep or tick, repeating at once per second, to allow people who are blind to find the device. If APS units are installed in more than one crossing direction (e.g. if there are APS units at a curb for both the north–south and west–east crossing directions), different sounds or speech messages may be used for each direction. Under the MUTCD guideline, the walk indication may be a speech message if two or more units on the same curb are separated by less than . These speech messages usually follow the pattern &quot;[Street name]. Walk sign is on to cross [Street Name].&quot; Otherwise, the walk indication may be a &quot;percussive tone&quot;, which usually consists of repeated, rapid sounds that can be clearly heard from the opposite curb and can oscillate between high and low volumes. In both cases, when the &quot;don&#x27;t walk&quot; indication is flashing, the device will beep at every second until the &quot;don&#x27;t walk&quot; indication becomes steady and the pedestrian countdown indication reaches &quot;0&quot;, at which point the device will beep intermittently at lower volume. When activated, the APS units are mandated to be accompanied by a vibrating arrow on the APS during the walk signal.

The devices have been in existence since the mid-20th century, but were not popular until the 2000s because of concerns over noise. As of the 2009 MUTCD, APS are supposed to be set to be heard only 6 to 12 feet from the device to be easy to detect from a close distance but not so loud as to be intrusive to neighboring properties. Among American cities, San Francisco has one of the greatest numbers of APS-equipped intersections in the United States, with APS installed at 202 intersections . New York City has APS at 131 intersections , with 75 more intersections to be equipped every year after that.

APS in other countries may consist of a short recorded message, as in Scotland, Hong Kong, Singapore and some parts of Canada (moderate to large urban centres). In Japan, various electronic melodies are played, often of traditional melancholic folk songs such as &quot;Tōryanse&quot; or &quot;Sakura&quot;. In Croatia, Denmark Israel, Sweden, and Hong Kong, beeps (or clicks) with long intervals in-between signifying &quot;don&#x27;t walk&quot; mode and beeps with very short intervals signifying &quot;walk&quot; mode; however, the standards differ by the implementing country (for example, the intervals between clicks in Hong Kong, for both &quot;walk&quot; mode and &quot;don&#x27;t walk&quot; mode, are shorter than the corresponding intervals in Sweden).

=== Relief symbol ===

On some pushbutton especially in Austria and Germany there is a symbolic relief showing the crossing situation for the visually impaired, so they can get an overview of the crossing.

The relief is read from the bottom up. It consists of different modules, which are put together according to the crosswalk. Each pedestrian crossing begins with the start symbol, consisting of an arrow and a broad line representing the curb. Subsequently, different modules for traffic lanes and islands follow. The relief is completed with a broad line.

Modules for traffic lanes consist of a dash in the middle and a symbol for the kind of lane right or left of the dash, depending on the direction from which the traffic crosses the crossing. If a crossing is possible from both directions, a symbol is located on both sides. If the pedestrian crossing is a zebra crossing, the middle line is dashed. A traffic light secured crossing has a solid line.

A cycle path is represented by two points next to each other, a vehicle lane by a rectangle and tram rails by two lines lying one above the other.

Islands are represented as a rectangle, which has semicircles on the right and left side. If there is a pushbutton for pedestrians on the island, there is a dot in the middle of the rectangle. If the pedestrian walkway divides on an island, the rectangle may be open on the right or left side.

===Key-based system===
In Perth, Western Australia, an extended phase system called &quot;Keywalk&quot; was developed by the Main Roads Department of Western Australia in response to concerns from disability advocates about the widening of the Albany Highway in that city in the mid-1990s. The department felt that extending the walk phase permanently on cross streets would cause too much disruption to traffic flow on the highway and so the Keywalk system was developed to allow for those who needed an extended green light phase to cross the road safely. A small electronic key adjusted the green/walk and flashing red/complete crossing phases to allow more time for the key holder to complete the crossing of the highway safely. The system was first installed at the junction of Albany Highway and Cecil Avenue. It is unclear what became of this system.

==Lighting==

There are two types of crosswalk lights: those that illuminate the whole crosswalk area, and warning lights. Both these lighting systems encourage oncoming traffic to yield for pedestrians only if necessary.

The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America currently provides engineering design standards for highway lighting. In the US, in conventional intersections, area lighting is typically provided by pole-mounted luminaires. These systems illuminate the crosswalk as well as surrounding areas, and do not always provide enough contrast between the pedestrian and his or her background.

There have been many efforts to create lighting scenarios that offer better nighttime illumination in crosswalks. Some innovative concepts include:

===Illuminating lights===
* Bollard posts containing linear light sources inside. These posts have been shown to sufficiently illuminate the pedestrian but not the background, consequently increasing contrast and improving pedestrian visibility and detection. Although this method shows promise in being incorporated into crosswalk lighting standards, more studies need to be done.
* Festooned strings of light over the top of the crosswalk.

===Warning lights===
To warn the oncoming traffic, these warning lights usually only rapidly flash when a pedestrian presses a button to use the crosswalk.
* In-pavement lighting oriented to face oncoming traffic (Embedded pavement flashing-light system).
* In-pavement, flashing warning lights oriented upwards (especially visible to children, the short-statured, and smombies)
* Pole-mounted, flashing warning lights (mounted similar to a traffic signal).
*Pedestrian warning signs enhanced with LED lights either within the sign face or underneath it.

In areas with heavy snowfall, using in-pavement lighting can be problematic, since snow can obscure the lights, and snowplows can damage them.

==Railway pedestrian crossings==
In Finland, fences in the footpath approaching the crossing force pedestrians and bicycles to slow down to navigate a zigzag path, which also tends to force that user to look out for the train.

Pedestrian crossings across railways may be arranged differently elsewhere, such as in New South Wales, where they consist of:
* a barrier which closes when a train approaches;
* a &quot;Red Man&quot; light; no light when no train approaching
* an alarm

In France, when a train is approaching, a red man is shown with the word STOP flashing in red (R25 signal).

When a footpath crosses a railway in the United Kingdom, there will most often be gates or stiles protecting the crossing from wildlife and livestock. In situations where there is little visibility along the railway, or the footpath is especially busy, there will also be a small set of lights with an explanatory sign. When a train approaches, the signal light will change to red and an alarm will sound until the train has cleared the crossing.

==Safety==
The safety of unsignalled pedestrian or zebra crossings is somewhat contested in traffic engineering circles.

Research undertaken in New Zealand showed that a zebra crossing without other safety features on average &quot;increases&quot; pedestrian crashes by 28% compared to a location without crossings. However, if combined with (placed on top of) a speed table, zebra crossings were found to reduce pedestrian crashes by 80%.

A five-year U.S. study of 1,000 marked crosswalks and 1,000 unmarked comparison sites found that on most roads, the difference in safety performance of marked and unmarked crossings is not statistically significant, unless additional safety features are used. On multilane roads carrying over 12,000 vehicles per day, a marked crosswalk is likely to have worse safety performance than an otherwise similar unmarked location, unless safety features such as raised median refuges or pedestrian beacons are also installed. On multilane roads carrying over 15,000 vehicles per day, a marked crosswalk is likely to have worse safety performance than an unmarked location, even if raised median refuges are provided. The marking pattern had no significant effect on safety. This study only included locations where vehicle traffic was not controlled by a signal or stop sign.

Traffic accidents are reduced when intersections are daylighted, i.e. visibility increased such as by removing adjacent parked cars.

==See also==

* Footpath
* Road surface marking
* Stile
* The Greenwalking
* Traffic light
* Pedestrian crossing flag

==References==
==External links==
* Bicycle and Pedestrian Statistics Federal Highway Administration (US)
* The Design of Pedestrian Crossings - Department for Transport (United Kingdom)
* Photos of pedestrian signals from various countries
* Investigating Improvements to Pedestrian Crossings FHWA.dot.gov</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8010" start="2" end="21" title="Pedestrian crossing" label="pedestrian crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010" start="26" end="35" title="Pedestrian crossing" label="crosswalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q221488" start="96" end="106" title="pedestrian" label="pedestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="119" end="123" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q79007" start="125" end="131" title="street" label="street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543083" start="135" end="141" title="Avenue (landscape)" label="avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q699366" start="204" end="210" title="Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="215" end="221" title="Geneva Convention" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788454" start="337" end="350" title="Junction (road)" label="intersections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814666" start="904" end="914" title="jaywalking" label="jaywalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161439" start="1263" end="1279" title="Pelican crossing" label="Pelican crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q999646" start="1348" end="1356" title="motorist" label="motorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566551" start="1389" end="1395" title="safety" label="safely"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="1415" end="1424" title="vehicle" label="vehicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q4323994" start="1425" end="1432" title="traffic" label="traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328304" start="1442" end="1456" title="zebra crossing" label="zebra crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198538" start="1598" end="1613" title="traffic calming" label="traffic calming"/>
<link wikidata="Q350871" start="1696" end="1709" title="refuge island" label="refuge island"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="1841" end="1848" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="2180" end="2191" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2193" end="2199" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q211907" start="2994" end="3000" title="Slough" label="Slough"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="3499" end="3508" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q800352" start="5282" end="5323" title="Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" label="Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452193" start="6011" end="6025" title="traffic island" label="traffic island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328304" start="7157" end="7171" title="zebra crossing" label="zebra crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814666" start="7557" end="7564" title="Jaywalking" label="jaywalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7841" end="7854" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392287" start="8014" end="8048" title="Road marking machine" label="Pedestrian cross striping machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392287" start="8667" end="8680" title="road striping" label="road striping"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="8698" end="8702" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="8870" end="8877" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="8881" end="8889" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q174219" start="8917" end="8922" title="paint" label="paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q143983" start="9151" end="9156" title="epoxy" label="epoxy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9381" end="9392" title="#Call button" label="call button"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9428" end="9435" title="#Audible signals" label="Audible"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9439" end="9446" title="#Tactile indications" label="tactile"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="9507" end="9512" title="Visual perception" label="sight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9569" end="9585" title="#Countdown timers" label="countdown timers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370009" start="9731" end="9770" title="Embedded pavement flashing-light system" label="Embedded pavement flashing-light system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208212" start="9826" end="9873" title="pedestrian scramble" label="exclusive traffic signal phases for pedestrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="10041" end="10051" title="Traffic light" label="red lights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10086" end="10102" title="Traffic light#Traffic signal cycles" label="a period of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208212" start="10115" end="10134" title="pedestrian scramble" label="pedestrian scramble"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583377" start="10157" end="10169" title="all-way stop" label="all-way stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068842" start="10277" end="10287" title="Footbridge" label="Footbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="10303" end="10309" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="10402" end="10421" title="limited-access road" label="limited-access road"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="10427" end="10452" title="controlled-access highway" label="controlled-access highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361100" start="11033" end="11039" title="skyway" label="skyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11663" start="11114" end="11121" title="weather" label="weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q350871" start="11151" end="11168" title="Pedestrian refuge" label="Pedestrian refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452193" start="11382" end="11396" title="traffic island" label="traffic island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673934" start="11457" end="11469" title="median strip" label="median strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873268" start="11658" end="11677" title="curb extension" label="curb/kerb extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="12252" end="12260" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="12473" end="12481" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="12581" end="12610" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q852704" start="12615" end="12633" title="Lompoc, California" label="Lompoc, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="12942" end="12949" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34929" start="13089" end="13091" title="three-dimensional space" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209373" start="13301" end="13315" title="Luoyuan County" label="Luoyuan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q174091" start="13375" end="13383" title="Changsha" label="Changsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="13462" end="13469" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="13628" end="13635" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4361" start="13763" end="13771" title="Curitiba" label="Curitiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q856" start="13834" end="13841" title="barcode" label="barcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208212" start="13929" end="13948" title="pedestrian scramble" label="pedestrian scramble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100154" start="13956" end="13965" title="Chinatown, Oakland" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="13977" end="13996" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q131147" start="14065" end="14078" title="flag of China" label="flag of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q51401" start="14177" end="14189" title="Rainbow flag (LGBT movement)" label="Rainbow flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="14276" end="14280" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="14314" end="14327" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q846421" start="14329" end="14343" title="West Hollywood, California" label="West Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="14345" end="14357" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="14363" end="14371" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q901207" start="14397" end="14411" title="musical keyboard" label="piano keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="14434" end="14444" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="14446" end="14452" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="14458" end="14467" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q800112" start="14488" end="14518" title="Federal Highway Administration" label="Federal Highway Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="14646" end="14653" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041704" start="14723" end="14735" title="Capitol Hill, Seattle" label="Capitol Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029729" start="14744" end="14760" title="Pan-African flag" label="Pan-African flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060713" start="14768" end="14784" title="Central District, Seattle" label="Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915349" start="15018" end="15039" title="neurodivergent people" label="neurodivergent people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198538" start="15287" end="15302" title="traffic calming" label="traffic calming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278577" start="15325" end="15336" title="speed table" label="speed table"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="15816" end="15830" title="Municipality" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="15900" end="15913" title="Jurisdiction" label="jurisdictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628994" start="16668" end="16679" title="HAWK beacon" label="HAWK beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144084" start="17047" end="17052" title="Utility pole" label="poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231989" start="17158" end="17173" title="Portland Orange" label="Portland Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="17622" end="17640" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q699366" start="17695" end="17745" title="Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals" label="Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals (1968)"/>
<link wikidata="Q697986" start="18099" end="18139" title="Vienna Convention on Road Traffic" label="Vienna Convention on Road Traffic (1968)"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="19096" end="19102" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170097" start="19121" end="19134" title="Ampelmännchen" label="Ampelmännchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q155813" start="19282" end="19290" title="ostalgie" label="ostalgie"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="19434" end="19448" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="19453" end="19460" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="19666" end="19675" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="19680" end="19685" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747919" start="19985" end="20000" title="Belisha beacon" label="belisha beacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161439" start="20183" end="20199" title="pelican crossing" label="pelican crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258882" start="20285" end="20301" title="Puffin crossing" label="puffin crossings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828547" start="20586" end="20602" title="Toucan crossing" label="toucan crossings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771717" start="22725" end="22750" title="Portland State University" label="Portland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="23222" end="23235" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q769396" start="23283" end="23297" title="placebo button" label="placebo button"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065707" start="23429" end="23448" title="illusion of control" label="illusion of control"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="24178" end="24184" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="24437" end="24446" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q775594" start="24838" end="24847" title="countdown" label="countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q186612" start="24848" end="24853" title="timer" label="timer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154539" start="26342" end="26367" title="Lake Buena Vista, Florida" label="Lake Buena Vista, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="26399" end="26416" title="Walt Disney World" label="Walt Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="26647" end="26654" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="26827" end="26833" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="27114" end="27125" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q14480936" start="27237" end="27246" title="xiaoluren" label="xiaolüren"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="27829" end="27855" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170097" start="27889" end="27902" title="Ampelmännchen" label="Ampelmännchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="28121" end="28129" title="Yokohama" label="Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q127513" start="28131" end="28150" title="Kanagawa Prefecture" label="Kanagawa Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576732" start="28201" end="28210" title="Astro Boy (character)" label="Astro Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="28215" end="28221" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="28344" end="28354" title="Daimler AG" label="Daimler AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q368960" start="29122" end="29133" title="Vision Zero" label="Vision Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4181026" start="29327" end="29336" title="roadworks" label="roadworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="30417" end="30432" title="disability" label="disabled people"/>
<link wikidata="Q26336" start="30814" end="30827" title="electrostatic" label="electrostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q884259" start="31115" end="31141" title="Tactile paving" label="Tactile surfacing patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q177749" start="31215" end="31223" title="sidewalk" label="sidewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="31235" end="31252" title="visually impaired" label="visually impaired"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="34557" end="34566" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="34721" end="34730" title="folk song" label="folk song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039770" start="34746" end="34754" title="Tōryanse" label="Tōryanse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451268" start="34770" end="34776" title="Sakura Sakura" label="Sakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="36673" end="36678" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="36680" end="36697" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148389" start="38298" end="38305" title="Bollard" label="Bollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370009" start="38927" end="38966" title="Embedded pavement flashing-light system" label="Embedded pavement flashing-light system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502090" start="39062" end="39076" title="short stature" label="short-statured"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901351" start="39082" end="39089" title="smombie" label="smombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="39728" end="39743" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278577" start="40817" end="40828" title="speed table" label="speed table"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412010" start="41801" end="41829" title="intersection daylighting" label="intersections are daylighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352369" start="41916" end="41924" title="Footpath" label="Footpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392287" start="41927" end="41947" title="Road surface marking" label="Road surface marking"/>
<link wikidata="Q166557" start="41950" end="41955" title="Stile" label="Stile"/>
<link wikidata="Q14480936" start="41958" end="41974" title="The Greenwalking" label="The Greenwalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="41977" end="41990" title="Traffic light" label="Traffic light"/>
<link wikidata="Q121536495" start="41993" end="42017" title="Pedestrian crossing flag" label="Pedestrian crossing flag"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158479" wikidata="Q1752294" url="?curid=158479" title="Reverse discrimination">
<text>Reverse discrimination is a term used to describe discrimination against members of a dominant or majority group, in favor of members of a minority or historically disadvantaged group. Reverse discrimination based on race or ethnicity is also called reverse racism.

==Equality of opportunity and substantive equality==
Philosopher Richard Arneson argues that while a program of reverse discrimination favoring non-White candidates over White ones may violate equality of opportunity in a formal sense, it may more effectively promote substantive equality. The Dilemma of difference refers to the difference between the two equality concepts. 

== Affirmative action ==

Affirmative action is a set of practices that attempts to promote diversity in areas such as employment, education, and leadership, typically by reserving some positions for people of traditionally disadvantaged groups. This may result in discrimination towards successful majority groups who have greater technical qualifications than minority applicants.

Philosopher James Rachels posited that reverse discrimination as a factor in affirmative action in the United States may disadvantage some Whites, but without it, African Americans would likewise be disadvantaged by pervasive racial discrimination in society. Critics of racial preferences in affirmative action such as William Bennett and Carl Cohen have argued that explicitly using race for the purpose of ending racial discrimination is illogical and contrary to the principle of non-discrimination. Conversely, Alan H. Goldman argued that short-term violations of such a principle could be justified for the sake of equalizing social opportunities in the longer term. 
It is often argued by majority groups that they are being discriminated against for hiring and advancement because of affirmative action policies. However, critics of this argument often cite the &quot;symbolic&quot; significance of a job has to be taken into consideration as well as qualifications.

==By race, ethnicity or caste==
=== China ===

The affirmative action of the Chinese government has been called into question, especially from the ethnic group of Han Chinese. Unfair policies on Chinese college entrance exams (Gaokao) as well as human rights considered to be favoring the national minority have both been believed to be causing reverse discrimination in the mainland. Han chauvinism has been becoming more popular in mainland China since the 2000s, the cause of which has been attributed to the discontent towards Chinese affirmative action. The one-child policy was only introduced for Han Chinese, with minorities being allowed two or more babies.

=== India ===
In India, in higher education institutions and in employment by Government, around 49.5% seats are reserved for members of socially disadvantaged castes. Reserved category candidates can select a position from the Open 40% also.

In India, the term is often used by citizens protesting against reservation in India. In later years a &quot;creamy layer&quot; exception forbade reserved status to those whose parents held relatively high governmental posts.

=== United States ===

Opponents of affirmative action in the United States use the term &quot;reverse discrimination&quot; to say that such programs discriminate against White Americans in favor of African Americans. In the U.S., affirmative action has focused on the under-representation of ethnic minority groups and women, and attempted to remedy the effects of past discrimination in both government and the business world. Historian Nancy MacLean writes that during the 1980s and 1990s, &quot;so-called reverse discrimination occurred on an inconsequential scale&quot;. The number of reverse discrimination cases filed with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) doubled in the 1990s and continued to reflect a growing percentage of all discrimination cases .

==== Colleges ====

White college applicants who have felt passed over in favor of less-qualified Black students as a result of affirmative action in college admissions have described such programs as &quot;reverse discrimination&quot;. Elizabeth Purdy argues that this conception of reverse discrimination came close to overturning affirmative action during the conservative resurgence of the 1980s and &#x27;90s after being granted legitimacy by the U.S. Supreme Court&#x27;s ruling in &quot;Regents of the University of California v. Bakke&quot;, which ruled that Alan Bakke had been discriminated against by the school&#x27;s admissions program.

In 1996, the University of Texas had to defer the use of racial preferences in their college admissions after the US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit barred the school from considering race in admitting students. The ruling determined that diversity in education could not justify making race-based distinctions. &quot;Hopwood v. Texas&quot; in 1996 was a lawsuit brought by four white applicants to the Texas Law School who were denied admission even though their grade point averages were greater than minority applications that were accepted. The four white students also had greater Law School Admission Test scores.

However, in &quot;Grutter v. Bollinger&quot; in 2003, the Supreme Court allowed the University of Michigan Law School to continue to consider race among other relevant diversity factors. The decision was the only legally challenged affirmative-action policy to survive the courts. However, this ruling has led to confusion among universities and lower courts alike regarding the status of affirmative action across the nation.

In 2012, &quot;Fisher v. University of Texas&quot; reached the Supreme Court. The University of Texas allegedly used race as a factor in denying Abigail Fisher&#x27;s application, denying her a fair review. The lower courts upheld the program, but the Supreme Court vacated the judgment of the lower courts and sent the case back to the Fifth Circuit for review.

==== Complaints ====
A draft report on claims of reverse discrimination was prepared for the United States Department of Labor in 1995. Its analysis of employment discrimination cases in federal courts between 1990 and 1994 concluded that between 1 and 3 percent involved claims of reverse discrimination; and that a &quot;high proportion&quot; of the claims were found to be without merit.

Newer reports by the EEOC have found that less than 10% of race-related complaints were filed by whites. When national samples of whites were asked if they personally have experienced the loss of job, promotion, or college admission because of their race, 2%–13% say yes.

==By sex, gender or sexual orientation==
A 2019 study by S. K. Camara &amp; M. P. Orbe collected narratives of individuals describing situations where they were discriminated against based on their majority-group status (cases of reverse discrimination), a smaller portion reported gender discrimination.
A 2008 study found 18% of gender-related complaints and 4% of the court cases were filed by men.

A small number of heterosexuals reported experiencing discrimination based on their sexual orientation.

==By economic status==
In Reservation in India, a 10% quota is reserved for members of Economically Weaker Section, which has been criticized as reverse discrimination.

==By citizenship or nationality==
=== European Union ===

In European Union law, reverse discrimination occurs where a Member State&#x27;s national law provides for worse treatment of its own citizens or domestic products than other EU citizens/goods under EU law. This is permitted in the EU because of the legal principle of subsidiarity, that EU law is not applicable in situations purely internal to one Member State.

== See also ==
* Afrocentrism
* Double standard
* Minoritarianism
* Paradox of tolerance
* Prejudice plus power
* Pseudo-secularism
* White guilt

===Gender===
* All-women shortlists
* Housing discrimination
* Male expendability
* Women and children first (protocol)
* Women&#x27;s parking space

===Race===
* Anti-racism
* Black Economic Empowerment (South Africa)
* Racial color blindness
* Land reform in Zimbabwe (although directed towards a minority)
* Malaysian New Economic Policy
* &quot;Ricci v. DeStefano&quot;

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1752294" start="0" end="22" title="Reverse discrimination" label="Reverse discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="50" end="64" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q951894" start="250" end="264" title="reverse racism" label="reverse racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559613" start="332" end="347" title="Richard Arneson" label="Richard Arneson"/>
<link wikidata="Q912512" start="460" end="483" title="equality of opportunity" label="equality of opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775261" start="535" end="555" title="substantive equality" label="substantive equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681014" start="1041" end="1054" title="James Rachels" label="James Rachels"/>
<link wikidata="Q356112" start="1106" end="1145" title="affirmative action in the United States" label="affirmative action in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251932" start="1349" end="1364" title="William Bennett" label="William Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q962087" start="1369" end="1379" title="Carl Cohen (professor)" label="Carl Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25508172" start="1545" end="1560" title="Alan H. Goldman" label="Alan H. Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="2056" end="2074" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q936190" start="2082" end="2100" title="Government of China" label="Chinese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="2168" end="2179" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q670287" start="2232" end="2238" title="Gaokao" label="Gaokao"/>
<link wikidata="Q108486101" start="2390" end="2404" title="Han chauvinism" label="Han chauvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q221719" start="2568" end="2584" title="one-child policy" label="one-child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2920" end="2925" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q68104" start="2981" end="3001" title="reservation in India" label="reservation in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q356112" start="3180" end="3219" title="affirmative action in the United States" label="affirmative action in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="3315" end="3330" title="White Americans" label="White Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="3343" end="3360" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q31212681" start="3583" end="3596" title="Nancy MacLean" label="Nancy MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="3778" end="3817" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="4286" end="4298" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308137" start="4417" end="4465" title="Regents of the University of California v. Bakke" label="Regents of the University of California v. Bakke"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="4587" end="4606" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="4688" end="4729" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901376" start="4899" end="4915" title="Hopwood v. Texas" label="Hopwood v. Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18185" start="5045" end="5064" title="grade point average" label="grade point average"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612369" start="5220" end="5240" title="Grutter v. Bollinger" label="Grutter v. Bollinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454863" start="5639" end="5680" title="Fisher v. University of Texas (2013)" label="&amp;quot;Fisher v. University of Texas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="6087" end="6120" title="United States Department of Labor" label="United States Department of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q68104" start="7193" end="7213" title="Reservation in India" label="Reservation in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q28458624" start="7254" end="7281" title="Economically Weaker Section" label="Economically Weaker Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="7398" end="7416" title="European Union law" label="European Union law"/>
<link wikidata="Q466938" start="7664" end="7676" title="subsidiarity" label="subsidiarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876790" start="7777" end="7789" title="Afrocentrism" label="Afrocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q603742" start="7792" end="7807" title="Double standard" label="Double standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869224" start="7810" end="7825" title="Minoritarianism" label="Minoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363329" start="7828" end="7848" title="Paradox of tolerance" label="Paradox of tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136199" start="7851" end="7871" title="Prejudice plus power" label="Prejudice plus power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634144" start="7874" end="7891" title="Pseudo-secularism" label="Pseudo-secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995620" start="7894" end="7905" title="White guilt" label="White guilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728464" start="7922" end="7942" title="All-women shortlists" label="All-women shortlists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916202" start="7945" end="7967" title="Housing discrimination" label="Housing discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q39047923" start="7970" end="7988" title="Male expendability" label="Male expendability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113136" start="7991" end="8026" title="Women and children first (protocol)" label="Women and children first (protocol)"/>
<link wikidata="Q354170" start="8029" end="8055" title="Women&amp;#x27;s parking space" label="Women&amp;#x27;s parking space"/>
<link wikidata="Q582965" start="8070" end="8081" title="Anti-racism" label="Anti-racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064433" start="8084" end="8110" title="Black Economic Empowerment" label="Black Economic Empowerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148591" start="8128" end="8150" title="Racial color blindness" label="Racial color blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469058" start="8153" end="8176" title="Land reform in Zimbabwe" label="Land reform in Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q138211" start="8218" end="8247" title="Malaysian New Economic Policy" label="Malaysian New Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430395" start="8256" end="8274" title="Ricci v. DeStefano" label="Ricci v. DeStefano"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158480" wikidata="Q823508" url="?curid=158480" title="New Jersey Route 62">
<text>Route 62 is a state highway in the U.S. state of New Jersey. It begins at the centerline of U.S. Route 46 (US 46) along Union Boulevard (Passaic County Route 646) in the community of Totowa and continues northward to the merge of the Interstate 80 (I-80) westbound off-ramp at Exit 55B, where Route 62 ends. The route continues as Passaic County Route 646 in both directions, heading northbound to Paterson and southbound to Little Falls.

Route 62 was originally an alignment of Route S6, which was designated in 1929. The route went from the Caldwells in Essex County to the West Paterson corporate line. Route S6 was decommissioned in the 1953 renumbering and replaced with Route 62, which went from Totowa to West Paterson until being truncated to its current length.

==Route description==

Route 62 begins at an intersection with the off-ramp from US 46 eastbound and Passaic County Route 646 in the community of Totowa. The highway heads northward along Union Boulevard, intersecting with the on-ramp from Route 62 to US 46 eastbound. The route heads across a long bridge over the eastbound and westbound divided lanes of US 46. After crossing the bridge, Route 62 heads into a small industrial part of Totowa, where it intersects with the off-ramp from the westbound lanes of US 46. The highway continues northward, intersecting with Furler Street and Lackawanna Avenue with jughandles in the northeastern quadrant. Route 62 continues along Union Boulevard, becoming a divided highway. The highway crosses over a Norfolk Southern railroad line before meeting I-80 at interchange 55A, where the route&#x27;s designation terminates. The route continues into Paterson as County Route 646.

==History==

Route 62 was the original route of pre-1927 Route 12, and later of Route 6 (the predecessor of Route 46), designated 1927. When in 1929 Route 6 was redefined to bypass Paterson to the south, State Highway Route S6 was also designated to take on its old route west of Paterson. This route headed northbound from Totowa to Paterson following Union Boulevard, Totowa Avenue and McBride Avenue, ending at the Paterson-West Paterson (now Woodland Park) town line for several years, constituting a length of . Before the bypass of Paterson was completed in 1943, U.S. Route 46 followed Route S6 into the city, following the old Route 6 alignment of McBride Avenue, Spruce Street, and Market Street to its current alignment. In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering on January 1, 1953, Route S6 was renumbered to Route 62. Route 62 remained along this alignment before being truncated by 1980. Route 62 was left out of the Straight Line Diagrams produced by the New Jersey Department of Transportation in 2000, but was returned the next year. Route 62 received improvements of the interchange with US 46 in 2006 at a cost of $22.748 million (2006 USD) to repair the bridge over US 46, ramp reconfigurations and new resurfaced roadway.

==Major intersections==



==See also==
*

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q823508" start="0" end="8" title="New Jersey Route 62" label="Route 62"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788582" start="14" end="27" title="state highway" label="state highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="35" end="45" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="49" end="59" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q409675" start="92" end="105" title="U.S. Route 46" label="U.S. Route 46"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082888" start="183" end="189" title="Totowa, New Jersey" label="Totowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q811209" start="234" end="247" title="Interstate 80 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="398" end="406" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087494" start="425" end="437" title="Little Falls, New Jersey" label="Little Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q823508" start="480" end="488" title="New Jersey Route 62" label="Route S6"/>
<link wikidata="Q128077" start="557" end="569" title="Essex County, New Jersey" label="Essex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087672" start="577" end="590" title="West Paterson, New Jersey" label="West Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q409675" start="854" end="859" title="U.S. Route 46" label="US 46"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082888" start="919" end="925" title="Totowa, New Jersey" label="Totowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642279" start="1383" end="1392" title="jughandle" label="jughandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="1521" end="1537" title="Norfolk Southern" label="Norfolk Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q811209" start="1567" end="1571" title="Interstate 80 in New Jersey" label="I-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="1664" end="1672" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087672" start="2122" end="2135" title="West Paterson, New Jersey" label="West Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q867442" start="2433" end="2474" title="1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering" label="1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158482" wikidata="Q287088" url="?curid=158482" title="De minimis">
<text>De minimis is a legal doctrine by which a court refuses to consider trifling matters. The name of the doctrine is a Latin expression meaning &quot;pertaining to minimal things&quot; or &quot;with trifles&quot;, normally in the terms (&quot;The praetor does not concern himself with trifles&quot;) or &quot;de minimis non curat lex&quot; (&quot;The law does not concern itself with trifles&quot;). Queen Christina of Sweden (r. 1633–1654) favoured the similar Latin adage, &quot;aquila non &quot; (the eagle does not catch flies).

The legal history of &quot;de minimis&quot; dates back to the 15th century in the civil law, although there are earlier antecedents. It was incorporated into David Dudley Field&#x27;s Maxims of Jurisprudence of New York by the 1800s which was later exported by migrants such as John Chilton Burch to newer states such as California by the 1870s and Montana by the 1890s—as well as to other states such as North Dakota. 

The general term has come to have a variety of specialized meanings in various contexts as shown below, which indicate that beneath a certain low level a quantity is regarded as trivial, and treated commensurately.

== Examples of application ==

===Taxation===
Under U.S. tax rules, the &quot;de minimis&quot; rule governs the treatment of small amounts of market discount. Under the rule, if a bond is purchased with a small amount of market discount (an amount less than 0.25% of the face value of a bond times the number of complete years between the bond&#x27;s acquisition date and its maturity date) the market discount is considered to be zero and the discount on the bond will be considered to be a capital gain upon the bond&#x27;s disposition or redemption rather than ordinary income. Under Internal Revenue Service guidelines, the &quot;de minimis&quot; rule can also apply to any benefit, property, or service provided to an employee that has so little value that reporting for it would be unreasonable or administratively impracticable; for example, use of a company photocopier to copy personal documents – see &quot;de minimis&quot; fringe benefit. Cash is not excludable, regardless of the amount.

Specifically in U.S. State income tax, &quot;de minimis&quot; refers to the point at which withholdings should be initiated for a nonresident working in a state which taxes personal income. Not all U.S. states levy income taxes, and there is little consistency among nonresident &quot;de minimis&quot; standards for those that do. Some states base &quot;de minimis&quot; on the number of days worked (although the definition of what counts as a workday has been controversial), others on the dollars earned or a percentage of total income derived from work in the state, still others using a combination of methods. These inconsistencies have led to repeated attempts to pass the so-called Mobile Workforce State Income Tax Simplification Act without success.

===European Union usage===
According to European Union regulations, &quot;de minimis&quot; &quot;state aid&quot; is any amount of aid up to the &quot;de minimis&quot; ceiling of €300,000 provided from state funds to a business enterprise over a rolling three-year period. For businesses in the land transport sector, the &quot;de minimis&quot; ceiling is €100,000. If a business receives more than the &quot;de minimis&quot; ceiling amount of aid, it is subject to a different set of regulations.

Under European Union competition law, some agreements infringing Article 101(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (formerly Article 81(1) of the EC Treaty) are considered to be &quot;de minimis&quot; and therefore accepted. Horizontal agreement, that is one between competitors, will usually be &quot;de minimis&quot; where the parties&#x27; market share is 10% or less, and a vertical agreement, between undertakings operating at different levels of the market, where it is 15% or less.

Procurement of low value contracts is subject to limited regulation when its value falls below certain low thresholds.

===Criminology and crime===
In criminology, the &quot;de minimis&quot; or &quot;minimalist&quot; approach is an addition to a general harm principle. The general harm principle fails to consider the possibility of other sanctions to prevent harm, and the effectiveness of criminalization as a chosen option. Those other sanctions include civil courts, laws of tort and regulation. Having criminal remedies in place is seen as a &quot;last resort&quot; since such actions often infringe personal liberties – incarceration, for example, prevents the freedom of movement. In this sense, law making that places a greater emphasis on human rights, such as the European Convention on Human Rights, falls into the &quot;de minimis&quot; category. Most crimes of direct action (murder, rape, assault, for example) are generally not affected by such a stance, but do require greater justification in less clear cases.

The &quot;de minimis&quot; rule in North American drug law requires a &quot;usable&quot; quantity of the substance in question before charges can be brought, known as the &quot;minority rule&quot;.

In Canada, &quot;de minimis&quot; is often used as a standard of whether a criminal offence is made out at a preliminary stage. For a charge of second degree murder, the test being: &quot;could the jury reasonably conclude that accused actions were a contributing cause, beyond &quot;de minimis&quot;, of the victim&#x27;s death.&quot;

===Risk assessment===

In risk assessment, it refers to the highest level of risk that is still too small to be concerned with. Therefore, only risk levels above this de minimis level must be addressed and managed. Some refer to this as a &quot;virtually safe&quot; level.
It has application in the fields of auditing, modeling, and engineering, and may refer to situations of low (negligible) risk. It can be verified in ASA 1.

=== Charity tax deductions ===
In Australia donations to charities are tax deductible if they equal or exceed $2. The amount hasn&#x27;t changed since decimal currency replaced pounds, shilling and pence in 1966. $2 is equivalent to £1. Inflation has since rendered $2 trivial.

=== Copyright ===

Courts will occasionally not uphold a claim to copyright on modified public domain material if the changes are deemed to be &quot;de minimis&quot;. Similarly, courts have dismissed copyright infringement cases on the grounds that the alleged infringer&#x27;s use of the copyrighted work (such as sampling) was so insignificant as to be &quot;de minimis&quot;. For example, the &quot;NBA 2K&quot; video games that included copyrighted tattoos in the recreation of the players&#x27; likenesses were found to be in &quot;de minimis&quot; and not copyright-violating. However, in &quot;Bridgeport Music, Inc. v. Dimension Films&quot;, such a ruling was overturned on appeal, the US appeals court explicitly declining to recognize a &quot;de minimis&quot; standard for digital sampling.
&quot;De minimis&quot; was also invoked in the &quot;Trevor Newton v. Beastie Boys&quot; copyright infringement lawsuit, where a 6-second sample of Newton&#x27;s piece &quot;Choir&quot; was used in &quot;Pass the Mic&quot;; Newton lost the case.

==== In India ====
The principle of &quot;de minimis non curat lex&quot; can be used as defense in India in cases of copyright infringement. The important issue is that whether de minimis principle could be used as separate defence than fair use under section 52 of Indian Copyright Act. In &quot;India TV Independent News Service Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. v Yashraj Films Pvt. Ltd.&quot;, the court discussed the applicability of &quot;de minimis&quot; principle at length. Before this case the position was not very clear with regard to the applicability. The facts of the case were that five words were copied from a song of five stanzas. After applying the five well-known factors commonly considered by courts in applying &quot;de minimis&quot;, the court reached the conclusion that the infraction is trivial and attracts the defence of &quot;de minimis&quot;.

=== Duties and taxes on imports ===
The &quot;de minimis&quot; threshold is the value of a shipment that can be imported without payment of custom duties (import tariffs) or taxes (such as the value-added tax in the EU). 
In the United States, the &quot;de minimis&quot; import threshold was raised to $800 from $200 per person per day in 2016 to facilitate trade and to save on enforcement costs.
The change meant the U.S. had one of the highest &quot;de minimis&quot; levels in the world. By comparison, in 2024 the duty-free threshold was $673 in Australia, $166 in the EU, and $71 in Japan (measured in U.S. dollars).

In September 2024, the U.S. took executive action following an &quot;exponential&quot; increase in the number of &quot;de minimis&quot; shipments over the previous decade, from approximately 140 million to over one billion a year.
New regulations require additional data (such as the identity of the person claiming the exemption, and the 10-digit tariff classification number), and exclude products subject to tariffs under Sections 201 (mostly solar panels), 232 (steel/aluminum), and 301 (includes textiles, apparel and footwear).
The surge in &quot;de minimis&quot; shipments was largely attributed to e-commerce platforms, particularly those based in China such as Shein and Temu, which ship directly to U.S. consumers.
Shein and Temu are likely responsible for more than 30% of all packages shipped to the U.S. daily under the &quot;de minimis&quot; provision, and their shipments could be greatly reduced since Section 301 tariffs cover approximately 70% of textile and apparel imports from China.
According to a congressional report, Shein and Temu paid no import duties in 2022, while bricks-and-mortar rivals H&amp;M and Gap paid $205 million and $700 million, respectively.
In a February 1, 2025 executive order, newly-elected U.S. President Donald Trump announced an end to the &quot;de minimis&quot; duty exemption for packages from China, which comprise about 60% of all U.S. &quot;de minimis&quot; packages.
The policy was to take effect in just three days, but on February 7 it was paused (this type of change typically takes months), and the Commerce Department was put in charge of implementation.

Other countries are reviewing their tax and duty-free exemptions so as to avoid providing an advantage to low-value imports. For example, the European Union and South Africa have proposed the elimination of duty-free &quot;de minimis&quot; exemptions.
Since 2021, there has been no &quot;de minimis&quot; exemption for imports from value-added tax in the EU. 

===Planning===
In environmental planning in New Zealand, the use of the term &#x27;de minimis&#x27; is common in the legal and planning professions. While not defined under the Resource Management Act 1991, it is commonly used in case law in relation to an assessment of environmental effect, e.g. &quot;the potential adverse effect of one additional road user on the crossing is considered to be &quot;de minimis&quot;.&quot; It is used when an actual or potential effect may exist, but is so minor it is close to negligible or zero in nature.

===Education===
In &quot;Endrew v. Douglas County School District&quot;, the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously ruled, on March 22, 2017, that the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires more than &quot;de minimis&quot; efforts to provide equivalent educational opportunity to students with disabilities. The decision reversed a previous decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit.

===Logistics===
A de minimis threshold is a value set by a country to apply customs duty and tax rates on imported goods. De minimis refers to the minimum value of the goods below which no duties and taxes are collected by the Customs. The low-value of such items makes it counterproductive to apply normal customs procedures. The threshold varies from country to country. In addition, some countries do not have a de minimis rule, so everything gets taxed; other countries do not have customs duties, so nothing gets taxed.

=== Christian theology ===
The principle of &quot;de minimis non curat Lex&quot; has been commonly used in defence of the historical reliability of the Gospels. F. W. Upham used the term when speaking of &quot;the [...] minor differences that make up the larger part of the current argument against the Gospels.&quot; Simon Greenleaf&#x27;s &quot;Testimony of the Evangelists&quot; is perhaps the most famous application of legal rules to the Christian Gospels.

===Miscellaneous examples===
Following bus deregulation in Great Britain in 1986, small contracts for supplementary local bus services could be let by local authorities without competitive tendering. The Department for Transport&#x27;s &quot;Guidance on New De Minimis Rules for Bus Subsidy Contracts&quot; (2005) notes that &quot;The Transport Act 1985 (as amended by the 2000 Transport Act) introduced the provisions which govern the duties of local passenger transport authorities to secure local bus services where these would not otherwise be met. In the majority of cases these services have to be secured through competitive tender. The Service Subsidy Agreements (Tendering) Regulations provided local authorities with the scope to let any individual bus subsidy contract in any one year up to a certain maximum value without the need to competitively tender (the &quot;de minimis&quot; limits). There was also a maximum value that &quot;de minimis&quot; contracts could be let with any one operator in any one year.&quot;

Under the &quot;de minimis&quot; provision of the World Trade Organization&#x27;s Agreement on Agriculture there is no requirement to cap trade-distorting domestic support in any year during which the value of support does not exceed a certain percentage (5–10%) of the national production value per product or of all products taken together if the support is not attributable to any specific product category.

== See also ==
* List of Latin phrases
* Small claims court
* Sugar bowl (legal maxim)

== References ==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="116" end="121" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q52937" start="397" end="422" title="Queen Christina of Sweden" label="Queen Christina of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="465" end="470" title="adage" label="adage"/>
<link wikidata="Q352906" start="689" end="714" title="David Dudley Field II" label="David Dudley Field&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699479" start="809" end="827" title="John Chilton Burch" label="John Chilton Burch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689573" start="1220" end="1234" title="Taxation in the United States" label="U.S. tax rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="1628" end="1632" title="Bond (finance)" label="bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850816" start="1660" end="1672" title="capital gain" label="capital gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141694" start="1732" end="1747" title="ordinary income" label="ordinary income"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="1755" end="1779" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244948" start="2079" end="2116" title="de minimis fringe benefit" label="&amp;quot;de minimis&amp;quot; fringe benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q693464" start="2118" end="2122" title="Cash" label="Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603703" start="2190" end="2206" title="State income tax" label="State income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863423" start="2299" end="2310" title="U.S. State Non-resident Withholding Tax" label="nonresident"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="3148" end="3156" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660020" start="3434" end="3464" title="European Union competition law" label="European Union competition law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800856" start="3493" end="3507" title="Article 101 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Article 101(1)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3515" end="3562" title="Treaties of the European Union#Treaty on the functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122" start="3594" end="3603" title="Treaties of the European Union" label="EC Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577882" start="3938" end="3949" title="Government procurement in the European Union" label="Procurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q161733" start="4089" end="4100" title="criminology" label="criminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q831403" start="4192" end="4206" title="harm principle" label="harm principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761413" start="4330" end="4345" title="criminalization" label="criminalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="4418" end="4422" title="tort" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="4427" end="4437" title="regulation" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="4565" end="4578" title="incarceration" label="incarceration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="4687" end="4699" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="4713" end="4748" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="4828" end="4834" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="4836" end="4840" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="4842" end="4849" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551312" start="5018" end="5026" title="Drug prohibition law" label="drug law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058438" start="5530" end="5545" title="risk assessment" label="risk assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="6279" end="6288" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="6301" end="6314" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="6413" end="6435" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="6528" end="6536" title="Sampling (music)" label="sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q512849" start="6615" end="6621" title="NBA 2K" label="NBA 2K"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966602" start="6814" end="6855" title="Bridgeport Music, Inc. v. Dimension Films" label="Bridgeport Music, Inc. v. Dimension Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="7084" end="7096" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142432" start="7218" end="7230" title="Pass the Mic" label="Pass the Mic"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="8284" end="8291" title="Tariff" label="tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="8315" end="8330" title="value-added tax" label="value-added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q107377209" start="9415" end="9420" title="Shein" label="Shein"/>
<link wikidata="Q114258161" start="9425" end="9429" title="Temu" label="Temu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188326" start="9864" end="9871" title="H&amp;amp;M" label="H&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q420822" start="9876" end="9879" title="Gap Inc." label="Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025378" start="11412" end="11455" title="Individuals with Disabilities Education Act" label="Individuals with Disabilities Education Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q286918" start="11639" end="11682" title="U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16687744" start="11769" end="11773" title="Duty (tax)" label="duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="11912" end="11919" title="Customs" label="Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496235" start="12333" end="12370" title="historical reliability of the Gospels" label="historical reliability of the Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="12514" end="12521" title="Gospel" label="Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518882" start="12529" end="12551" title="Simon Greenleaf" label="Simon Greenleaf&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705900" start="12558" end="12586" title="Testimony of the Evangelists" label="Testimony of the Evangelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001216" start="12713" end="12746" title="bus deregulation in Great Britain" label="bus deregulation in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q284325" start="13009" end="13027" title="Transport Act 1985" label="Transport Act 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449623" start="13047" end="13065" title="Transport Act 2000" label="2000 Transport Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="13756" end="13780" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822829" start="13788" end="13812" title="Agreement on Agriculture" label="Agreement on Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q87248" start="14135" end="14156" title="List of Latin phrases" label="List of Latin phrases"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916251" start="14159" end="14177" title="Small claims court" label="Small claims court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634939" start="14180" end="14204" title="Sugar bowl (legal maxim)" label="Sugar bowl (legal maxim)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158483" wikidata="Q245247" url="?curid=158483" title="King's College London">
<text>King&#x27;s College London (informally King&#x27;s or KCL) is a public research university located in London, England. King&#x27;s was established by royal charter in 1829 under the patronage of King George IV and the Duke of Wellington. In 1836, King&#x27;s became one of the two founding colleges of the University of London. It is one of the oldest university-level institutions in England. In the late 20th century, King&#x27;s grew through a series of mergers, including with Queen Elizabeth College and Chelsea College of Science and Technology (in 1985), the Institute of Psychiatry (in 1997), the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; Hospitals and the Florence Nightingale School of Nursing and Midwifery (in 1998).
King&#x27;s has five campuses: its historic Strand Campus in central London, three other Thames-side campuses (Guy&#x27;s, St Thomas&#x27; and Waterloo) nearby and one in Denmark Hill in south London. It also has a presence in Shrivenham, Oxfordshire, for its professional military education, and another in Newquay, Cornwall, where its information service centre is based. Its academic activities are organised into nine faculties, which are subdivided into numerous departments, centres, and research divisions. In 2023/24, King&#x27;s had a total income of £1.271 billion, of which £256.9 million was from research grants and contracts. It has the fourth largest endowment of any university in the United Kingdom, and the largest of any in London. King&#x27;s is the fifth-largest university in the United Kingdom by total enrolment and receives over 68,000 undergraduate applications per year, making it the third-most popular university in the UK by application volume.

King&#x27;s is a member of academic organisations including the Association of Commonwealth Universities, the European University Association, and the Russell Group. King&#x27;s is home to the Medical Research Council&#x27;s MRC Centre for Neurodevelopmental Disorders and is a founding member of the King&#x27;s Health Partners academic health sciences centre, Francis Crick Institute and MedCity. It is the largest European centre for graduate and post-graduate medical teaching and biomedical research, by number of students, and includes the world&#x27;s first nursing school, the Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery. King&#x27;s is generally regarded as part of the &quot;golden triangle&quot; of universities located in the cities of Oxford, Cambridge and London. King&#x27;s has often had royal patronage by virtue of its foundation, with the late Queen Elizabeth II having been patron and her son King Charles III taking over patronage in May 2024.

King&#x27;s alumni and staff include 14 Nobel laureates; contributors to the discovery of DNA structure, Hepatitis C, the Hepatitis D genome, and the Higgs boson; pioneers of in-vitro fertilisation, stem cell/mammal cloning and the modern hospice movement; and key researchers advancing radar, radio, television and mobile phones. Alumni also include heads of states, governments and intergovernmental organisations; seventeen members of the current House of Commons, two Speakers of the House of Commons and thirteen members of the current House of Lords; and the recipients of three Oscars, three Grammys, one Emmy, one Golden Globe, and one Booker Prize.

== History ==
=== Foundation ===
King&#x27;s College, so named to indicate the patronage of King George IV, was founded in 1829 (though the roots of King&#x27;s medical school, St. Thomas, date back to the 16th century with recorded first teaching in 1561) in response to the theological controversy surrounding the founding of &quot;London University&quot; (which later became University College, London) in 1826. London University was founded, with the backing of Utilitarians, Jews and Nonconformists, as a secular institution, intended to educate &quot;the youth of our middling rich people between the ages of 15 or 16 and 20 or later&quot; giving its nickname, &quot;the godless college in Gower Street&quot;. The need for such an institution was a result of the religious and social nature of the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, which then educated solely the sons of wealthy Anglicans. The secular nature of London University gained disapproval, indeed, &quot;the storms of opposition which raged around it threatened to crush every spark of vital energy which remained&quot;.

The creation of King&#x27;s College as a rival institution represented a Tory response to reassert the educational values of the established order. More widely, King&#x27;s was one of the first of a series of institutions which came about in the early nineteenth century as a result of the Industrial Revolution and great social changes in England following the Napoleonic Wars. By virtue of its foundation King&#x27;s has enjoyed the patronage of the monarch, the Archbishop of Canterbury as its visitor and during the nineteenth century counted among its official governors the Lord Chancellor, Speaker of the House of Commons and the Lord Mayor of London.


==== Duel in Battersea Fields, 21 March 1829 ====

The simultaneous support of Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington (who was also Prime Minister of the United Kingdom then), for an Anglican King&#x27;s College London and the Roman Catholic Relief Act, which was to lead to the granting of almost full civil rights to Catholics, was challenged by George Finch-Hatton, 10th Earl of Winchilsea, in early 1829. Winchilsea and his supporters wished for King&#x27;s to be subject to the Test Acts, like the universities of Oxford, where only members of the Church of England could matriculate, and Cambridge, where non-Anglicans could matriculate but not graduate, but this was not Wellington&#x27;s intent.

Winchilsea and about 150 other contributors withdrew their support of King&#x27;s College London in response to Wellington&#x27;s support of Catholic emancipation. In a letter to Wellington, he accused the Duke to have in mind &quot;insidious designs for the infringement of our liberty and the introduction of Popery into every department of the State&quot;. The letter provoked a furious exchange of correspondence and Wellington accused Winchilsea of imputing him with &quot;disgraceful and criminal motives&quot; in setting up King&#x27;s College London. When Winchilsea refused to retract the remarks, Wellington – by his own admission, &quot;no advocate of duelling&quot; and a virgin duellist – demanded satisfaction in a contest of arms: &quot;I now call upon your lordship to give me that satisfaction for your conduct which a gentleman has a right to require, and which a gentleman never refuses to give.&quot;

The result was a duel in Battersea Fields on 21 March 1829. Winchilsea did not fire, a plan he and his second almost certainly decided upon before the duel; Wellington took aim and fired wide to the right. Accounts differ as to whether Wellington missed on purpose. Wellington, noted for his poor aim, claimed he did, other reports more sympathetic to Winchilsea claimed he had aimed to kill. Honour was saved and Winchilsea wrote Wellington an apology. &quot;Duel Day&quot; is still celebrated on the first Thursday after 21 March every year, marked by various events throughout King&#x27;s, including reenactments.

=== 19th century ===

King&#x27;s opened in October 1831 with the cleric William Otter appointed as first principal and lecturer in divinity. The Archbishop of Canterbury presided over the opening ceremony, in which a sermon was given in the chapel by Charles James Blomfield, the Bishop of London, on the subject of combining religious instruction with intellectual culture. Despite the attempts to make King&#x27;s Anglican-only, the initial prospectus permitted, &quot;nonconformists of all sorts to enter the college freely&quot;. William Howley: the governors and the professors, except the linguists, had to be members of the Church of England but the students did not, though attendance at chapel was compulsory.

King&#x27;s was divided into a senior department and a junior department, also known as King&#x27;s College School, which was originally situated in the basement of the Strand Campus. The Junior department started with 85 pupils and only three teachers, but quickly grew to 500 by 1841, outgrowing its facilities and leading it to relocate to Wimbledon in 1897 where it remains today, though it is no longer associated with King&#x27;s College London. Within the Senior department teaching was divided into three courses: a general course comprised divinity, classical languages, mathematics, English literature and history; a medical course; and miscellaneous subjects, such as law, political economy and modern languages, which were not related to any systematic course of study at the time and depended for their continuance on the supply of occasional students. In 1833 the general course was reorganised leading to the award of the Associate of King&#x27;s College (AKC), the first qualification issued by King&#x27;s. The course, which concerns questions of ethics and theology, is still awarded today to students and staff who take an optional three-year course alongside their studies.

The river frontage was completed in April 1835 at a cost of £7,100, its completion a condition of King&#x27;s College London securing the site from the Crown. Unlike those in the school, student numbers in the Senior department remained almost stationary during King&#x27;s first five years of existence. During this time the medical school was blighted by inefficiency and the divided loyalties of the staff leading to a steady decline in attendance. One of the most important appointments was that of Charles Wheatstone as professor of Experimental Philosophy.

At this time neither King&#x27;s, &quot;London University&quot;, nor the medical schools at the London hospitals could confer degrees. In 1835 the government announced that it would establish an examining board to grant degrees, with &quot;London University&quot; and King&#x27;s both becoming affiliated colleges. This became the University of London in 1836, the former &quot;London University&quot; becoming &quot;University College, London&quot; (UCL). The first University of London degrees were awarded to King&#x27;s College London students in 1839.

In 1840, King&#x27;s opened its own hospital on Portugal Street near Lincoln&#x27;s Inn Fields, an area composed of overcrowded rookeries characterised by poverty and disease. The governance of King&#x27;s College Hospital was later transferred to the corporation of the hospital established by the King&#x27;s College Hospital Act 1851. The hospital moved to new premises in Denmark Hill, Camberwell in 1913. The appointment in 1877 of Joseph Lister as professor of clinical surgery greatly benefited the medical school, and the introduction of Lister&#x27;s antiseptic surgical methods gained the hospital an international reputation.

In 1845 King&#x27;s established a Military Department to train officers for the Army and the British East India Company, and in 1846 a Theological Department to train Anglican priests. In 1855, King&#x27;s pioneered evening classes in London; that King&#x27;s granted students at the evening classes certificates of college attendance to enable them to sit University of London degree exams was cited as an example of the worthlessness of these certificates in the decision by the University of London to end the affiliated colleges system in 1858 and open their examinations to everyone.
The (45 &amp; 46 Vict. c. xiii) amended the constitution. The act removed the proprietorial nature of King&#x27;s, changing the name of the corporation from &quot;The Governors and Proprietors of King&#x27;s College, London&quot; to &quot;King&#x27;s College London&quot; and annulling the 1829 charter (although King&#x27;s remained incorporated under that charter). The act also changed King&#x27;s College London from a (technically) for-profit corporation to a non-profit one (no dividends had ever been paid in over 50 years of operation) and extended the objects of King&#x27;s to include the education of women. The Ladies&#x27; Department of King&#x27;s College London was opened in Kensington Square in 1885, which later in 1902 became King&#x27;s College Women&#x27;s Department.

=== 20th century ===

The &#x27; (3 Edw. 7. c. xcii) abolished all remaining religious tests for staff, except within the Theological department. In 1910, King&#x27;s was (with the exception of the Theological department) merged into the University of London under the &#x27; (8 Edw. 7. c. xxxix), losing its legal independence.

During the First World War, the medical school was opened to women for the first time. From 1916 to 1921, the college&#x27;s Department of Italian was headed by a woman, Linetta de Castelvecchio. The end of the war saw an influx of students, which strained existing facilities to the point where some classes were held in the Principal&#x27;s house.

In World War II, the buildings of King&#x27;s College London were used by the Auxiliary Fire Service with a number of King&#x27;s staff, mainly those then known as college servants, serving as firewatchers. Parts of the Strand building, the quadrangle, and the roof of apse and stained glass windows of the chapel suffered bomb damage in the Blitz. During the post-war reconstruction, the vaults beneath the quadrangle were replaced by a two-storey laboratory, which opened in 1952, for the departments of Physics and Civil and Electrical Engineering.

One of the most famous pieces of scientific research performed at King&#x27;s were the crucial contributions to the discovery of the double helix structure of DNA in 1953 by Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin, together with Raymond Gosling, Alex Stokes, Herbert Wilson, and other colleagues at the Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics at King&#x27;s.

Major reconstruction of King&#x27;s began in 1966 following the publication of the Robbins Report on Higher Education. A new block facing the Strand designed by E. D. Jefferiss Mathews was opened in 1972. In 1980 King&#x27;s regained its legal independence under a new Royal Charter. In 1993 King&#x27;s, along with other large University of London colleges, gained direct access to government funding (which had previously been through the university) and the right to confer University of London degrees itself. This contributed to King&#x27;s and the other large colleges being regarded as &quot;de facto&quot; universities in their own right.

King&#x27;s College London underwent several mergers with other institutions in the late 20th century. These including the reincorporation in 1983 of the King&#x27;s College School of Medicine and Dentistry, which had become independent of King&#x27;s College Hospital at the foundation of the National Health Service in 1948, mergers with
Queen Elizabeth College and Chelsea College in 1985, and the Institute of Psychiatry in 1997. In 1998 the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; Hospitals merged with King&#x27;s to form the GKT School of Medical Education. Also in 1998 Florence Nightingale&#x27;s original training school for nurses merged with the King&#x27;s Department of Nursing Studies as the Florence Nightingale School of Nursing and Midwifery. The same year King&#x27;s acquired the former Public Record Office building on Chancery Lane and converted it at a cost of £35 million into the Maughan Library, which opened in 2002.

=== 21st century ===

In July 2006, King&#x27;s College London was granted degree-awarding powers in its own right, as opposed to through the University of London, by the Privy Council. This power remained unexercised until 2007, when King&#x27;s announced that all students starting courses from September 2007 onwards would be awarded degrees conferred by King&#x27;s itself, rather than by the University of London. The new certificates however still make reference to the fact that King&#x27;s is a constituent college of the University of London. All current students with at least one year of study remaining were in August 2007 offered the option of choosing to be awarded a University of London degree or a King&#x27;s degree. The first King&#x27;s degrees were awarded in summer 2008.

In April 2011, King&#x27;s became a founding partner in the UK Centre for Medical Research and Innovation, subsequently renamed the Francis Crick Institute, committing £40 million to the project. The Chemistry department was reopened in 2011 following its closure in 2003. In February 2012, the Queen officially opened Somerset House East Wing.

In September 2014, King&#x27;s College London opened King&#x27;s College London Mathematics School, a free school sixth form located in Lambeth that specialises in mathematics. In October 2014, Ed Byrne replaced Rick Trainor as Principal of King&#x27;s College London, the latter having served for 10 years. In December 2014, King&#x27;s announced its plans to rebrand its name to &#x27;King&#x27;s London&#x27;. After concerns were raised by the students&#x27; union, a statement from the college later in December emphasised that there were no plans to change the legal name of King&#x27;s, and said that the branding of &#x27;King&#x27;s London&#x27; was &quot;designed to promote King&#x27;s and its place in London and also the fact that we are one of the world&#x27;s great universities in our own right&quot;. King&#x27;s announced that the rebranding plans had been dropped in January 2015.

In 2015, King&#x27;s acquired a 50-year lease for the Aldwych Quarter site incorporating the historic Bush House. It has been occupied since 2017. Bush House was opened as part of the Strand Campus by the Queen in 2019.

== Campus ==
King&#x27;s is based on five campuses in central London.

=== Strand Campus ===

The Strand Campus is the original campus of King&#x27;s and is located on the Strand in the City of Westminster. The campus is based around the Grade I listed original King&#x27;s Building built for the college in 1831, designed by Sir Robert Smirke, adjacent to Somerset House and sharing its frontage along the River Thames, including the King&#x27;s College London Chapel, redesigned in 1864 by Sir George Gilbert Scott. The campus also includes buildings along the adjacent Surrey Street, the Strand Building and the east wing of Somerset House. Beyond this contiguous complex of buildings, the campus also includes Bush House on the opposite side of the Strand, the Virginia Woolf Building on Kingsway, and the Maughan Library and etc.venues on Chancery Lane. 
The Strand Campus houses the arts and science faculties of King&#x27;s, including the faculties of arts and humanities, law, natural and mathematical sciences, social science and public policy, and business, as well as the King&#x27;s Foundation. The students&#x27; union runs the Shack café and the Vault bar in Bush House on the Strand Campus, and has two contact hubs on the campus, also in Bush House.

The nearest Underground station is Temple, a two minute walk from the campus.

=== Guy&#x27;s Campus ===

Guy&#x27;s Campus is close to London Bridge on the South Bank of the Thames and is adjacent to Guy&#x27;s Hospital. It is home to the faculty of life sciences and medicine (also at the Waterloo Campus), the dental institute, and the institute of psychiatry, psychology and neuroscience (also at the Denmark Hill Campus).

Buildings include: the Henriette Raphael building, the Hodgkin building and Shepherd&#x27;s House. The campus is also home to the Gordon Museum of Pathology and the Museum of Life Sciences (neither of which is open to the public), as well as the Chapel of Thomas Guy. The Students&#x27; Union runs Guy&#x27;s Bar, Guy&#x27;s Café and a contact hub on the Guy&#x27;s Campus. The Great Dover Street Apartments and Wolfson House halls of residence are close to the campus.

The hospital and the campus are named after Thomas Guy, who established the hospital with money from his investments in the slave-trading South Sea Company. A statue of Thomas Guy, installed in 1734 and owned by the Guy’s and St Thomas’ Foundation, stands outside the hospital, on the grounds of the university campus. This was boarded up in 2020, following the George Floyd protests, it was de-boarded for conservation work, with temporary interpretation added, in November 2022. Permanent interpretation was installed in November 2023.

The nearest Underground station is London Bridge, a one minute walk from the campus.

=== Waterloo Campus ===
The Waterloo Campus is in Lambeth, across Waterloo Bridge from the Strand Campus and adjacent to the Southbank Centre. It has three main buildings: the James Clerk Maxwell Building, the Franklin–Wilkins Building (one of the largest university buildings in London) and the Stamford Street Apartments (student accommodation).

The campus is home to the Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery and parts of the faculty of life sciences and medicine (also on Guy&#x27;s Campus); the faculty of social science and public policy (also on the Strand Campus); and the London Dental Education Centre, part of the Dental Institute (also on the Guy&#x27;s and Denmark Hill campuses). The students&#x27; union has a contact hub in the Franlin-Wilkins Building.

The nearest Underground station is Waterloo, a four minute walk from the campus.

=== St Thomas&#x27; Campus ===
The St Thomas&#x27; Campus is located at St Thomas&#x27; Hospital, named after St Thomas Becket, in Lambeth, facing the Houses of Parliament across the Thames. It carries out continuing medical and dental training as well as housing the Florence Nightingale Museum, an independent charity.

The nearest Underground station is Lambeth North, seven minutes from the campus.

=== Denmark Hill Campus ===
The Denmark Hill Campus is situated in Camberwell in Southwark. It is the home of the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience (IoPPN) and also houses parts of the dental institute and the faculty of medicine and life sciences. The students&#x27; union has a contact hub in the IoPPN.

The nearest Overground station is Denmark Hill, adjacent to the campus.

=== Other sites ===
====Halls of residence====
King&#x27;s has halls of residence across central London. With the exception of the Stamford Street Apartments on the Waterloo Campus, these are separate sites from the college&#x27;s campuses.

====Sports grounds====
The college has two sports grounds, at New Malden and Honor Oak Park in London.

====Shrivenham====
Whilst not a formal campus, King&#x27;s retains an academic presence and estate at the Defence Academy of the United Kingdom in Shrivenham, Oxfordshire. Through its Defence Studies Department, King&#x27;s has delivered professional military training to much of the UK armed services through the Joint Services Command and Staff College since 2000 under contract to the Ministry of Defence.

====Newquay====
The King&#x27;s Service Centre, established in 2015 to provide professional services and IT support to the university, is located in Newquay, Cornwall.

== Organisation and administration ==
=== Governance ===
The office of &quot;President and Principal of the University&quot; is established by King&#x27;s royal charter as &quot;the Vice-Chancellor and chief academic and executive officer of the University&quot; and the statutes require the president and principal to have the general responsibility to the council for &quot;ensuring that the objects of the University are fulfilled and for maintaining and promoting the efficiency, discipline and good order of the University&quot;. The current president and principal, Shitij Kapur, uses the title &quot;Vice-Chancellor and President&quot;. The other senior officers of the college include three senior vice presidents, covering the areas of: academic; health and life science; and operations. There are also five vice presidents covering the areas of: finance (also the college&#x27;s chief financial officer); education and student success; international, engagement and service; research and innovation; and people and talent.

The council is the supreme governing body of King&#x27;s College London established under the charter and statutes, comprising up to 20 members. Its membership includes the President of King&#x27;s College London Students&#x27; Union (KCLSU) as the student member; seven staff members (including the President and Principal); and 12 lay members who must not be employees of King&#x27;s. It is supported by a number of standing committees. Christopher Geidt has been the chair of council since 2016.

The academic board is established under the charter as &quot;the body responsible under delegated authority from the Council for the regulation of the academic work of the University in teaching and examining and in research&quot;. Under the college ordinances, they are the body responsible for the award of degrees and other academic distinctions of the university. The academic board is chaired by the vice-chancellor and president with &quot;ex officio&quot; members being the senior vice presidents, vice presidents, executive deans, the president and education vice presidents of the students’ union, the dean for doctoral studies, and the Dean of King&#x27;s College; 45 academic staff elected by the faculties; 3 teaching staff elected from the Centre for International Education &amp; Languages; three members elected from the professional staff; and an elected student representative from each faculty.

The Dean of King&#x27;s College London is established by the ordinances as being &quot;responsible for ensuring that the College builds upon the Anglican tradition associated with its foundation and, in recognition of the multiethnic and international nature of its community, encourages and supports all its members of all beliefs and backgrounds&quot; and has to be an ordained minister of the Church of England. They are also responsible for the academic direction of the Associateship of King&#x27;s College and coordinate the college chaplaincy, and the Choir of King&#x27;s College London, which includes a number of choral scholarships, and of encourage and foster vocations to the Church of England priesthood. The current dean is Ellen Clark-King. That the dean is an ordained person is unusual among British universities, but reflects King&#x27;s foundation in the tradition of the Church of England in 1829.

The Archbishop of Canterbury was previously King&#x27;s College London&#x27;s visitor by right of office owing to the Anglican foundation of King&#x27;s. Under the 2023 royal charter, the visitor is appointed by the monarch on the representation of the council of the university.

=== Faculties and departments ===
In the 19th century, King&#x27;s College London had five departments: theological, general literature and science, applied sciences, medical, and military. The theological department provided studies in ecclesiastical history, pastoral theology and exegesis of the Bible. Languages and literature, history, law and jurisprudence, political economy, commerce, fencing, mathematics, zoology and natural history were taught within the department of general literature and science, and natural philosophy, geology, mineralogy and engineering-related subjects were taught within the department of applied sciences.

, King&#x27;s comprises nine academic faculties: arts and humanities; business; dentistry, oral and craniofacial sciences; law; life sciences and medicine; natural, mathematical and engineering sciences; nursing, midwifery and palliative care; psychiatry, psychology and neuroscience; and social science and public policy.

==== Faculty of arts and humanities ====
The faculty of arts and humanities is based on the Strand Campus in the heart of central London, in the vicinity of many cultural institutions, and has established collaborations with many of these, including Shakespeare&#x27;s Globe, the Courtauld Institute of Art and the Royal Academy of Music. The faculty was formed in 1989 by the amalgamation of the faculties of arts, music and theology.

==== Faculty of dentistry, oral and craniofacial Sciences ====
The faculty of dentistry, oral and craniofacial sciences (formerly the dental institute) is the dental school of King&#x27;s and focuses on understanding disease, enhancing health and restoring function. It is the successor of education carried out at Guy&#x27;s Dental Hospital, the Royal Dental Hospital&#x27;s London School of Dental Surgery, and King&#x27;s College Hospital Dental School. These became a single institution in 1998 with the merger of the united medical and dental schools of Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; Hospitals with King&#x27;s school of medicine and dentistry.

The history of dentistry education at the institutions that would eventually become the faculty started in 
1799, when Joseph Fox gave a series of lectures on dental surgery at Guy&#x27;s Hospital and was appointed dental surgeon in the same year. Thomas Bell succeeded Fox as dental surgeon either in 1817 or 1825. Frederick Newland-Pedley, who was appointed assistant dental surgeon at Guy&#x27;s Hospital in 1885, advocated the establishment of a dental school within the hospital, and he flooded the two dental schools in London, the Metropolitan School of Dental Science and the London School of Dental Surgery, with patients to prove that a further hospital was needed. In December 1888, Guy&#x27;s Hospital Dental School was established. Guy&#x27;s Hospital Dental School was recognised as a school of the University of London in 1901. In the 1970s, since there was a decline in the demand for dental services, the Department of Health of the UK suggested that there should be a decrease in the number of dental undergraduate students as well as the duration of all courses. In response to the recommendations, Royal Dental Hospital of London School of Dental Surgery amalgamated with the Guy&#x27;s Hospital Dental School of the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; Hospitals on 1 August 1983.

The establishment of King&#x27;s College Hospital Dental School was proposed by Viscount Hambleden at a Hospital Management Committee meeting on 12 April 1923. The dental school was opened on 12 November 1923 in King&#x27;s College Hospital. Under the 1948 National Health Act, King&#x27;s Medical and Dental School split from King&#x27;s and became an independent school, but the school remerged with King&#x27;s in 1983. The school further merged with the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; Hospitals in 1998.

==== Faculty of life sciences and medicine ====
The faculty of life sciences and medicine was created as a result of the merger of the school of medicine with the school of biomedical sciences in 2014.

There are two schools of education in the Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine: the GKT School of Medical Education is responsible for the medical education and training of students on the MBBS programme, and the school of bioscience education is responsible for the biomedical and health professions education and training. The faculty is divided into schools of basic and medical biosciences; biomedical engineering and imaging sciences; cancer and pharmaceutical science, cardiovascular medicine and sciences; immunology and microbial sciences; life course sciences; and population health sciences.

==== Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience ====

The Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience (IoPPN) is a faculty and a research institution dedicated to discovering what causes mental illness and diseases of the brain, and to help identify new treatments of the diseases. The institute is the largest centre for research and postgraduate education in psychiatry, psychology and neuroscience in Europe. Originally established in 1924 as the Maudsley Hospital Medical School, the institute changed its name to the Institute of Psychiatry in 1948, merged with King&#x27;s College London in 1997, and was renamed IoPPN in 2014.

==== Dickson Poon School of Law ====

The Dickson Poon School of Law is the law school of King&#x27;s. Law has been taught at King&#x27;s since 1831 and the faculty of laws was founded (in association with the London School of Economics) in 1909, becoming the school of law in 1991. The school includes various research centres and groups which serve as focal points for research activity.

==== Faculty of natural, mathematical and engineering sciences ====
The faculty includes the departments of chemistry, engineering, informatics, mathematics, and physics.

The teaching of experimental physics at King&#x27;s was the first in England and professors of experimental physics have included James Clerk Maxwell, Harold A. Wilson, Charles Glover Barkla, Sir Owen Richardson, Sir Edward Appleton and Sir Charles Ellis, three of whom became Nobel laureates.

Copley medallist John Frederic Daniell was the first professor of chemistry at King&#x27;s and established the first chemical laboratory in 1834. Chemistry was originally part of the medical department and became a separate department in 1958; this closed in 2003 due to a decline in student numbers and reduced funding. The department was reestablished in 2012.

Teaching of engineering at King&#x27;s was established in 1838, a year after Durham, making it the second school of engineering established in the United Kingdom. The department of engineering was the largest engineering school in the UK in 1893. The division of engineering was closed in 2013, with the current department of engineering being established in 2019.

==== Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing, Midwifery and Palliative Care====

The Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing, Midwifery and Palliative Care is a school for nurses and midwives. It also carries out nursing research and provides continuing professional development and postgraduate programmes. Formerly known as the Nightingale Training School and Home for Nurses, the faculty was established by Florence Nightingale in 1860, and was the first nursing school in the world to be continuously connected to a fully serving hospital and medical school.

The Nightingale Training School amalgamated with the Olive Haydon School of Midwifery and the Thomas Guy and Lewisham School of Nursing between 1991 and 1993 to form the Nightingale College of Health, which became part of King&#x27;s in 1993. In 2017 it merged with the Cicely Saunders Institute, a centre for research and education in palliative care, to become the Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing, Midwifery and Palliative Care.

==== Faculty of social science and public policy ====
The faculty of social science and public policy contains the schools of 
politics and economics; education, communication and society; global affairs; security studies; the international school for government; and the policy institute.

The department of war studies, within the school of security studies, is unique in the UK and is supported by research facilities such as the King&#x27;s Centre for Strategic Communications, Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives and the King&#x27;s Centre for Military Health Research.

==== King&#x27;s Business School ====

King&#x27;s Business School was established in 1989. In 2017 it became a faculty of the college as King&#x27;s Business School and moved into Bush House. From 2023, it has held triple accreditation from the Association of MBAs, the EFMD Quality Improvement System and the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business.

=== Finances ===
In the financial year ending 31 July 2024, King&#x27;s had a total income of £1.271 billion (2022/23 – £1.230 million) and total expenditure of £944 million (2022/23 – £1.102 billion). Key sources of income included £630.5 million from tuition fees and education contracts (2022/23 – £607.8 million), £144.9 million from funding body grants (2022/23 – £148.3 million), £256.9 million from research grants and contracts (2022/23 – £236.3 million), £26.7 million from investment income (2022/23 – £18 million) and £23.7 million from donations and endowments (2022/23 – £28.9 million).

At year end, King&#x27;s had endowments of £324.8 million (2022/23 – £301 million) and total net assets of £1.671 billion (2022/23 – £1.323 billion). It holds the fourth-largest endowment of any university in the UK behind only Oxford, Cambridge and Edinburgh.

=== Coat of arms ===


The coat of arms displayed on the King&#x27;s College London charter is that of George IV. The shield depicts the royal coat of arms together with an inescutcheon of the House of Hanover, while the supporters embody King&#x27;s motto of &quot;&quot;. No correspondence is believed to have survived regarding the choice of this coat of arms, either in King&#x27;s archives or at the College of Arms, and a variety of unofficial adaptations were used. The college was fined 20 shillings by London County Council in 1911 for using these arms without a licence. The current arms came into use in October 1989 but were not formally granted until 1995. 
These were developed following the mergers with Queen Elizabeth College and Chelsea College in 1985 and incorporate aspects of their heraldry. The official coat of arms, in heraldic terminology, is:

Arms:

&quot;Or on a Pale Azure between two Lions rampant respectant Gules an Anchor Gold ensigned by a Royal Crown proper on a Chief Argent an Ancient Lamp proper inflamed Gold between two Blazing Hearths also proper&quot;.

The crest and supporters:
&quot;On a Helm with a Wreath Or and Azure Upon a Book proper rising from a Coronet Or the rim set with jewels two Azure (one manifest) four Vert (two manifest) and two Gules a demi Lion Gules holding a Rod of Dexter a female figure habited Azure the cloak lined coif and sleeves Argent holding in the exterior hand a Lond Cross botony Gold and sinister a male figure the Long Coat Azure trimmed with Sable proper shirt Argent holding in the interior hand a Book proper&quot;.

==== Coats of arms of the medical schools ====
Although the St Thomas&#x27;s Hospital Medical School and Guy&#x27;s Medical School became legal bodies separate from St Thomas&#x27; Hospital and Guy&#x27;s Hospital in 1948, the tradition of using the hospitals&#x27; shields and coat of arms continues today.

In 1949, St Thomas&#x27;s Hospital Medical School was granted its own coat of arms. However, the St Thomas&#x27; Hospital coat of arms has still been used. Guy&#x27;s Medical School proposed to apply for its own coat of arms after separating from Guy&#x27;s Hospital, yet the school decided to continue to use Guy&#x27;s Hospital&#x27;s arms in 1954. The two medical schools merged in 1982 and became the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; Hospitals (UMDS). Simon Argles, secretary of UMDS, said that because of the name of the medical school it was more appropriate to use the hospital&#x27;s coat of arms.

UMDS merged with King&#x27;s College Hospital to become Guy&#x27;s, King&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; School of Medicine in 1998. The shields of Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; hospitals are used in conjunction with King&#x27;s shield in the medical schools&#x27; publications and graduation materials.

=== Affiliations and partnerships ===
King&#x27;s College London is a member institution and was one of the two founding colleges of the federal University of London. In 1998, King&#x27;s joined the Russell Group, an association of 24 public research universities established in 1994. King&#x27;s is also a member of the Institutional Network of the Universities from the Capitals of Europe (UNICA), a network of higher education institutions based in European capital cities, the Guild of European Research-Intensive Universities, the Circle U European University alliance, the Association of Commonwealth Universities (ACU), the European University Association (EUA) and Universities UK.

King&#x27;s is typically regarded as part of the &quot;golden triangle&quot;, a grouping of research universities located in the English cities of Cambridge, Oxford and London that generally also includes the universities of Cambridge and Oxford, Imperial College London, the London School of Economics, and University College London.

King&#x27;s College London is also a part of King&#x27;s Health Partners, an academic health science centre comprises Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; NHS Foundation Trust, King&#x27;s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King&#x27;s College London itself. King&#x27;s is a participant and one of the founding members of the Francis Crick Institute. Furthermore, launched in 2014, MedCity is the collaboration between King&#x27;s and the other two main science universities in London, Imperial College and University College London.

In 2016, King&#x27;s College London, together with Arizona State University and University of New South Wales, formed the PLuS Alliance, an international university alliance to address global challenges. King&#x27;s was also a founding member of FutureLearn, a massive open online course learning platform established in December 2012.

King&#x27;s offers joint degrees with many universities and other institutions, including Columbia University, University of Paris I, University of Hong Kong, National University of Singapore, Royal Academy of Music, British Library, Tate Modern, Shakespeare&#x27;s Globe, National Gallery, National Portrait Gallery and British Museum.

In the field of Mathematics, King&#x27;s College London has a joint venture with Imperial College London and University College London running the London School of Geometry and Number Theory (LSGNT), which is an EPSRC-funded Centre for Doctoral Training (CDT). The LSGNT offers a wide range of 4-year PhD research projects in different aspects of number theory, geometry and topology.

Another partnership King&#x27;s College London has with both Imperial College London and University College London is the field of Nanotechnology where all 3 universities jointly run the London Centre for Nanotechnology (LCN). LCN is a multidisciplinary research centre in physical and biomedical nanotechnology focused on exploitation and commercialisation of research generated in the relevant fields, established in 2003, which King&#x27;s joined in 2018.

King&#x27;s College London joined the SES engineering and physical sciences research alliance in 2016, which includes the universities of Cambridge, Oxford and Southampton, Imperial College London, Queen Mary University of London, and University College London as members. King&#x27;s College London is also a member of the Thomas Young Centre, an alliance of London research groups working on the theory and simulation of materials, along with Imperial College London, University College London and Queen Mary University of London.

The university is also a member of the University of London Screen Studies Group with other institutions from the University of London.

== Academic profile ==
=== Admissions ===
King&#x27;s had the 13th highest average entry qualification for undergraduates of any UK university in 2018, with new students averaging 171 UCAS points. In 2022, the university gave offers of admission to 39.3% of its applicants, the 8th lowest across the country.

=== Teaching ===
King&#x27;s academic year runs from the last Monday in September to the first Friday in June. Different faculties and departments adopt different academic term structures. For example, the academic year of the Mathematics School and Department of War Studies is divided into three terms (Autumn, Spring and Summer terms); while the Faculty of Arts &amp; Humanities academic year runs in two semesters.

=== Graduation ===


Graduation ceremonies are held in January (winter) and June or July (summer), with ceremonies for non-medical students held at the Royal Festival Hall in the Southbank Centre, near the Waterloo Campus. Ceremonies were held at the Royal Albert Hall until 1992 and then at the Barbican Centre until 2018.

Owing to St Thomas&#x27;s Medical School roots that could be traced to St Mary Overie Priory, students from the GKT School of Medical Education and Faculty of Dental, Oral &amp; Craniofacial Sciences graduate from Southwark Cathedral adjacent to Guy&#x27;s Campus.

After being granted the power to award its own degrees separately from the University of London in 2006, graduates began wearing King&#x27;s College London academic dress in 2008. King&#x27;s graduates have since worn gowns designed by Vivienne Westwood.

=== Research ===
In 2023/24 King&#x27;s had a total research income of £256.9 million, of which £69.5 million came from research councils; £57.2 million from the UK central government; £14.6 million from UK industry; £58.1 million from UK charitable bodies; £25.3 million from EU sources; £32.2 million from other sources.

Following the 2021 Research Excellence Framework (REF), which assessed the quality of research in UK higher education institutions, King&#x27;s was ranked 9th by GPA and 6th for research power by &quot;Times Higher Education&quot;.

=== Medicine ===
Medical research at King&#x27;s College London is spread across multiple faculties, particularly the Faculty of Dentistry, Oral and Craniofacial Sciences, the Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing, Midwifery and Palliative Care, and the Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine.

King&#x27;s claims to be the largest centre for healthcare education in Europe. The Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine has three main teaching hospitals – Guy&#x27;s Hospital, King&#x27;s College Hospital and St Thomas&#x27; Hospital – and a branch campus in Portsmouth run in collaboration with the University of Portsmouth. King&#x27;s College London Dental Institute was the largest dental school in Europe . The Florence Nightingale School of Nursing &amp; Midwifery, which became part of King&#x27;s in 1993, is the oldest professional school of nursing in the world.

King&#x27;s is a major centre for biomedical research. It is a founding member of King&#x27;s Health Partners, one of the largest academic health sciences centres in Europe with a turnover of over £2 billion and approximately 25,000 employees. It also is home to the Medical Research Council&#x27;s MRC Centre for Neurodevelopmental Disorders, and is part of two of the twelve biomedical research centres established by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) in England – the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; NHS Foundation Trust and King&#x27;s College London, and the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at the South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King&#x27;s College London.

The Drug Control Centre at King&#x27;s was established in 1978 and is the only WADA accredited anti-doping laboratory in the UK and holds the official UK contract for running doping tests on UK athletes. In 1997, it became the first International Olympic Committee accredited laboratory to meet the ISO/IEC 17025 quality standard. The centre was the anti-doping facility for the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games.

=== Libraries ===
==== Maughan Library ====

The Maughan Library is King&#x27;s largest library and is housed in the Grade II* listed 19th century gothic revival former Public Record Office building designed by Sir James Pennethorne, situated on Chancery Lane near the Strand Campus. The building is home to collections supporting humanities, law and science. It also houses the special collections and rare books within the Foyle Library (see below). Inside the library is the dodecagonal Round Reading Room, inspired by the reading room of the British Museum (now home to the humanities reference collection), and the former Chapel of the Masters of the Rolls (renamed the Weston Room following a donation from the Garfield Weston Foundation) with its stained glass windows, mosaic floor and monuments, including a Renaissance terracotta figure by Pietro Torrigiano of John Yonge, Master of the Rolls, who died in 1516.

==== Other libraries ====
* Foyle Special Collections Library: Situated inside the Maughan Library, the special collections library houses a collection of 200,000 printed works as well as maps, slides, sound recordings and manuscript material, including 17 incunabula. The Foyle Special Collections Library also houses a number of special collections, range in date from the 15th century to present, and in subject from human anatomy to Modern Greek poetry. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) Historical Collection is the largest collection contains material from the former FCO Library. The collection was a working tool used by the British government to inform and influence foreign and colonial policy. Transferred to King&#x27;s in 2007, the FCO Historical Collection contains over 80,000 items including books, pamphlets, manuscript, and photographic material. The Medical Collection include the historical library collections of the constituent medical schools and institutes of King&#x27;s. The Rare Books Collection holds 12,000 printed books, including a 1483 Venice printing of Silius Italicus&#x27;s &quot;Punica&quot;, first editions of Charles Dickens&#x27; novels, and the 1937 (first) edition of George Orwell&#x27;s &quot;The Road to Wigan Pier&quot;.
* Archives Reading Room: Situated in the King&#x27;s Building on the Strand campus, this includes the college archives and the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives. The college archives include institutional archives of King&#x27;s since 1828, archives of institutions and schools that were created by or have merged with King&#x27;s, and records relating to the history of medicine. The Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives, established in 1964, holds the private papers of over 800 senior British defence personnel who held office since 1900.
* Franklin-Wilkins Library: Situated on the Waterloo Campus, the library supports nursing and midwifery students and law students, with holdings on management, bioscience and education.
* Wills Library: Situated in the Hodgkin Building at Guy&#x27;s Campus, it was originally the main library for the Guy&#x27;s Hospital Medical School. The Wills Library was a gift in 1903 by the former governor of Guy&#x27;s Hospital, the late Sir Frederick Wills and it was opened as the Medical School Library. Many books, archives and documents that were kept in the Wills Library, such as Guy&#x27;s committee minute books, have been moved to the King&#x27;s College London Archives in 2004, although the library still contains a collection of books in locked cabinets that can be retrieved by request.
* New Hunt&#x27;s House Library: Situated on the Guy&#x27;s Campus, the library covers all aspects of biomedical science.
* St Thomas&#x27; House Library: Situated at St Thomas&#x27; Campus, the library has resources on complimentary clinical healthcare and a variety of study spaces.
* Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &amp; Neuroscience Library: Situated on the Denmark Hill Campus, the IoPPN library is one of the largest psychiatric libraries in Western Europe.
* Weston Education Centre Library: Situated on the Denmark Hill Campus, the library supports teaching and research in the faculties of medicine and dentistry. It also supports clinical work and research in the King&#x27;s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and the South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust.

Additionally, King&#x27;s students and staff have full access to Senate House Library, the central library for the University of London and the School of Advanced Study. Undergraduate and postgraduate students also have reference access to libraries of other University of London institutions under the University of London Libraries Access Agreement.

=== Museums, galleries and collections ===
King&#x27;s operates two museums: the Gordon Museum of Pathology and the Museum of Life Sciences, neither of which are open to the public. The Gordon Museum collection dates back to the opening of the medical school at Guy&#x27;s Hospital in 1826; the current museum was opened by the hospital in 1905. The Gordon Museum says it is the largest medical museum in the United Kingdom, with a collection of approximately 8,000 pathological specimens, artefacts, models and paintings, including Astley Cooper&#x27;s specimens and Sir Joseph Lister&#x27;s antiseptic spray. The Museum of Life Sciences was founded in 2009 adjacent to the Gordon Museum, and holds historic biological and pharmaceutical collections from the colleges that are now part of King&#x27;s College London.

Between 1843 and 1927, the King George III Museum was a museum within King&#x27;s College London which housed the collections of scientific instruments of George III and eminent nineteenth-century scientists (including Sir Charles Wheatstone and Charles Babbage). Due to space constraints within King&#x27;s, much of the museum&#x27;s collections were transferred on loan to the Science Museum in London or kept in King&#x27;s College London Archives.

The Anatomy Museum was a museum situated on the 6th floor of the King&#x27;s Building at the Strand Campus. The Anatomy Theatre was built next door to the museum in 1927, where anatomical dissections and demonstrations took place. The Anatomy Museum&#x27;s collection includes casts of injuries, leather models, skins of various animals from Western Australia donated to the museum in 1846, and casts of heads of John Bishop and Thomas Williams, the murderers in the Italian Boy&#x27;s murder in 1831. The last dissection in the Anatomy Theatre was performed in 1997. The Anatomy Theatre and Museum was renovated and refurbished in 2009, and is now a facility for teaching, research and performance at King&#x27;s.

Science Gallery London is a public science centre on the Guy&#x27;s Campus. Admission to exhibitions and events at the centre is free.

=== Reputation and ranking ===

King&#x27;s was &quot;Sunday Times&quot; University of the Year for 2010 to 2011.

According to the 2025 &quot;Complete University Guide&quot;, 16 subjects offered by King&#x27;s rank within the top 10 nationally, including Health Studies (1st), Social Policy (2nd), Business &amp; Management Studies (3rd), Anthropology (4th), Law (5th), Music (6th), Classics (6th), Economics (8th), Politics (8th), Communication &amp; Media Studies (8th), Food Science (9th), Philosophy (9th), Dentistry (9th), Biological Sciences (10th), History (10th), and Computer Science (10th). &quot;The Guardian&quot; University Guide 2021 ranks King&#x27;s in the top ten in 6 subjects, including Psychology (2nd), Politics (5th), Law (6th), Anatomy &amp; physiology (8th), Media &amp; film studies (9th), and Philosophy (9th). The &quot;Times Higher Education&quot; ranks King&#x27;s College London the top 20 universities in the world for Psychology (11th), and Clinical, pre-clinical &amp; health (16th) in the 2021 World University Rankings by subject. King&#x27;s College London has had 24 of its subject-areas awarded the highest rating of 5 or 5* for research quality in the 2004 Research Assessment Exercise, and in 2007 it received a good result in its audit by the Quality Assurance Agency.

Among global university rankings, King&#x27;s is ranked 40th equal by the 2025 &quot;QS World University Rankings&quot;, 36th equal by the 2025 world university rankings of the &quot;Times Higher Education&quot;, 36th equal by the 2024 &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; Best Global Universities Rankings, 53rd by the 2024 &quot;Academic Ranking of World Universities&quot; (ARWU).

King&#x27;s was ranked 7th in the UK for Graduate Employability in the Times Higher Education&#x27;s Global Employability University Ranking 2023. King&#x27;s was further recognised by the High Fliers&#x27; Graduate Market Report 2024 as one of the top universities targeted by leading UK employers. This was reaffirmed by the Teaching Excellence Framework (2023) which gave King&#x27;s a gold rating for student outcomes.

=== Associateship of King&#x27;s College ===
The Associateship of King&#x27;s College (AKC) is the original award of King&#x27;s College, dating back to its foundation in 1829 and first awarded in 1835. It was designed to reflect the twin objectives of King&#x27;s College&#x27;s 1829 royal charter to maintain the connection between &quot;sound religion and useful learning&quot; and to teach the &quot;doctrines and duties of Christianity&quot;.

Today, the AKC is a modern tradition that offers an inclusive, research-led programme of lectures that gives students the opportunities to engage with religious, philosophical and ethical issues alongside their main degree course. Graduates of King&#x27;s College London may be eligible to be elected as &#x27;Associates&#x27; of King&#x27;s College by the authority of King&#x27;s College London council, delegated to the academic board. After election, they are entitled to use the post-nominal letters &quot;AKC&quot;.

=== Fellowship of King&#x27;s College ===
The Fellowship of King&#x27;s College (FKC) is the highest award that can be bestowed upon an individual by King&#x27;s College London. The award of the fellowship is governed by a statute of King&#x27;s College London and reflects distinguished service to King&#x27;s by a member of staff, conspicuous service to King&#x27;s, or the achievement of distinction by those who were at one time closely associated with King&#x27;s College London.

The proposal to establish a fellowship of King&#x27;s was first considered in 1847. John Allen, a former chaplain of King&#x27;s, was the first FKC. Each fellow had to pay two guineas for the fellowship privilege initially, but the fee was ceased from 1850. A wide variety of people were elected as fellows of King&#x27;s, including former principal Alfred Barry, former King&#x27;s student then professor Thorold Rogers, architect William Burges and ornithologist Robert Swinhoe. The first women fellows were elected in 1904. Lilian Faithfull, vice-principal of the King&#x27;s Ladies&#x27; Department from 1894 to 1906, was one of the first women fellows.

== Student life ==
=== Students&#x27; union ===

King&#x27;s College, London Union Society was founded in 1873. In 1905, this was reorganised, providing common rooms, student clubs and entertainment, with a further reorganisation in 1908 seeing it take over the athletics club (established in 1884) and other social activities, and becoming a students&#x27; union.

As King&#x27;s College London Students&#x27; Union (KCLSU), it now provides a wide range of activities and services, including over 50 sports clubs, over 300 activity groups, and bars and cafes (the Shack and the Vault in Bush House on the Strand Campus, and Guy&#x27;s Café and Guy&#x27;s Bar on Guy&#x27;s Campus).

&quot;Reggie the Lion&quot; (informally &quot;Reggie&quot;) is the official mascot of the students&#x27; union. In total there are four Reggies in existence. The original can be found on display in the undercroft of the Union&#x27;s Bush House base at the Strand Campus. A papier-mâché Reggie lives outside the Great Hall at the Strand Campus. The third Reggie, given as a gift by alumnus Willie Kwan, guards the entrance of Willies Common Room in Somerset House East Wing. A small sterling silver incarnation is displayed during graduation ceremonies, which was presented to King&#x27;s by former Halliburton Professor of Physiology, Robert John Stewart McDowall, in 1959.

=== Student media ===
KCLSU Student Media won Student Media of the Year 2014 at the Ents Forum awards and came in the top three student media outlets in the country at the NUS Awards 2014.

&quot;Roar News&quot; is a tabloid newspaper for students at King&#x27;s which is owned and funded by KCLSU. It is editorially independent of both the university and the students&#x27; union and its award-winning website is read by tens of thousands of people per month in over 100 countries. In 2014 it had a successful awards season, scooping several national awards and commendations, including a Mind Media Award and Student Media of the Year.

The radio station of KCLSU, KCL Radio, was founded in 2009 as a podcast producer. The first live broadcast of KCL Radio was in 2011 at the London Varsity. In 2013, KCL Radio relaunched as a live station with more than 45 hours of live programming a week. The schedule of the radio station includes news, music, entertainment, debate, sport and live performance.

Other King&#x27;s student media groups include the King&#x27;s College London Film Society, student television station KingsTV, and the photographic society KCLSU PhotoSoc.

=== Sports ===
There are over 60 sports clubs, many of which compete in the University of London and British Universities &amp; Colleges (BUCS) leagues across the South East. The annual Macadam Cup, named after Sir Ivison Macadam, a KCL alumnus and first president of the National Union of Students, is a varsity match that has been played between the sports teams of King&#x27;s College London proper and the Guy&#x27;s, King&#x27;s and St. Thomas&#x27; School of Medicine since 2005.

King&#x27;s Sport, a partnership between King&#x27;s College London and KCLSU, manages all the sports activities and facilities of King&#x27;s since 2013. King&#x27;s Sport runs three fitness centres at the Waterloo, Guy&#x27;s and Strand Campuses which include various studio spaces. King&#x27;s Sport also operates two sports grounds, in New Malden and Honor Oak. Honor Oak Park Sports Ground has a floodlit 3G field hockey pitch and a floodlit 2G football/multi-sport pitch, as well as a grass football pitch, a grass rugby pitch and a netball or tennis court. New Malden Sports Ground has four football pitches, two rugby pitches, a lacrosse pitch, and two all-weather netball or tennis courts, with a cricket ground being set up in the summer. There are also on-campus sports facilities at Guy&#x27;s, St Thomas&#x27;s and Denmark Hill campuses. King&#x27;s students and staff can utilize Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; NHS Foundation Trust&#x27;s fitness centre and swimming pool based within the Guy&#x27;s and St Thomas&#x27; hospitals.

=== Societies and organisations ===
In addition to sporting clubs, King&#x27;s College London Students&#x27; Union also has around 300 other societies and groups in a wide variety of activities.

=== Student-led think tank ===
Following the 2010 student demonstrations against increased tuition fees, King&#x27;s College London students founded London&#x27;s first student-led think tank, King&#x27;s Think Tank (formerly known as KCL Think Tank). With a membership of more than 2000, it is the largest organisation of its kind in Europe. This student initiative organises lectures and discussions in seven different policy areas, and assists students in lobbying politicians, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and other policymakers with their ideas. Every May, it produces a peer-reviewed journal of policy recommendations called &quot;The Spectrum&quot;.

=== Music ===
There are many music societies at King&#x27;s including a cappella groups, orchestras, choir, musical theatre and jazz society. King&#x27;s has three orchestras: King&#x27;s College London Symphony Orchestra (KCLSO), King&#x27;s College London Chamber Orchestra and KCL Concert Orchestra.

Founded in 1945, the Choir of King&#x27;s College London consists of around 30 choral scholars. The choir regularly broadcasts on BBC Radio 3 and Radio 4 and has made recordings mainly focus on 16th-century English and Spanish repertoire.

All the King&#x27;s Men is an all-male a cappella ensemble from King&#x27;s College London. Founded in 2009, it become the first group outside of Oxford and Cambridge to win The Voice Festival UK in 2012.

American rock band Foo Fighters played their first UK gig at King&#x27;s College London Students Union in 1995. Pop singer Taylor Swift played her first UK gig at the Strand Campus in 2008.

=== Rivalry with University College London ===

Competition within the University of London is most intense between King&#x27;s and University College London, the two oldest institutions. Indeed, the University of London when it was established has been described as &quot;an umbrella organisation designed to disguise the rivalry between UCL and KCL.&quot; In the early twentieth century, King&#x27;s College London and UCL rivalry was centred on their respective mascots. University College&#x27;s was Phineas Maclino, a wooden tobacconist&#x27;s sign of a kilted Jacobite Highlander purloined from outside a shop in Tottenham Court Road during the celebrations of the relief of Ladysmith in 1900. King&#x27;s later addition was a giant beer bottle representing &quot;bottled youth&quot;. In 1923 it was replaced by a new mascot to rival Phineas – Reggie the Lion, who made his debut at a King&#x27;s–UCL sporting rag in December 1923, protected by a lifeguard of engineering students armed with T-squares. Thereafter, Reggie formed the centrepiece of annual freshers&#x27; processions by King&#x27;s students around Aldwych in which new students were typically flour bombed.

Although riots between respective college students occurred in central London well into the 1950s, rivalry is now limited to the rugby union pitch and skulduggery over mascots, with the annual London Varsity series culminating in the historic match between King&#x27;s College London RFC and University College London RFC.

=== Rivalry with the London School of Economics ===
On 2 December 2005, tensions between King&#x27;s and the London School of Economics (LSE) were ignited when at least 200 students from LSE (located in Aldwych near the Strand Campus) diverted off from the annual &quot;barrel run&quot; and caused an estimated £32,000 of damage to the English department at King&#x27;s. &quot;The Times&quot; reported that LSE director Howard Davies attended the fun run event, while LSE claimed that Davies only attended for a short time. King&#x27;s principal, Sir Rick Trainor, deplored the behaviour, appealed to King&#x27;s students to remain calm and called for no retaliation. The LSE Students&#x27; Union later on 6 December issued a formal apology, condemned the actions, as well as promising to foot the bill for the damage repair.
=== Student residences ===

King&#x27;s has 14 halls of residence in central London. The university guarantees accommodation for new first-year undergraduate or foundation year students who make a firm acceptance of their offer and apply for accommodation by a defined date, and to postgraduates who make a firm acceptance of their offer and apply for accommodation by a different defined date. Accommodation is also guaranteed for care-experienced students, and students who are under 18 on move-in day. The university also has a scheme, King&#x27;s Affordable Accommodation Scheme (KAAS) which enables undergraduate students to access accommodation priced at below market levels, provided applicants for the scheme meet the eligibility criteria. There is a limited quota for KAAS rooms in a number of King&#x27;s residences.

There are also five intercollegiate halls shared with the constituent colleges of the University of London, which full-time students at King&#x27;s are eligible to live in.

The university&#x27;s Champion Hill residence has been empty since 2020, following the discovery of fire safety concerns and subsequent relocation of students and staff. A university spokesperson stated in March 2024, &quot;We are working to refurbish these buildings with the aim to have them available as student accommodation as soon as work is completed, and it is safe to do so.&quot;

King&#x27;s newest residence opened in Battersea, in September 2024, and contains 452 rooms. A number of affordable rooms have been secured under the KAAS scheme.

== Notable people ==
=== Notable alumni ===
There are 14 Nobel laureates who were associated with either King&#x27;s College London or one of the institutions that have since merged with it. Notable alumni in the sciences include Nobel laureates Peter Higgs (Physics), Sir Michael Houghton (Medicine) and Michael Levitt (Chemistry). Others include Sir Francis Galton, polymath and pioneer of eugenics. Alumni in performing arts include impressionist Rory Bremner; Queen bassist John Deacon; and Oscar winners Greer Garson, Edmund Gwenn and Anne Dudley. In law, alumni include Karim Ahmad Khan, Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, and Patrick Lipton Robinson, a judge of the International Court of Justice. In literature, alumni include the dramatist Sir W. S. Gilbert of Gilbert and Sullivan, and the writers Thomas Hardy, Sir Arthur C. Clarke and Virginia Woolf.

Notable King&#x27;s alumni to have held senior positions in British politics include two Speakers of the House of Commons (Horace King and James Lowther), and one Foreign Secretary (David Owen). King&#x27;s has also educated numerous foreign heads of state and government including two presidents of Cyprus, Tassos Papadopoulos and Glafcos Clerides; Marouf al-Bakhit, Prime Minister of Jordan; France-Albert René, President of the Seychelles; Sir Lynden Pindling, Prime Minister of the Bahamas; Godfrey Binaisa, President of Uganda; Abd al-Rahman al-Bazzaz, Prime Minister of Iraq; Maurice Bishop, Prime Minister of Grenada; and Sir Lee Moore, Prime Minister of Saint Kitts and Nevis.

King&#x27;s alumni in religion include Desmond Tutu, Nobel Peace Prize laureate and Archbishop of Cape Town; George Carey, Archbishop of Canterbury; and Jonathan Sacks, Chief Rabbi of the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth. While in the military, alumni include Sir Tony Radakin, Chief of the Defence Staff; Lord Harding, Chief of the Imperial General Staff; Sir Michael Wigston, Chief of the Air Staff; and two recipients of the Victoria Cross, Ferdinand Le Quesne and Mark Sever Bell. King&#x27;s is also the alma mater of the founder of Bentley Motors, Walter Bentley; oil magnate and philanthropist Calouste Gulbenkian, and Olympic gold medalists Dame Katherine Grainger, Paul Bennett and Kieran West.

=== Notable academics and staff ===
Notable academics at King&#x27;s have included Sir Charles Lyell (geologist and author of &quot;Principles of Geology&quot;), Sir Charles Wheatstone (best known for the Wheatstone bridge), James Clerk Maxwell (mathematical physicist known for Maxwell&#x27;s equations describing the motion of light as an electro-magnetic wave), Joseph Lister (pioneer of antiseptic surgery), Charles Barkla (winner of the 1917 Nobel Prize in Physics), Sir Owen Richardson (winner of the 1928 Nobel Prize in Physics), Sir Edward Appleton (winner of the 1947 Nobel Prize in Physics), Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin (both known for their contributions to the discovery of the structure of DNA, for which Wilkins won the 1962 Nobel Prize for Medicine after Franklin&#x27;s death), Mario Vargas Llosa (writer and winner of the 2010 Nobel Prize for Literature), and Sir Roger Penrose (winner of the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics).

== In popular culture ==
=== Film and television settings ===
The neoclassical facade of King&#x27;s, with the passage which connects the Strand to the Somerset House terrace, has been utilised to reproduce the late Victorian Strand in the opening scenes of Oliver Parker&#x27;s 2002 film &quot;The Importance of Being Earnest&quot;. The East Wing of King&#x27;s appears, as a part of Somerset House, in a number of other productions, such as &quot;Wilde&quot; and &quot;The Duchess&quot;.

The Maughan Library has also been the location of some film shoots of popular movies and TV series, most notably &quot;Johnny English&quot;, &quot;The Imitation Game&quot; and &quot;V for Vendetta&quot;.

Part of Dan Brown&#x27;s novel &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot; was set in the Round Reading Room of the Maughan Library, although no part of the film adaption was filmed there.

In September 1979, The Greenwood Theatre at Guy&#x27;s Medical School (now King&#x27;s GKT Medical School) became the first home for the &quot;BBC&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Question Time&quot; programme. In December 2018, &quot;Question Time&quot; returned to the Greenwood Theatre for David Dimbleby&#x27;s last programme as host.

==See also==
* Armorial of UK universities
* List of universities in the UK

== Notes ==

== References ==
; Bibliography
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Comment&quot; – quarterly newsletter of King&#x27;s College London, edited by the Public Relations Department.
* &quot;Profile&quot; – annual publication of King&#x27;s College London.
* &quot;Report&quot; – annual publication of King&#x27;s College London.
== Further reading ==
* Huelin, G. (1978) &quot;King&#x27;s College London, 1828–1978&quot;.
* Jones, C. K. (2004) &quot;King&#x27;s College London: In the service of society&quot;.
* (Includes King&#x27;s students who matriculated in or graduated from the University of London)
* (Includes personnel from King&#x27;s)

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="0" end="26" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="39" end="50" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="54" end="57" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="KCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="64" end="70" title="public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="71" end="90" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="102" end="108" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="150" end="163" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="195" end="209" title="George IV of the United Kingdom" label="King George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="218" end="236" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407956" start="281" end="298" title="university college" label="founding colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="306" end="326" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785074" start="345" end="392" title="Third-oldest university in England debate" label="oldest university-level institutions in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q991099" start="481" end="504" title="Queen Elizabeth College" label="Queen Elizabeth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090062" start="509" end="550" title="Chelsea College of Science and Technology" label="Chelsea College of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q631045" start="566" end="589" title="Institute of Psychiatry" label="Institute of Psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028979" start="605" end="682" title="United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospitals" label="United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q841076" start="691" end="743" title="Florence Nightingale School of Nursing and Midwifery" label="Florence Nightingale School of Nursing and Midwifery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555679" start="799" end="812" title="Strand Campus" label="Strand Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="844" end="850" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257939" start="926" end="938" title="Denmark Hill" label="Denmark Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394500" start="942" end="954" title="south London" label="south London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088790" start="982" end="992" title="Shrivenham" label="Shrivenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="994" end="1005" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q943517" start="1063" end="1070" title="Newquay" label="Newquay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="1072" end="1080" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601204" start="1406" end="1430" title="List of UK universities by endowment" label="fourth largest endowment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644419" start="1539" end="1590" title="list of universities in the United Kingdom by enrolment" label="university in the United Kingdom by total enrolment"/>
<link wikidata="Q593768" start="1795" end="1835" title="Association of Commonwealth Universities" label="Association of Commonwealth Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q868940" start="1841" end="1872" title="European University Association" label="European University Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q590631" start="1882" end="1895" title="Russell Group" label="Russell Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1924" end="1948" title="Medical Research Council (UK)#Institutes, centres and units" label="Medical Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410963" start="2032" end="2059" title="King&amp;#x27;s Health Partners" label="King&amp;#x27;s Health Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671274" start="2060" end="2091" title="academic health sciences centre" label="academic health sciences centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q326044" start="2093" end="2116" title="Francis Crick Institute" label="Francis Crick Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706987" start="2121" end="2128" title="MedCity (London)" label="MedCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q841076" start="2316" end="2369" title="Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery" label="Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073858" start="2426" end="2441" title="Golden triangle (universities)" label="golden triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="2604" end="2622" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="2654" end="2670" title="King Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635881" start="2744" end="2762" title="List of Nobel laureates affiliated with King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="14 Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2797" end="2800" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q154869" start="2812" end="2823" title="Hepatitis C" label="Hepatitis C"/>
<link wikidata="Q327281" start="2829" end="2840" title="Hepatitis D" label="Hepatitis D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="2841" end="2847" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q402" start="2857" end="2868" title="Higgs boson" label="Higgs boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="2882" end="2904" title="In vitro fertilisation" label="in-vitro fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939923" start="2906" end="2915" title="Somatic cell nuclear transfer" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q171433" start="2916" end="2922" title="Dolly the sheep" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11710128" start="2939" end="2953" title="St Christopher&amp;#x27;s Hospice" label="modern hospice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="3157" end="3173" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="3179" end="3211" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Speakers of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="3248" end="3262" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="3292" end="3298" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscars"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="3306" end="3313" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammys"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="3319" end="3323" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="3329" end="3341" title="Golden Globes" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="3351" end="3363" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="3458" end="3472" title="George IV of the United Kingdom" label="King George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="3744" end="3770" title="University College London" label="University College, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="3832" end="3844" title="Utilitarians" label="Utilitarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="3846" end="3850" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="3855" end="3869" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155605" start="4247" end="4254" title="upper class" label="wealthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="4255" end="4264" title="Anglicans" label="Anglicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="4531" end="4535" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4657" end="4679" title="List of modern universities in Europe (1801–1945)#19th century" label="series of institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="4748" end="4769" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4798" end="4805" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="4820" end="4835" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="4910" end="4917" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="4923" end="4947" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q12644761" start="4955" end="4962" title="visitor" label="visitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="5038" end="5053" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="5055" end="5086" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Speaker of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q73341" start="5095" end="5115" title="Lord Mayor of London" label="Lord Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="5198" end="5238" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="5253" end="5289" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602689" start="5348" end="5373" title="Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829" label="Roman Catholic Relief Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101557" start="5469" end="5513" title="George Finch-Hatton, 10th Earl of Winchilsea" label="George Finch-Hatton, 10th Earl of Winchilsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428908" start="5604" end="5613" title="Test Acts" label="Test Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="5640" end="5646" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5698" end="5709" title="Matriculation#United Kingdom" label="matriculate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="5715" end="5724" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="5967" end="5988" title="Catholic emancipation" label="Catholic emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="6765" end="6769" title="duel" label="duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q810947" start="6773" end="6789" title="Battersea Park" label="Battersea Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016400" start="7439" end="7452" title="William Otter" label="William Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="7512" end="7536" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559943" start="7618" end="7641" title="Charles James Blomfield" label="Charles James Blomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587771" start="7647" end="7663" title="Bishop of London" label="Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q844561" start="7901" end="7915" title="William Howley" label="William Howley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410900" start="8175" end="8201" title="King&amp;#x27;s College School" label="King&amp;#x27;s College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="8430" end="8439" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809271" start="9024" end="9056" title="Associate of King&amp;#x27;s College" label="Associate of King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q156942" start="9785" end="9803" title="Charles Wheatstone" label="Charles Wheatstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="10177" end="10197" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="10440" end="10448" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736153" start="10473" end="10498" title="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366200" start="10532" end="10541" title="Rookery (slum)" label="rookeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="10598" end="10626" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257939" start="10780" end="10792" title="Denmark Hill" label="Denmark Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q385060" start="10794" end="10804" title="Camberwell" label="Camberwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="10841" end="10854" title="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister" label="Joseph Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q274493" start="10964" end="10974" title="antiseptic" label="antiseptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="11135" end="11161" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q123965306" start="11636" end="11653" title="45 &amp;amp; 46 Vict." label="45 &amp;amp; 46 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q3814645" start="12322" end="12339" title="Kensington Square" label="Kensington Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q123944471" start="12456" end="12464" title="3 Edw. 7" label="3 Edw. 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q123944481" start="12699" end="12707" title="8 Edw. 7" label="8 Edw. 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q110855421" start="12922" end="12946" title="Linetta de Castelvecchio Richardson" label="Linetta de Castelvecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827284" start="13181" end="13203" title="Auxiliary Fire Service" label="Auxiliary Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825427" start="13296" end="13308" title="fire lookouts" label="firewatchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13381944" start="13344" end="13354" title="quadrangle (architecture)" label="quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="13372" end="13376" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="13441" end="13450" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q60535862" start="13789" end="13801" title="double helix" label="double helix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="13815" end="13818" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q184659" start="13830" end="13845" title="Maurice Wilkins" label="Maurice Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7474" start="13850" end="13867" title="Rosalind Franklin" label="Rosalind Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930621" start="13883" end="13898" title="Ray Gosling" label="Raymond Gosling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173100" start="13900" end="13911" title="Alex Stokes" label="Alex Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735948" start="13913" end="13927" title="Herbert Wilson" label="Herbert Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291530" start="13957" end="14006" title="Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics" label="Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118956" start="14107" end="14121" title="Robbins Report" label="Robbins Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251481" start="14966" end="14989" title="National Health Service (England)" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q991099" start="15012" end="15035" title="Queen Elizabeth College" label="Queen Elizabeth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090062" start="15040" end="15055" title="Chelsea College of Science and Technology" label="Chelsea College"/>
<link wikidata="Q631045" start="15073" end="15096" title="Institute of Psychiatry" label="Institute of Psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028979" start="15118" end="15195" title="United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospitals" label="United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410897" start="15232" end="15263" title="GKT School of Medical Education" label="GKT School of Medical Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="15278" end="15298" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q841076" start="15407" end="15459" title="Florence Nightingale School of Nursing and Midwifery" label="Florence Nightingale School of Nursing and Midwifery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505035" start="15507" end="15527" title="Public Record Office" label="Public Record Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q404351" start="15540" end="15553" title="Chancery Lane" label="Chancery Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167115" start="15605" end="15620" title="Maughan Library" label="Maughan Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="15787" end="15807" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="15816" end="15829" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q326044" start="16572" end="16595" title="Francis Crick Institute" label="Francis Crick Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q23891246" start="16839" end="16884" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London Mathematics School" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London Mathematics School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500295" start="16888" end="16899" title="Free school (England)" label="free school"/>
<link wikidata="Q895809" start="16900" end="16910" title="sixth form" label="sixth form"/>
<link wikidata="Q148349" start="16922" end="16929" title="Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342122" start="16980" end="16988" title="Ed Byrne (academic)" label="Ed Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331815" start="16998" end="17010" title="Rick Trainor" label="Rick Trainor"/>
<link wikidata="Q852282" start="17788" end="17798" title="Bush House" label="Bush House"/>
<link wikidata="Q756819" start="18079" end="18085" title="Strand, London" label="Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="18093" end="18112" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18145" end="18159" title="Listed building#England and Wales" label="Grade I listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q21592162" start="18169" end="18189" title="King&amp;#x27;s Building, London" label="King&amp;#x27;s Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q983719" start="18233" end="18250" title="Robert Smirke (architect)" label="Sir Robert Smirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344889" start="18264" end="18278" title="Somerset House" label="Somerset House"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="18314" end="18326" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410893" start="18342" end="18375" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London Chapel" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="18399" end="18423" title="Sir George Gilbert Scott" label="Sir George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q852282" start="18621" end="18631" title="Bush House" label="Bush House"/>
<link wikidata="Q893261" start="18699" end="18707" title="Kingsway, London" label="Kingsway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167115" start="18717" end="18732" title="Maughan Library" label="Maughan Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q404351" start="18751" end="18764" title="Chancery Lane" label="Chancery Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432389" start="18866" end="18885" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London School of Arts &amp;amp; Humanities" label="arts and humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730132" start="18887" end="18890" title="The Dickson Poon School of Law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="19186" end="19197" title="London Underground" label="Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431071" start="19209" end="19215" title="Temple tube station" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="19310" end="19323" title="London Bridge" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q154322" start="19331" end="19341" title="South Bank" label="South Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q777039" start="19375" end="19394" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410897" start="19414" end="19451" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London School of Medicine" label="faculty of life sciences and medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21592481" start="19732" end="19758" title="Gordon Museum of Pathology" label="Gordon Museum of Pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23891179" start="19767" end="19790" title="Museum of Life Sciences" label="Museum of Life Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410896" start="19874" end="19894" title="KCLSU" label="Students&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525181" start="20117" end="20127" title="Thomas Guy" label="Thomas Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210696" start="20211" end="20228" title="South Sea Company" label="South Sea Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q26665639" start="20232" end="20252" title="statue of Thomas Guy" label="statue of Thomas Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="20435" end="20456" title="George Floyd protests" label="George Floyd protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q801125" start="20647" end="20660" title="London Bridge tube station" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="20748" end="20755" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q501003" start="20764" end="20779" title="Waterloo Bridge" label="Waterloo Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339207" start="20823" end="20839" title="Southbank Centre" label="Southbank Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10319641" start="21521" end="21529" title="Waterloo tube station" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="21640" end="21664" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="21678" end="21694" title="St Thomas Becket" label="St Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="21699" end="21706" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="21719" end="21739" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460739" start="21836" end="21863" title="Florence Nightingale Museum" label="Florence Nightingale Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549587" start="21925" end="21938" title="Lambeth North tube station" label="Lambeth North"/>
<link wikidata="Q385060" start="22039" end="22049" title="Camberwell" label="Camberwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q730706" start="22053" end="22062" title="London Borough of Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q631045" start="22086" end="22138" title="Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience" label="Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="22310" end="22320" title="London Overground" label="Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981385" start="22332" end="22344" title="Denmark Hill railway station" label="Denmark Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054629" start="22675" end="22685" title="New Malden" label="New Malden"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636553" start="22690" end="22699" title="Honor Oak" label="Honor Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251144" start="22823" end="22860" title="Defence Academy of the United Kingdom" label="Defence Academy of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088790" start="22864" end="22874" title="Shrivenham" label="Shrivenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="22876" end="22887" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269376" start="23031" end="23071" title="Joint Services Command and Staff College" label="Joint Services Command and Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="23105" end="23124" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q943517" start="23276" end="23283" title="Newquay" label="Newquay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="23285" end="23293" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12416358" start="23478" end="23493" title="Vice-Chancellor" label="Vice-Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713543" start="23868" end="23880" title="Shitij Kapur" label="Shitij Kapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894668" start="24334" end="24341" title="University council" label="council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410896" start="24516" end="24563" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London Students&amp;#x27; Union" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London Students&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112399" start="24769" end="24786" title="Christopher Geidt" label="Christopher Geidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475782" start="24834" end="24848" title="academic senate" label="academic board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809271" start="26219" end="26255" title="Associateship of King&amp;#x27;s College" label="Associateship of King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="26451" end="26461" title="priesthood" label="priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q107690043" start="26483" end="26499" title="Ellen Clark-King" label="Ellen Clark-King"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="26668" end="26692" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q12644761" start="26742" end="26749" title="visitor" label="visitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800439" start="27182" end="27204" title="ecclesiastical history" label="ecclesiastical history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056335" start="27206" end="27223" title="pastoral theology" label="pastoral theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="27228" end="27236" title="exegesis" label="exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="28044" end="28050" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7725501" start="28164" end="28188" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Globe" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q734266" start="28194" end="28220" title="Courtauld Institute of Art" label="Courtauld Institute of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144673" start="28229" end="28251" title="Royal Academy of Music" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259432" start="28510" end="28523" title="dental school" label="dental school"/>
<link wikidata="Q107653617" start="28698" end="28719" title="Royal Dental Hospital" label="Royal Dental Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q644875" start="29251" end="29262" title="Thomas Bell (zoologist)" label="Thomas Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q96378486" start="29319" end="29343" title="Frederick Newland-Pedley" label="Frederick Newland-Pedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044742" start="29925" end="29945" title="Department of Health (United Kingdom)" label="Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028979" start="30240" end="30317" title="United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospitals" label="United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018524" start="30417" end="30435" title="William Smith, 3rd Viscount Hambleden" label="Viscount Hambleden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410897" start="31171" end="31202" title="GKT School of Medical Education" label="GKT School of Medical Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q13948235" start="31276" end="31280" title="MBBS" label="MBBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q631045" start="31758" end="31810" title="Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience" label="Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="31896" end="31910" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="31931" end="31936" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730132" start="32386" end="32412" title="Dickson Poon School of Law" label="Dickson Poon School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321960" start="32420" end="32430" title="law school" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="32554" end="32580" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="33037" end="33056" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659887" start="33058" end="33074" title="Harold A. Wilson (physicist)" label="Harold A. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q160522" start="33076" end="33097" title="Charles Glover Barkla" label="Charles Glover Barkla"/>
<link wikidata="Q169330" start="33099" end="33118" title="Owen Willans Richardson" label="Sir Owen Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q153194" start="33120" end="33139" title="Sir Edward Appleton" label="Sir Edward Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306233" start="33144" end="33161" title="Charles Drummond Ellis" label="Sir Charles Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28003" start="33202" end="33218" title="Copley Medal" label="Copley medallist"/>
<link wikidata="Q315752" start="33219" end="33240" title="John Frederic Daniell" label="John Frederic Daniell"/>
<link wikidata="Q853745" start="33672" end="33693" title="school of engineering" label="school of engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="34342" end="34362" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405160" start="35087" end="35123" title="School of Education, Communication and Society" label="education, communication and society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260529" start="35231" end="35256" title="Department of War Studies, King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="department of war studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543606" start="35418" end="35459" title="Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives" label="Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q852282" start="35699" end="35709" title="Bush House" label="Bush House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435271" start="35734" end="35754" title="triple accreditation" label="triple accreditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q392156" start="35764" end="35783" title="Association of MBAs" label="Association of MBAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376925" start="35789" end="35820" title="EFMD Quality Improvement System" label="EFMD Quality Improvement System"/>
<link wikidata="Q744144" start="35829" end="35882" title="Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business" label="Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601204" start="36649" end="36673" title="List of UK universities by endowment" label="fourth-largest endowment"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="36714" end="36720" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="36722" end="36731" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="36736" end="36745" title="University of Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="36775" end="36787" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q165762" start="36885" end="36903" title="Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom" label="royal coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q740263" start="36921" end="36933" title="inescutcheon" label="inescutcheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="36941" end="36957" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="37153" end="37168" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q739384" start="37259" end="37280" title="London County Council" label="London County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="37592" end="37612" title="Blazon" label="heraldic terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595546" start="38409" end="38449" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27;s Hospital Medical School" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27;s Hospital Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="38514" end="38538" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q777039" start="38543" end="38562" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028979" start="39063" end="39140" title="United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospitals" label="United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="39317" end="39345" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410897" start="39356" end="39418" title="GKT School of Medical Education" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s, King&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="39746" end="39766" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q590631" start="39800" end="39813" title="Russell Group" label="Russell Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="39843" end="39864" title="research universities" label="research universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883765" start="39922" end="39991" title="Institutional Network of the Universities from the Capitals of Europe" label="Institutional Network of the Universities from the Capitals of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q59490097" start="40082" end="40131" title="Guild of European Research-Intensive Universities" label="Guild of European Research-Intensive Universities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40146" end="40174" title="European Higher Education Area#European Universities initiative" label="European University alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q593768" start="40180" end="40220" title="Association of Commonwealth Universities" label="Association of Commonwealth Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q868940" start="40232" end="40263" title="European University Association" label="European University Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495783" start="40274" end="40289" title="Universities UK" label="Universities UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073858" start="40347" end="40362" title="Golden triangle (universities)" label="golden triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410963" start="40673" end="40700" title="King&amp;#x27;s Health Partners" label="King&amp;#x27;s Health Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671274" start="40705" end="40735" title="academic health science centre" label="academic health science centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q777039" start="40746" end="40797" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; NHS Foundation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="40799" end="40827" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567852" start="40850" end="40896" title="South London and Maudsley NHS Trust" label="South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q326044" start="41004" end="41027" title="Francis Crick Institute" label="Francis Crick Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706987" start="41060" end="41067" title="MedCity (London)" label="MedCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="41264" end="41288" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q734764" start="41293" end="41322" title="University of New South Wales" label="University of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339742" start="41335" end="41348" title="PLuS Alliance" label="PLuS Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732971" start="41459" end="41470" title="FutureLearn" label="FutureLearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q967853" start="41474" end="41500" title="massive open online course" label="massive open online course"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="41640" end="41659" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q999763" start="41661" end="41682" title="University of Paris 1 Pantheon-Sorbonne" label="University of Paris I"/>
<link wikidata="Q15568" start="41684" end="41707" title="University of Hong Kong" label="University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q738236" start="41709" end="41741" title="National University of Singapore" label="National University of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144673" start="41743" end="41765" title="Royal Academy of Music" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="41767" end="41782" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q193375" start="41784" end="41795" title="Tate Modern" label="Tate Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7725501" start="41797" end="41821" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Globe" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="41823" end="41839" title="National Gallery" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="41841" end="41866" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="41871" end="41885" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="41904" end="41915" title="Mathematics" label="Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="41969" end="41992" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="41997" end="42022" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="42189" end="42192" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="42335" end="42358" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="42363" end="42388" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670211" start="42461" end="42493" title="London Centre for Nanotechnology" label="London Centre for Nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203347" start="42772" end="42775" title="Science and Engineering South" label="SES"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795383" start="43058" end="43077" title="Thomas Young Centre" label="Thomas Young Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753919" start="43307" end="43348" title="Screen Studies Group, London" label="University of London Screen Studies Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q647390" start="44287" end="44306" title="Royal Festival Hall" label="Royal Festival Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339207" start="44314" end="44330" title="Southbank Centre" label="Southbank Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="44386" end="44403" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q653858" start="44431" end="44446" title="Barbican Centre" label="Barbican Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q922967" start="44531" end="44545" title="St Mary Overie" label="St Mary Overie"/>
<link wikidata="Q922967" start="44674" end="44693" title="Southwark Cathedral" label="Southwark Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="44801" end="44821" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q158067" start="44962" end="44979" title="Vivienne Westwood" label="Vivienne Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315085" start="45325" end="45354" title="Research Excellence Framework" label="Research Excellence Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475036" start="45508" end="45530" title="Times Higher Education" label="Times Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q777039" start="45993" end="46012" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="46014" end="46042" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="46047" end="46071" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744209" start="46138" end="46162" title="University of Portsmouth" label="University of Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410963" start="46494" end="46521" title="King&amp;#x27;s Health Partners" label="King&amp;#x27;s Health Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671274" start="46542" end="46573" title="academic health sciences centre" label="academic health sciences centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46679" end="46703" title="Medical Research Council (UK)#Institutes, centres and units" label="Medical Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973576" start="46836" end="46883" title="National Institute for Health and Care Research" label="National Institute for Health and Care Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q749394" start="47233" end="47237" title="World Anti-Doping Agency" label="WADA"/>
<link wikidata="Q166376" start="47329" end="47335" title="doping (sport)" label="doping"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="47387" end="47418" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429378" start="47453" end="47466" title="ISO/IEC 17025" label="ISO/IEC 17025"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="47533" end="47552" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="London 2012 Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182798" start="47557" end="47573" title="2012 Summer Paralympics" label="Paralympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="47693" end="47709" title="Listed building" label="Grade II* listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="47723" end="47737" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="gothic revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505035" start="47745" end="47765" title="Public Record Office" label="Public Record Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161333" start="47787" end="47808" title="James Pennethorne" label="Sir James Pennethorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q404351" start="47822" end="47835" title="Chancery Lane" label="Chancery Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="48122" end="48136" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523127" start="48293" end="48319" title="Garfield Weston Foundation" label="Garfield Weston Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="48330" end="48350" title="stained glass window" label="stained glass window"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="48353" end="48359" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="48393" end="48404" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q948332" start="48426" end="48443" title="Pietro Torrigiano" label="Pietro Torrigiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265157" start="48447" end="48457" title="John Yonge" label="John Yonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q216665" start="48756" end="48766" title="incunabula" label="incunabula"/>
<link wikidata="Q190399" start="49322" end="49331" title="pamphlets" label="pamphlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q316123" start="49594" end="49609" title="Silius Italicus" label="Silius Italicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219433" start="49623" end="49629" title="Punica (poem)" label="Punica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="49655" end="49670" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="49717" end="49730" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197966" start="49744" end="49766" title="The Road to Wigan Pier" label="The Road to Wigan Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543606" start="49901" end="49942" title="Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives" label="Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526796" start="50754" end="50778" title="Sir Frederick Wills, 1st Baronet" label="late Sir Frederick Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q30288170" start="51801" end="51850" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567852" start="51859" end="51905" title="South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust" label="South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51973" end="51993" title="Senate House (University of London)#Senate House Library" label="Senate House Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248856" start="52052" end="52076" title="School of Advanced Study" label="School of Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q21592481" start="52342" end="52368" title="Gordon Museum of Pathology" label="Gordon Museum of Pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23891179" start="52377" end="52400" title="Museum of Life Sciences" label="Museum of Life Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q749557" start="52794" end="52807" title="Astley Cooper" label="Astley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="52829" end="52846" title="Sir Joseph Lister" label="Sir Joseph Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q15961537" start="53107" end="53129" title="King George III Museum" label="King George III Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="53235" end="53245" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q156942" start="53299" end="53321" title="Sir Charles Wheatstone" label="Sir Charles Wheatstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="53326" end="53341" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="53459" end="53473" title="Science Museum, London" label="Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21592162" start="53598" end="53618" title="King&amp;#x27;s Building, London" label="King&amp;#x27;s Building"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54000" end="54025" title="London Burkers#&amp;quot;Italian Boy&amp;quot; Murder" label="Italian Boy&amp;#x27;s murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q588140" start="54284" end="54298" title="science centre" label="science centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639583" start="54433" end="54480" title="Sunday Times University of the Year" label="&amp;quot;Sunday Times&amp;quot; University of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293303" start="54528" end="54553" title="Complete University Guide" label="Complete University Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="54993" end="55005" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427676" start="55582" end="55610" title="Research Assessment Exercise" label="Research Assessment Exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606488" start="55670" end="55694" title="Quality Assurance Agency" label="Quality Assurance Agency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55703" end="55729" title="College and university rankings#International rankings from regional organizations" label="global university rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="55782" end="55810" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475036" start="55880" end="55902" title="Times Higher Education" label="Times Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="55939" end="55967" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="56032" end="56070" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="Academic Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809271" start="56559" end="56595" title="Associateship of King&amp;#x27;s College" label="Associateship of King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330404" start="57443" end="57463" title="post-nominal letters" label="post-nominal letters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57528" end="57538" title="Fellow#Academia" label="Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073200" start="58073" end="58096" title="List of Chaplains of King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="chaplain of King&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q918094" start="58144" end="58151" title="guinea (coin)" label="guineas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722300" start="58318" end="58330" title="Alfred Barry" label="Alfred Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069804" start="58374" end="58388" title="Thorold Rogers" label="Thorold Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186265" start="58400" end="58414" title="William Burges" label="William Burges"/>
<link wikidata="Q468149" start="58433" end="58447" title="Robert Swinhoe" label="Robert Swinhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967880" start="58495" end="58511" title="Lilian Faithfull" label="Lilian Faithfull"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627903" start="58970" end="58990" title="Student unionism in the United Kingdom" label="students&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410896" start="58996" end="59043" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London Students&amp;#x27; Union" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London Students&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q899363" start="59584" end="59596" title="papier-mâché" label="papier-mâché"/>
<link wikidata="Q31576" start="59793" end="59808" title="sterling silver" label="sterling silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339819" start="60182" end="60191" title="Roar News" label="Roar News"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60576" end="60592" title="Mind (charity)#Campaigns" label="Mind Media Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748068" start="60760" end="60778" title="the London Varsity" label="the London Varsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516740" start="61080" end="61106" title="student television station" label="student television station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61238" end="61258" title="University of London#Sports, clubs and traditions" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971186" start="61263" end="61298" title="British Universities and Colleges Sport" label="British Universities &amp;amp; Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q623109" start="61306" end="61313" title="Sport league" label="leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722421" start="61348" end="61359" title="Macadam Cup" label="Macadam Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099018" start="61377" end="61391" title="Ivison Macadam" label="Ivison Macadam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979170" start="61434" end="61460" title="National Union of Students (United Kingdom)" label="National Union of Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916170" start="61467" end="61480" title="List of British and Irish varsity matches" label="varsity match"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054629" start="61989" end="61999" title="New Malden" label="New Malden"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636553" start="62004" end="62013" title="Honor Oak" label="Honor Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993504" start="62543" end="62594" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; NHS Foundation Trust" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s and St Thomas&amp;#x27; NHS Foundation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="63072" end="63082" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="63372" end="63402" title="non-governmental organisations" label="non-governmental organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="63628" end="63638" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q112228197" start="63883" end="63918" title="Choir of King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="Choir of King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q626703" start="63941" end="63955" title="choral scholar" label="choral scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="63992" end="64003" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="64008" end="64015" title="BBC Radio 4" label="Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="64248" end="64254" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="64259" end="64268" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="64327" end="64339" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="64431" end="64443" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="64570" end="64590" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="64631" end="64656" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410898" start="64889" end="64931" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London and UCL rivalry" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London and UCL rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="64964" end="64970" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16406" start="65029" end="65040" title="tobacconist" label="tobacconist"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="65074" end="65084" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647486" start="65118" end="65138" title="Tottenham Court Road" label="Tottenham Court Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q874262" start="65180" end="65189" title="Ladysmith, KwaZulu-Natal" label="Ladysmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="65402" end="65405" title="University College London" label="UCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410898" start="65415" end="65418" title="Student Rags" label="rag"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883551" start="65560" end="65567" title="fresher" label="fresher"/>
<link wikidata="Q620182" start="65618" end="65625" title="Aldwych" label="Aldwych"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="65807" end="65818" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748068" start="65871" end="65885" title="The London Varsity" label="London Varsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410899" start="65935" end="65965" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Rugby Club" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="66111" end="66137" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q620182" start="66205" end="66212" title="Aldwych" label="Aldwych"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="66379" end="66388" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631770" start="66422" end="66435" title="Howard Davies (economist)" label="Howard Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331815" start="66549" end="66565" title="Rick Trainor" label="Sir Rick Trainor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459942" start="66674" end="66698" title="LSE Students&amp;#x27; Union" label="LSE Students&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="67742" end="67762" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069998" start="67852" end="67865" title="Champion Hill" label="Champion Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138912" start="68260" end="68269" title="Battersea" label="Battersea"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="68442" end="68457" title="list of Nobel laureates" label="Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q192112" start="68631" end="68642" title="Peter Higgs" label="Peter Higgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927895" start="68654" end="68674" title="Michael Houghton (virologist)" label="Sir Michael Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832227" start="68690" end="68704" title="Michael Levitt (biophysicist)" label="Michael Levitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q191026" start="68733" end="68751" title="Francis Galton" label="Sir Francis Galton"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="68777" end="68785" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400702" start="68835" end="68847" title="Rory Bremner" label="Rory Bremner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="68849" end="68854" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192103" start="68863" end="68874" title="John Deacon" label="John Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="68880" end="68885" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182486" start="68894" end="68906" title="Greer Garson" label="Greer Garson"/>
<link wikidata="Q344750" start="68908" end="68920" title="Edmund Gwenn" label="Edmund Gwenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q273502" start="68925" end="68936" title="Anne Dudley" label="Anne Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370541" start="68961" end="68977" title="Karim Ahmad Khan" label="Karim Ahmad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250572" start="68985" end="69031" title="Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court" label="Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304283" start="69037" end="69060" title="Patrick Lipton Robinson" label="Patrick Lipton Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q348513" start="69153" end="69170" title="W. S. Gilbert" label="Sir W. S. Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="69174" end="69194" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="69212" end="69224" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="69226" end="69246" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Sir Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="69251" end="69265" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627883" start="69391" end="69402" title="Horace King, Baron Maybray-King" label="Horace King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680725" start="69407" end="69420" title="James Lowther, 1st Viscount Ullswater" label="James Lowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="69431" end="69448" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333085" start="69450" end="69460" title="David Owen" label="David Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q200776" start="69576" end="69595" title="Tassos Papadopoulos" label="Tassos Papadopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q317648" start="69600" end="69616" title="Glafcos Clerides" label="Glafcos Clerides"/>
<link wikidata="Q299743" start="69618" end="69634" title="Marouf al-Bakhit" label="Marouf al-Bakhit"/>
<link wikidata="Q224986" start="69662" end="69680" title="France-Albert René" label="France-Albert René"/>
<link wikidata="Q920953" start="69711" end="69730" title="Lynden Pindling" label="Sir Lynden Pindling"/>
<link wikidata="Q433057" start="69763" end="69778" title="Godfrey Binaisa" label="Godfrey Binaisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q307459" start="69801" end="69824" title="Abd al-Rahman al-Bazzaz" label="Abd al-Rahman al-Bazzaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q468234" start="69850" end="69864" title="Maurice Bishop" label="Maurice Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q548573" start="69897" end="69910" title="Lee Moore (politician)" label="Sir Lee Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q43033" start="69993" end="70005" title="Desmond Tutu" label="Desmond Tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="70007" end="70024" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q335458" start="70063" end="70075" title="George Carey" label="George Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q336766" start="70107" end="70121" title="Jonathan Sacks" label="Jonathan Sacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501412" start="70123" end="70134" title="Chief Rabbi" label="Chief Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19663463" start="70217" end="70233" title="Tony Radakin" label="Sir Tony Radakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962001" start="70235" end="70261" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q335743" start="70263" end="70275" title="John Harding, 1st Baron Harding of Petherton" label="Lord Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="70277" end="70312" title="Chief of the General Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Imperial General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063276" start="70314" end="70333" title="Michael Wigston" label="Sir Michael Wigston"/>
<link wikidata="Q776938" start="70335" end="70357" title="Chief of the Air Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="70385" end="70399" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443901" start="70401" end="70420" title="Ferdinand Le Quesne" label="Ferdinand Le Quesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769681" start="70425" end="70440" title="Mark Sever Bell" label="Mark Sever Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q27224" start="70495" end="70509" title="Bentley Motors" label="Bentley Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q561420" start="70511" end="70525" title="W. O. Bentley" label="Walter Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q345538" start="70558" end="70577" title="Calouste Gulbenkian" label="Calouste Gulbenkian"/>
<link wikidata="Q438702" start="70606" end="70629" title="Katherine Grainger" label="Dame Katherine Grainger"/>
<link wikidata="Q20666358" start="70631" end="70643" title="Paul Bennett (rower)" label="Paul Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405471" start="70648" end="70659" title="Kieran West" label="Kieran West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333" start="70745" end="70762" title="Charles Lyell" label="Sir Charles Lyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348323" start="70794" end="70815" title="Principles of Geology" label="Principles of Geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q156942" start="70824" end="70846" title="Charles Wheatstone" label="Sir Charles Wheatstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q245133" start="70867" end="70884" title="Wheatstone bridge" label="Wheatstone bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="70887" end="70906" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="70941" end="70965" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="71027" end="71040" title="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister" label="Joseph Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q160522" start="71074" end="71088" title="Charles Barkla" label="Charles Barkla"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="71109" end="71131" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q169330" start="71134" end="71153" title="Owen Willans Richardson" label="Sir Owen Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="71174" end="71196" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q153194" start="71199" end="71218" title="Edward Victor Appleton" label="Sir Edward Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="71239" end="71261" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184659" start="71264" end="71279" title="Maurice Wilkins" label="Maurice Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7474" start="71284" end="71301" title="Rosalind Franklin" label="Rosalind Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="71411" end="71435" title="Nobel Prize for Medicine" label="Nobel Prize for Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39803" start="71466" end="71484" title="Mario Vargas Llosa" label="Mario Vargas Llosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="71516" end="71542" title="Nobel Prize for Literature" label="Nobel Prize for Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q193803" start="71549" end="71566" title="Roger Penrose" label="Sir Roger Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="71587" end="71609" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344889" start="71765" end="71779" title="Somerset House" label="Somerset House"/>
<link wikidata="Q475703" start="71871" end="71884" title="Oliver Parker" label="Oliver Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366919" start="71908" end="71939" title="The Importance of Being Earnest (2002 film)" label="The Importance of Being Earnest"/>
<link wikidata="Q21050435" start="72062" end="72067" title="Wilde" label="Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q466514" start="72084" end="72095" title="The Duchess (film)" label="The Duchess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167115" start="72108" end="72123" title="Maughan Library" label="Maughan Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q337881" start="72223" end="72237" title="Johnny English" label="Johnny English"/>
<link wikidata="Q14918344" start="72251" end="72269" title="The Imitation Game" label="The Imitation Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890" start="72286" end="72300" title="V for Vendetta (film)" label="V for Vendetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345" start="72317" end="72326" title="Dan Brown" label="Dan Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q81689" start="72346" end="72363" title="The Da Vinci Code" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167115" start="72411" end="72426" title="Maughan Library" label="Maughan Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q160560" start="72452" end="72465" title="The Da Vinci Code (film)" label="film adaption"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410897" start="72572" end="72590" title="GKT School of Medical Education" label="GKT Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="72628" end="72631" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581397" start="72651" end="72664" title="Question Time (TV programme)" label="Question Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581397" start="72706" end="72719" title="Question Time (TV programme)" label="Question Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232979" start="72764" end="72778" title="David Dimbleby" label="David Dimbleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359871" start="72826" end="72853" title="Armorial of UK universities" label="Armorial of UK universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746976" start="72856" end="72886" title="List of universities in the UK" label="List of universities in the UK"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158486" wikidata="Q7161439" url="?curid=158486" title="Pelican crossing">
<text>A pelican crossing is a type of pedestrian crossing with traffic signals for both pedestrians and vehicular traffic, activated by call buttons for pedestrians, with the walk signal being directly across the road from the pedestrian. Pelican crossings are ubiquitous in many countries, but usage of the phrase &quot;pelican crossing&quot; is confined mainly to the UK and Ireland. The design was originally introduced in the United Kingdom; they are also found in the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands, Ireland, Indonesia and Australia. The crossings began to be phased out in Great Britain in 2016, being replaced with puffin crossings which have pedestrian signals above the call button rather than across the road.

The pelican crossing is usually formed of two poles on either side of the road, each containing three signal heads (one in each direction for drivers and one facing pedestrians) and a call button unit for pedestrians to operate the crossing. The crossing type is distinctive for fixed signal timings (as opposed to the variable timings of puffin crossings and the flashing amber/green man phase, which allows the crossing to clear and drivers to continue when it is). An audible bleep and tactile rotating cone are normally present to aid visually impaired pedestrians.

A comparable system called the HAWK beacon is used in the United States.

==History==

=== Etymology ===
The name is derived from &quot;PELICON&quot;, a portmanteau of &quot;pe&quot;destrian &quot;li&quot;ght &quot;con&quot;trolled. The term &quot;pelican crossing&quot; originated in the United Kingdom, Crown Dependencies and British Overseas Territories, but similar traffic control devices are in use throughout the world. The term is also used occasionally in the Republic of Ireland.

=== Development ===

The pelican crossing was a relatively minor development of the previously-trialled &quot;x–way&quot; crossing. This was largely identical to the pelican crossing, but instead of a green light for motorists, featured a white diagonal cross. The intention of this was to distinguish the crossing lights from any nearby junction (standard) traffic lights. The white cross was widely criticised and users and motoring organisations alike called for the white cross to be replaced by a green light.

With this change in place, along with some alterations to the light timings and road markings, the &quot;x–way&quot; crossing became the pelican crossing.

=== Introduction ===
In the United Kingdom, the pelican crossing was the first definitive light-controlled crossing for pedestrians, introduced in 1969. This was after the earlier failed experiment of the panda crossing. Previously only zebra crossings had been used, which have warning signals (Belisha beacons), but no control signals.

In 1974, cast from &quot;Dad&#x27;s Army&quot; performed a public information film to explain the pelican crossing, and how it works. In 1976, Paul Greenwood sang &quot;The Pelican Crossing Song&quot;, again explaining how a pelican crossing works.

Changes to the regulations surrounding pelican crossings published in 1987 included the introduction of zig-zag markings, matching those used on the Zebra crossing, from 1989.

=== Decommissioning ===
Statutory authority for pelican crossings was removed in the 2016 update of the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions. After 22 October 2016, no new pelican crossings can be installed on public highways in the UK, except work in progress where there was a six-month saving. Puffin crossings are to be installed instead.

==Characteristics==
Additionally, a pelican crossing, as distinct from a puffin crossing, has the special feature that while the green man flashes to indicate that pedestrians may continue crossing but may not start to cross, the red light changes to an amber flashing light permitting cars to pass if there are no further pedestrians. This reduces the delay to traffic.

Under UK law, pelican crossings that go straight across the road are defined as a single crossing, even when there is a central island. Therefore, traffic in both directions must wait until pedestrians have finished crossing and the signal is green or flashing amber. This rule is different from similar standard pedestrian crossings where each portion of the crossing is treated as a separate crossing. However, at installations where the crossings that cross each carriageway are separate crossings, the crossing is staggered.

==See also==
* Pedestrian scramble
* Pegasus crossing
* Toucan crossing

==References==

* &quot;The History of British Roadsigns&quot;, Dept. for Transport, 2nd Edition, 1999.

==External links==
*BBC article, on the introduction of Panda crossings, and subsequent developments.
*YouTube video from British Pathé on the introduction of the Pelican crossing in London in 1969.
*BBC Rewind has footage from Points West of the introduction of the Pelican crossing in Bristol in July 1969.
*Article from roads.org.uk on the development of the pelican crossing.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7161439" start="2" end="18" title="Pelican crossing" label="pelican crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010" start="32" end="51" title="pedestrian crossing" label="pedestrian crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258882" start="618" end="633" title="puffin crossing" label="puffin crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258882" start="1056" end="1071" title="puffin crossing" label="puffin crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q116266201" start="1206" end="1227" title="tactile rotating cone" label="tactile rotating cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="1256" end="1273" title="Visual impairment" label="visually impaired"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628994" start="1319" end="1330" title="HAWK beacon" label="HAWK beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1577" end="1591" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="1593" end="1611" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="1616" end="1644" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="1757" end="1776" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2479" end="2493" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130446" start="2656" end="2670" title="panda crossing" label="panda crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328304" start="2688" end="2702" title="zebra crossing" label="zebra crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747919" start="2747" end="2761" title="Belisha beacon" label="Belisha beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q659575" start="2815" end="2830" title="Dad&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Dad&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257915" start="2849" end="2872" title="public information film" label="public information film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151004" start="2933" end="2947" title="Paul Greenwood" label="Paul Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328304" start="3189" end="3203" title="Zebra crossing" label="Zebra crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832471" start="3321" end="3369" title="Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions" label="Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258882" start="3526" end="3541" title="Puffin crossing" label="Puffin crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208212" start="4490" end="4509" title="Pedestrian scramble" label="Pedestrian scramble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160596" start="4512" end="4528" title="Pegasus crossing" label="Pegasus crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828547" start="4531" end="4546" title="Toucan crossing" label="Toucan crossing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158489" wikidata="Q1056352" url="?curid=158489" title="Certiorari">
<text>In law, certiorari is a court process to seek judicial review of a decision of a lower court or government agency. &quot;Certiorari&quot; comes from the name of a prerogative writ in England, issued by a superior court to direct that the record of the lower court be sent to the superior court for review. The term is Latin for &quot;to be made more certain&quot;, and comes from the opening line of such writs, which traditionally began with the Latin words &quot;...&quot; (&quot;We wish to be made more certain...&quot;).

Derived from the English common law, &quot;certiorari&quot; is prevalent in countries using, or influenced by, the common law&quot;.&quot; It has evolved in the legal system of each nation, as court decisions and statutory amendments are made. In modern law, &quot;certiorari&quot; is recognized in many jurisdictions, including England and Wales (now called a &quot;quashing order&quot;), Canada, India, Ireland, the Philippines and the United States. With the expansion of administrative law in the 19th and 20th centuries, the writ of &quot;certiorari&quot; has gained broader use in many countries, to review the decisions of administrative bodies as well as lower courts.

==Etymology==
The term &quot;certiorari&quot; (US English: , , or ; UK English: or ) comes from the words used at the beginning of these writs when they were written in Latin: &quot;certiorari [volumus]&quot; &quot;[we wish] to be made more certain&quot;. &quot;Certiorari&quot; is the present passive infinitive of the Latin verb &quot;certioro, certiorare&quot; (&quot;to inform, apprise, show&quot;). It is often abbreviated cert. in the United States, particularly in relation to applications to the Supreme Court of the United States for review of a lower court decision.

==Origins ==
=== English prerogative writ ===
In English common law, &quot;certiorari&quot; was a supervisory writ, serving to keep &quot;all inferior jurisdictions within the bounds of their authority ... [protecting] the liberty of the subject, by speedy and summary interposition&quot;. In England and Wales, the Court of King&#x27;s Bench was tasked with the duty of supervising all lower courts, and had power to issue all writs necessary for the discharge of that duty; the justices of that Court appeared to have no discretion as to whether it was heard, as long as an application for a bill of &quot;certiorari&quot; met established criteria, as it arose from their duty of supervision.

As time went on, &quot;certiorari&quot; evolved into an important rule of law remedy:

== Australia ==

In Australia, the power to issue &quot;certiorari&quot; is part of the inherent jurisdiction of the superior courts.

==Canada==

In Canada, &quot;certiorari&quot; is a rarely-used power, part of the inherent jurisdiction of the superior courts. It is usually used to cancel a lower court&#x27;s decision because of an obvious mistake. 

In &quot;R. v. Awashish,&quot; 2018 SCC 45, the Supreme Court of Canada restricted the use of &quot;certiorari&quot; in criminal matters. It ruled that &quot;certiorari&quot; can only be used to correct jurisdictional errors, i.e. when a court makes a decision that is out of its power to make; it cannot be used to correct legal errors, i.e. where a court makes a decision it is allowed to make, but decides incorrectly. The latter type of error can only be challenged through an appeal, once the court makes a final decision in the case. This is part of a general prohibition on interlocutory appeals in criminal matters. &quot;Certiorari&quot; is also available if a decision affects the rights of a third party who would not have standing to appeal the decision. The Supreme Court declined to decide whether &quot;certiorari&quot; would be available to address a legal error that threatens irreparable harm to a party&#x27;s rights that could not be cured on appeal.

== England and Wales ==

In the courts of England and Wales, the remedy of &quot;certiorari&quot; evolved into a general remedy for the correction of plain error, to bring decisions of an inferior court, tribunal, or public authority before the superior court for review so that the court can determine whether to quash such decisions.

Reflecting this evolution in usage as a remedy after judicial review nullifying a decision of a public body, in England and Wales, orders or writs of &quot;certiorari&quot; were renamed &quot;quashing orders&quot; by the Civil Procedure (Modification of Supreme Court Act 1981) Order 2004, which amended the Senior Courts Act 1981.

== India ==

The Constitution of India vests the power to issue &quot;certiorari&quot; in the Supreme Court of India, for the purpose of enforcing the fundamental rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. The Parliament of India has the authority to give a similar &quot;certiorari&quot; power to any other court to enforce the fundamental rights, in addition to the &quot;certiorari&quot; power of the Supreme Court.

In addition to the power to issue &quot;certiorari&quot; to protect fundamental rights, the Supreme Court and the High Courts all have jurisdiction to issue &quot;certiorari&quot; for the protection of other legal rights.

==New Zealand==

When the Supreme Court of New Zealand was established a superior court in 1841, it had inherent jurisdiction to issue &quot;certiorari&quot; to control inferior courts and tribunals. The common law jurisdiction to issue &quot;certiorari&quot; was modified by statute in 1972, when the New Zealand Parliament passed the &quot;Judicature Amendment Act&quot;. This Act created a new procedural mechanism, known as an &quot;application for review&quot;, which could be used in place of &quot;certiorari&quot; and the other prerogative writs. The &quot;Judicature Amendment Act&quot; did not abolish &quot;certiorari&quot; and the other writs, but it was expected that as the legal profession adapted to the use of the new application for review, the writs would cease to be used.

==Philippines==

The Philippines has adapted the extraordinary writ of &quot;certiorari&quot; in civil actions under its Rules of Court, as the procedure to seek judicial review from the Supreme Court of the Philippines.

==United States==

===Federal courts===

As Associate Justice James Wilson (1742–1798), the person primarily responsible for the drafting of Article Three of the United States Constitution, which describes the judicial branch of the US federal government, wrote:

In the United States, &quot;certiorari&quot; is most often seen as the writ that the Supreme Court of the United States issues to a lower court to review the lower court&#x27;s judgment for legal error (reversible error) and review where no appeal is available as a matter of right. Before the Judiciary Act of 1891, the cases that could reach the Supreme Court were heard as a matter of right, meaning that the Court was required to issue a decision in each of those cases. That is, the Court had to review all properly presented appeals on the merits, hear oral argument, and issue decisions. As the United States expanded in the nineteenth century, the federal judicial system became increasingly strained, and the Supreme Court had a backlog of cases several years long. The Act solved these problems by transferring most of the court&#x27;s direct appeals to the newly created circuit courts of appeals, whose decisions in those cases would normally be final. The Supreme Court did not completely give up its judiciary authority because it gained the ability to review the decisions of the courts of appeals at its discretion through writ of &quot;certiorari&quot;.

Since the Judiciary Act of 1925 and the Supreme Court Case Selections Act of 1988, most cases cannot be appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States as a matter of right. A party who wants the Supreme Court to review a decision of a federal or state court files a &quot;petition for writ of certiorari&quot; in the Supreme Court. A &quot;petition&quot; is printed in booklet format and 40 copies are filed with the Court. If the Court grants the petition, the case is scheduled for the filing of briefs and for oral argument. A minimum of four of the nine justices is required to grant a writ of &quot;certiorari&quot;, referred to as the &quot;rule of four&quot;. The court denies the vast majority of petitions and thus leaves the decision of the lower court to stand without review; it takes roughly 80 to 150 cases each term. In the term that concluded in June 2009, for example, 8,241 petitions were filed, with a grant rate of approximately 1.1 percent. Cases on the paid certiorari docket are substantially more likely to be granted than those on the &quot;in forma pauperis&quot; docket. The Supreme Court is generally careful to choose only cases over which the Court has jurisdiction and which the Court considers sufficiently important, such as cases involving deep constitutional questions, to merit the use of its limited resources, utilizing tools such as the cert pool. While both appeals of right and cert petitions often present several alleged errors of the lower courts for appellate review, the court normally grants review of only one or two questions presented in a &quot;certiorari&quot; petition.

The Supreme Court sometimes grants a writ of &quot;certiorari&quot; to resolve a &quot;circuit split&quot;, when the federal appeals courts in two (or more) federal judicial circuits have ruled differently in similar situations. These are often called &quot;percolating issues&quot;.

&quot;Certiorari&quot; is sometimes informally referred to as &quot;cert.&quot;, and cases warranting the Supreme Court&#x27;s attention as &quot;&quot;cert.&quot; worthy&quot;. The granting of a writ does not necessarily mean that the Supreme Court disagrees with the decision of the lower court. Granting a writ of &quot;certiorari&quot; means merely that at least four of the justices have determined that the circumstances described in the petition are sufficient to warrant review by the Court. 

Conversely, the Supreme Court&#x27;s denial of a petition for a writ of &quot;certiorari&quot; is sometimes misunderstood as implying that the Supreme Court approves the decision of the lower court. As the Court explained in &quot;Missouri v. Jenkins&quot;, such a denial &quot;imports no expression of opinion upon the merits of the case&quot;. In particular, a denial of a writ of &quot;certiorari&quot; means that no binding precedent is created by the denial itself, and the lower court&#x27;s decision is treated as mandatory authority only within the geographical (or in the case of the Federal Circuit, subject-specific) jurisdiction of that court. The reasons for why a denial of &quot;certiorari&quot; cannot be treated as implicit approval were set forth in &quot;Maryland v. Baltimore Radio Show, Inc.&quot; (1950), in which the Court explained the many rationales which could underlie the denial of a writ which have nothing to do with the merits of the case.

===State courts===
Some United States state court systems use the same terminology, but in others, &quot;writ of review&quot;, &quot;leave to appeal&quot;, or &quot;certification for appeal&quot; is used in place of &quot;writ of certiorari&quot; as the name for discretionary review of a lower court&#x27;s judgment. The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania uniquely uses the terms &quot;allocatur&quot; (informally) and &quot;allowance of appeal&quot; (formally) for the same process. A handful of states lack intermediate appellate courts; in most of these, their supreme courts operate under a mandatory review regime, in which the supreme court must take all appeals in order to preserve the loser&#x27;s traditional right to one appeal (except in criminal cases where the defendant was acquitted). Virginia has an intermediate appeals court, but operates under discretionary review except in family law and administrative cases. Mandatory review remains in place in all states where the death penalty exists; in those states, a sentence of death is automatically appealed to the state&#x27;s highest court.

In two states without an intermediate appeals court (New Hampshire and West Virginia), the Supreme Court used to operate under discretionary review in all cases, whether civil or criminal. This meant that there was no right of appeal in either state, with the only exception being death penalty cases in New Hampshire; West Virginia abolished its death penalty in 1965. New Hampshire transitioned to mandatory review for the vast majority of cases beginning in 2004, while West Virginia transitioned to mandatory review for all cases beginning in 2010.

Texas is an unusual exception to the rule that denial of &quot;certiorari&quot; by the state supreme court normally does not imply approval or disapproval of the merits of the lower court&#x27;s decision. In March 1927, the Texas Legislature enacted a law directing the Texas Supreme Court to summarily &quot;refuse&quot; to hear applications for writs of error when it believed the Court of Appeals opinion correctly stated the law. Thus, since June 1927, over 4,100 decisions of the Texas Courts of Appeals have become valid binding precedent of the Texas Supreme Court itself because the high court refused applications for writ of error rather than denying them and thereby signaled that it approved of their holdings as the law of the state. 

While Texas&#x27; unique practice saved the state supreme court from having to hear relatively minor cases just to create uniform statewide precedents on those issues, it also makes for lengthy citations to the opinions of the Courts of Appeals, since the subsequent writ history of the case must always be noted (e.g., no writ, writ refused, writ denied, etc.) in order for the reader to determine at a glance whether the cited opinion is binding precedent only in the district of the Court of Appeals in which it was decided, or binding precedent for the entire state. In contrast, California, Florida, and New York solved the problem of creating uniform precedent by simply holding that the first intermediate appellate court to reach a novel question of law always sets binding precedent for the entire state, unless and until another intermediate appellate court expressly disagrees with the first one. Meanwhile, some states, such as Pennsylvania and New Jersey, avoid the issue entirely by eschewing regionalized appellate courts; the intermediate appellate courts in these states may hear cases from all parts of the state within their subject-matter jurisdiction.

===Administrative law===
In the administrative law context, the common-law writ of &quot;certiorari&quot; was historically used by lower courts in the United States for judicial review of decisions made by an administrative agency after an adversarial hearing. Some states have retained this use of the writ of &quot;certiorari&quot; in state courts, while others have replaced it with statutory procedures. In the federal courts, this use of &quot;certiorari&quot; has been abolished and replaced by a civil action under the Administrative Procedure Act in a United States district court or in some circumstances a petition for review in a United States court of appeals.

In 1936, the Supreme Court of California held that this use of &quot;certiorari&quot; was unconstitutional under the Constitution of California, then in 1939 approved of its replacement with mandate (California&#x27;s version of &quot;mandamus&quot;).

==See also==

* &quot;Allocatur&quot;
* &quot;Certiorari&quot; before judgment
* Joint appendix
* Petition for review
* &quot;Subpoena ad testificandum&quot;
* &quot;Subpoena duces tecum&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Lane, Charles. &quot;It&#x27;s Cert., to Be Sure. But How Do They Say It? Let&#x27;s Count the Ways&quot;, &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, December 3, 2001 (archived).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="3" end="6" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776190" start="24" end="37" title="Legal process" label="court process"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="46" end="61" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="96" end="113" title="government agency" label="government agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240696" start="163" end="179" title="prerogative writ" label="prerogative writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577005" start="204" end="218" title="superior court" label="superior court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="543" end="561" title="English common law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005600" start="602" end="651" title="List of national legal systems" label="countries using, or influenced by, the common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="830" end="842" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="855" end="872" title="English law" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q181756" start="916" end="922" title="Law of Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973852" start="924" end="929" title="Law of India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303026" start="931" end="938" title="Judicial review in the Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185330" start="940" end="955" title="Philippine legal codes" label="the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="964" end="977" title="Law of the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q171251" start="1001" end="1019" title="administrative law" label="administrative law"/>
<link wikidata="Q192613" start="1490" end="1497" title="present tense" label="present"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194697" start="1498" end="1505" title="passive voice" label="passive"/>
<link wikidata="Q179230" start="1506" end="1516" title="infinitive" label="infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1524" end="1529" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1688" end="1742" title="Procedures_of_the_Supreme_Court_of_the_United_States#Selection_of_cases" label="applications to the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="1839" end="1849" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178387" start="2107" end="2124" title="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench (England)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="2544" end="2555" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033722" start="2653" end="2674" title="inherent jurisdiction" label="inherent jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577005" start="2682" end="2696" title="superior court" label="superior court"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="2968" end="2991" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q525603" start="3501" end="3521" title="interlocutory appeal" label="interlocutory appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434445" start="4042" end="4053" title="plain error" label="plain error"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="4282" end="4297" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4421" end="4436" title="Judicial review in English law#Quashing order" label="quashing orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450672" start="4537" end="4559" title="Senior Courts Act 1981" label="Senior Courts Act 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="4579" end="4600" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="4656" end="4678" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345485" start="4746" end="4774" title="Part III of the Constitution of India" label="Part III of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="4780" end="4799" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840882" start="5104" end="5115" title="High courts of India" label="High Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355832" start="5239" end="5267" title="Supreme Court of New Zealand" label="Supreme Court of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520966" start="5515" end="5537" title="New Zealand Parliament" label="New Zealand Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q936044" start="6128" end="6142" title="Procedural law" label="Rules of Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q514212" start="6194" end="6226" title="Supreme Court of the Philippines" label="Supreme Court of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="6273" end="6290" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q365181" start="6291" end="6303" title="James Wilson (Founding Father)" label="James Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48429" start="6370" end="6417" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution" label="Article Three of the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="6439" end="6454" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="judicial branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="6462" end="6483" title="Federal government of the United States" label="US federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001059" start="6564" end="6568" title="writ" label="writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="6578" end="6612" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732574" start="6683" end="6694" title="legal error" label="legal error"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318300" start="6696" end="6712" title="reversible error" label="reversible error"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="6734" end="6740" title="appeal" label="appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303058" start="6787" end="6808" title="Judiciary Act of 1891" label="Judiciary Act of 1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="7375" end="7400" title="United States courts of appeals" label="circuit courts of appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109608" start="7675" end="7696" title="Judiciary Act of 1925" label="Judiciary Act of 1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644854" start="7705" end="7738" title="Supreme Court Case Selections Act" label="Supreme Court Case Selections Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8106" end="8112" title="Procedures of the Supreme Court of the United States#Selection of cases" label="grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378960" start="8316" end="8328" title="rule of four" label="rule of four"/>
<link wikidata="Q685973" start="8735" end="8752" title="in forma pauperis" label="in forma pauperis"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="8852" end="8864" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065038" start="9045" end="9054" title="cert pool" label="cert pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121623" start="9380" end="9393" title="circuit split" label="circuit split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="9410" end="9432" title="United States court of appeals" label="federal appeals courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="9450" end="9475" title="United States federal judicial circuit" label="federal judicial circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879917" start="10311" end="10330" title="Missouri v. Jenkins" label="Missouri v. Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="10500" end="10517" title="binding precedent" label="binding precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110245" start="10854" end="10892" title="Maryland v. Baltimore Radio Show, Inc." label="Maryland v. Baltimore Radio Show, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="11077" end="11096" title="U.S. state" label="United States state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282071" start="11316" end="11336" title="discretionary review" label="discretionary review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785145" start="11375" end="11404" title="Supreme Court of Pennsylvania" label="Supreme Court of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q46029" start="11435" end="11444" title="allocatur" label="allocatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="12039" end="12052" title="Capital punishment in the United States" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694683" start="12984" end="13003" title="Texas Supreme Court" label="Texas Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707612" start="13199" end="13222" title="Texas Courts of Appeals" label="Texas Courts of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="14403" end="14415" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="14420" end="14430" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q171251" start="14669" end="14687" title="administrative law" label="administrative law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="14701" end="14711" title="common law" label="common-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="14806" end="14821" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="14846" end="14867" title="administrative agency" label="administrative agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="15140" end="15152" title="civil action" label="civil action"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344901" start="15163" end="15191" title="Administrative Procedure Act (United States)" label="Administrative Procedure Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="15197" end="15225" title="United States district court" label="United States district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="15324" end="15351" title="Supreme Court of California" label="Supreme Court of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q196195" start="15428" end="15454" title="Constitution of California" label="Constitution of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q106972853" start="15502" end="15509" title="Writ of mandate (California)" label="mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q312424" start="15546" end="15554" title="mandamus" label="mandamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46029" start="15586" end="15595" title="Allocatur" label="Allocatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065278" start="15604" end="15642" title="Certiorari before judgment" label="&amp;quot;Certiorari&amp;quot; before judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269487" start="15645" end="15659" title="Joint appendix" label="Joint appendix"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245556" start="15662" end="15681" title="Petition for review" label="Petition for review"/>
<link wikidata="Q883270" start="15690" end="15715" title="Subpoena ad testificandum" label="Subpoena ad testificandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631814" start="15730" end="15750" title="Subpoena duces tecum" label="Subpoena duces tecum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158490" wikidata="Q823712" url="?curid=158490" title="New Jersey Route 64">
<text>Route 64 is a state highway in the U.S. state of New Jersey. It is a state-maintained bridge over Amtrak&#x27;s Northeast Corridor line in West Windsor. Route 64 begins at an intersection with County Route 571 in West Windsor. It heads along the bridge to an intersection with County Route 615, where Route 64 ends. County Route 571, which is concurrent with Route 64, continues to Hightstown.

Route 64 was designated originally as an alignment of Route 31A, a spur off of State Highway Route 31 (currently U.S. Route 206) from Princeton eastward to Hightstown, where it met State Highway Route 33. The state planned on turning the alignment into a full-fledged expressway for several decades, including constructing the alignment that Route 64 currently uses in 1939. The route was amended in 1941, and was renumbered from Route 31A to Route 64 in the 1953 renumbering. Route 64 was proposed to become part of the Princeton–Hightstown Bypass (later designated Route 92), but completion never occurred. Currently, the route remains the bridge over the Northeast Corridor. However, it is not currently planned that Route 64 will receive an extension of sorts from the proposed Penns Neck Bypass to U.S. Route 1, a proposed realignment of County Route 571.

== Route description ==

Route 64 begins at an intersection with County Route 571 and County Route 615 in the community of West Windsor. From this point, County Route 571 continues along the right-of-way towards U.S. Route 130. The route heads north and crosses over Amtrak&#x27;s Northeast Corridor before it passes to the north of a local bus depot. Route 64 continues westward for a short distance, crossing through a local woodland and behind several local homes. The route makes a gradual curve to the west off the railroad bridge and passes behind a couple of homes before heading to the south slightly at an intersection. Route 64 reaches its northern terminus and County Route 571 makes a right turn to head northwest toward U.S. Route 1 and Princeton.

== History ==

=== Route 31A and the original freeway ===

In the late-1920s, the state proposed a bypass along the alignment.
In 1938, the New Jersey State Highway Department and New Jersey General Assembly put forth a proposal detailing that a highway from State Highway Route 31 (co-signed with U.S. Route 206) in the city of Princeton eastward through Mercer County onto current-day County Route 571. From there, it would follow an alignment of highway to the intersection with State Highway Route 33 in the community of Hightstown. The original proposal for the highway was to turn the road into a limited-access freeway along its entirety. The route was designated as State Highway Route 31A, a suffixed spur of State Highway Route 31 that year. A portion of the highway was constructed in 1939, when a bridge over the Pennsylvania Railroad was constructed from Washington Road&#x27;s former alignment to the current intersection with Route 615. This new, bridge replaced the at-grade crossing on Washington Road, which is now a dead-end. The state highway law was amended just three years later, with the freeway option removed and the extensions remaining.

The new bridge remained in place along Route 31A, however, no new portions of the freeway were constructed in terms of creating the Route 31A Freeway, as proposed in 1938. In 1950, then-governor of New Jersey, Alfred E. Driscoll, cited the need for the expressway as an important truck and passenger car highway from Trenton to the Jersey Shore. Route 31A itself was decommissioned in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering, and replaced by the designation of Route 64. The route was truncated from both ends toward Princeton and Hightstown, leaving just the bridge in West Windsor. Route 31A remained in the state highway statutes for several decades after decommissioning, with a bill in 1991 being proposed. The bill passed, and Route 31A was stripped from the statutes on January 18, 1992.

=== Route 92 and future changes to CR 571 ===
Route 64, after designation in 1953, remained a short bridge along the highway. However, the need for an expressway from Trenton to the Jersey Shore remained, and in the late 1950s, the State Highway Department brought about plans for the Princeton–Hightstown Bypass, a four-lane freeway that would head for from U.S. Route 206 in Montgomery Township to New Jersey Route 33 in Hightstown. In the length, the freeway was to interchange with U.S. Route 1, U.S. Route 130 and New Jersey Route 27. The route was re-designated as Route 92, and remained a high priority project for several decades. Even after changes in alignment, Route 64 was still an alternative. However, Route 92 was shelved on December 1, 2006 in favor of widening the New Jersey Turnpike mainline, and only New Jersey Route 133 was constructed for the proposal.

As part of the proposed Penns Neck Bypass on U.S. Route 1, the New Jersey Department of Transportation plans on realigning County Route 571 from the western terminus of Route 64 to a northerly route to Route 1. Although County Route 571 are proposed to be realigned onto the new alignment, there is no designated change proposed for Route 64. On the contrary to this, one state figure shows Route 64 running along Washington Road, where the two county routes currently run.

== Major intersections ==

==See also==
*
*New Jersey Route 13
*New Jersey Route 162

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q823712" start="0" end="8" title="New Jersey Route 64" label="Route 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788582" start="14" end="27" title="state highway" label="state highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="35" end="45" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="49" end="59" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="98" end="104" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="112" end="130" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073777" start="139" end="151" title="West Windsor, New Jersey" label="West Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q859422" start="193" end="209" title="County Route 571 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 571"/>
<link wikidata="Q867110" start="277" end="293" title="County Route 615 (Mercer County, New Jersey)" label="County Route 615"/>
<link wikidata="Q385746" start="382" end="392" title="Hightstown, New Jersey" label="Hightstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q823712" start="449" end="458" title="New Jersey Route 64" label="Route 31A"/>
<link wikidata="Q811472" start="508" end="522" title="U.S. Route 206" label="U.S. Route 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q822416" start="576" end="598" title="New Jersey Route 33" label="State Highway Route 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q825303" start="962" end="970" title="New Jersey Route 92" label="Route 92"/>
<link wikidata="Q811340" start="1198" end="1210" title="U.S. Route 1 in New Jersey" label="U.S. Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q859422" start="1322" end="1338" title="County Route 571 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 571"/>
<link wikidata="Q867110" start="1343" end="1359" title="County Route 615 (Mercer County, New Jersey)" label="County Route 615"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073777" start="1380" end="1392" title="West Windsor, New Jersey" label="West Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q811453" start="1469" end="1483" title="U.S. Route 130" label="U.S. Route 130"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="1524" end="1530" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="1538" end="1556" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q811340" start="1990" end="2002" title="U.S. Route 1 in New Jersey" label="U.S. Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="2007" end="2016" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="2159" end="2194" title="New Jersey State Highway Department" label="New Jersey State Highway Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455914" start="2199" end="2226" title="New Jersey General Assembly" label="New Jersey General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q811472" start="2278" end="2300" title="U.S. Route 206" label="State Highway Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="2348" end="2357" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q822416" start="2501" end="2523" title="New Jersey Route 33" label="State Highway Route 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q385746" start="2544" end="2554" title="Hightstown, New Jersey" label="Hightstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="2844" end="2865" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q477096" start="3395" end="3413" title="Alfred E. Driscoll" label="Alfred E. Driscoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246511" start="3517" end="3529" title="Jersey Shore" label="Jersey Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q867442" start="3574" end="3615" title="1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering" label="1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering"/>
<link wikidata="Q367289" start="4364" end="4383" title="Montgomery Township, New Jersey" label="Montgomery Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q822416" start="4387" end="4406" title="New Jersey Route 33" label="New Jersey Route 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q811340" start="4473" end="4485" title="U.S. Route 1 in New Jersey" label="U.S. Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q811453" start="4487" end="4501" title="U.S. Route 130" label="U.S. Route 130"/>
<link wikidata="Q822217" start="4506" end="4525" title="New Jersey Route 27" label="New Jersey Route 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q811504" start="4769" end="4788" title="New Jersey Turnpike" label="New Jersey Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q825932" start="4808" end="4828" title="New Jersey Route 133" label="New Jersey Route 133"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4888" end="4905" title="Penns Neck Bypass" label="Penns Neck Bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="4927" end="4966" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q821657" start="5382" end="5401" title="New Jersey Route 13" label="New Jersey Route 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q826938" start="5403" end="5423" title="New Jersey Route 162" label="New Jersey Route 162"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158492" wikidata="Q1001059" url="?curid=158492" title="Writ">
<text>In common law, a writ (Anglo-Saxon &quot;gewrit&quot;, Latin &quot;breve&quot;) is a formal written order issued by a body with administrative or judicial jurisdiction; in modern usage, this body is generally a court. Warrants, prerogative writs, subpoenas, and &quot;certiorari&quot; are common types of writs, but many forms exist and have existed.

In its earliest form, a writ was simply a written order made by the English monarch to a specified person to undertake a specified action; for example, in the feudal era, a military summons by the king to one of his tenants-in-chief to appear dressed for battle with retinue at a specific place and time. An early usage survives in the United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia in a writ of election, which is a written order issued on behalf of the monarch (in Canada, by the Governor General and, in Australia, by the Governor-General for elections for the House of Representatives, or state governors for state elections) to local officials (High sheriffs of every county in the United Kingdom) to hold a general election. Writs were used by the medieval English kings to summon people to Parliament (then consisting primarily of the House of Lords) whose advice was considered valuable or who were particularly influential, and who were thereby deemed to have been created &quot;barons by writ&quot;.

==History== 
===Origins===
Sometime before the tenth century, officials in England began utilizing writs to convey orders. A &quot;writ&quot; was simply a short written command issued by a person in authority. It was customary for the sender to seal such a command as proof of its authenticity. In the days when writing was a rare art, a writ was revered because the person receiving the command was unlikely to deny or question its legitimacy. The Norman Conquest of England in 1066 led to the establishment of a strong, centralized monarchy. The first Norman King of England, William the Conqueror, modified writs to become mainly framed in Latin, increased the number of writs to cover additional royal commands, and established the &quot;Curia Regis &quot; in England. The &quot;Curia Regis&quot;, a Latin term meaning &quot;royal council&quot;, consisted of the King of England and his loyal advisors. The &quot;Curia Regis&quot; accompanied the King as he travelled. This council administered all of the King&#x27;s governmental activities, including judicial matters.

One of the most important members of the &quot;Curia Regis&quot; was the Lord Chancellor. The Lord Chancellor led the chancery. Chancery is a general term for a medieval writing office that was responsible for the production of official documents. The Lord Chancellor wrote writs on behalf of the King, maintained all official documents, and acted as the keeper of the royal seal. This position, in effect, placed the Lord Chancellor as the head of the English legal system. The King, however, was the ultimate leader of the kingdom; therefore, the Lord Chancellor issued writs under the guidance of what he believed to be in the best interests of the King. Between the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the Lord Chancellor had a large control over the issuance of all original writs. In this history of English common law, original writs began a legal proceeding, while a judicial writ was issued during a legal proceeding.

The writ was a unique development of the Anglo-Saxon monarchy and consisted of a brief administrative order, authenticated (innovatively) by a seal. Written in the vernacular, they generally made a land grant or conveyed instructions to a local court. In the beginning, writs were the documents issued by the King&#x27;s Chancellor against a landowner whose vassal complained to the King about an injustice, after a first summon by the sheriff to comply had been deemed fruitless. William the Conqueror took over the system unchanged, but was to extend it in two ways: first, writs became mainly framed in Latin, not Anglo-Saxon; second, they covered an increasing range of royal commands and decisions. Writs of instruction continued to develop under his immediate successors, but it was not until Henry II that writs became available for purchase by private individuals seeking justice, thus initiating a vast expansion in their role within the common law.

Writs could take two main forms: &#x27;letters patent&#x27;, which were open for all to read, and &#x27;letters close&#x27; for one or more specified individuals alone.

===Development===
The development of writs as a means of commencing a court action was a form of &quot;off-the-shelf&quot; justice designed to enable the English law courts to rapidly process lawsuits by allocating each complaint form into a standard category that could be dealt with by standard procedures. The complainant applied to the court for the writ most relevant to his complaint to be sent to the wrongdoer, which ordered him under royal authority to attend a royal court to answer for his actions. The development was part of the establishment of a Court of Common Pleas, for dealing with commonly made complaints by subjects of the crown, for example: &quot;someone has damaged my property&quot;. The previous system of justice at the royal court of Chancery was tailor-made to suit each case and was thus highly time-consuming. Thus eventually the obtaining of a writ became necessary, in most cases, to have a case heard in one of the Royal Courts, such as the King&#x27;s Bench or Common Pleas. Some franchise courts, especially in the Counties Palatine, had their own system of writs, which often reflected or anticipated the common law writs. The writ was &quot;served&quot; on (delivered in person to) the wrongdoer and acted as a command that he should appear at a specified time and date before the court specified in the writ, or it might command some other act on the part of the recipient.

Where a plaintiff wished to have a case heard by a local court or by the justice of an Eyre if one happened to be visiting the county, there would be no need to obtain a writ. An informal complaint could usually start actions in local courts. However, if a plaintiff wished to avail himself of Royal — and by implication superior — justice in one of the King&#x27;s courts, then he would need a writ, a command of the King, to enable him to do this. Initially, for common law, recourse to the King&#x27;s courts was unusual, and something for which a plaintiff would have to pay. For most Royal Courts, the writ would usually have been purchased from the Chancery, although the court of the Exchequer, being, in essence, another government department, could issue its own writs.

While originally writs were exceptional, or at least non-routine devices, Maitland suggests that by the time of King Henry II (1154–1189), the use of writs had become a regular part of the system of royal justice in England.

At first, new writs were drafted to fit each unique situation. However, in practice, the clerks of the Chancery would use wording from previously issued writs, with suitable adjustments, often taken from reference books containing collections of forms of writ, much as in modern times, lawyers frequently use fixed precedents or boilerplate, rather than re-inventing the wording of a new legal document. The problem with this approach was that a plaintiff&#x27;s rights and available forms of action at his disposal, would be defined, and in most cases limited, by the limited variety of writs available to him. Thus, the power to create new writs was akin to the power to create new rights, a form of extra-parliamentary legislation. Moreover, a writ, if one could be found fitting the plaintiff&#x27;s case, provided the legal means to remove the dispute from the jurisdiction of the local court, often controlled by a lesser noble, and instead have it heard by the King&#x27;s judges. The nobility thus saw the creation of new writs as an erosion of their influence.

Over time, opposition to the creation of new writs by the Chancery increased. For example, in 1256, a court was asked to quash a writ as &quot;novel, unheard of, and against reason&quot;. Ultimately, in 1258, the King was forced to accept the Provisions of Oxford, which among other things, prohibited the creation of new forms of writ without the sanction of the King&#x27;s council. New writs were created after that time only by the express sanction of Parliament and the forms of writ remained essentially static, each writ defining a particular form of action. It was the role and expertise of a solicitor to select on his client&#x27;s behalf the appropriate writ for the proposed legal action. These were purchased from the court by payment of a fee. The solicitor would then hire a barrister to speak for his client in court.

=== Rationalisation of writs ===
With the abolition of the Forms of Action in 1832 and 1833, a profusion of writs was no longer needed, and one uniform writ came into use. After 1852, the need to state the name of the form of action was also abolished. In 1875, the form of writ was altered to conform more to the subpoena used in the Chancery. A writ was a summons from the Crown to the parties to the action, with on its back the substance of the action set out, together with a &#x27;prayer&#x27; requesting a remedy from the court (for example, damages). In 1980, the need for writs to be written in the name of the Crown was ended. From that time, a writ simply required the parties to appear.

Writs applied to claims to be heard in one of the courts, eventually forming part of the High Court of Justice. The procedure in a county court, which was established by statute, was to issue a &#x27;summons&#x27;.

In 1999, the Woolf Reforms unified most of the procedures of the Supreme Court and the county courts in civil matters. These reforms brought in the Civil Procedure Rules. Under these, almost all civil actions, other than those connected with insolvency, are now commenced by the completion of a &#x27;Claim Form&#x27; as opposed to the obtaining of a &#x27;Writ&#x27;, &#x27;Originating Application&#x27;, or &#x27;Summons&#x27; (see Rules 7 and 8 of the Civil Procedure Rules).

===List===

The following writs, amongst others, existed in England:
* Advocatione decimarum was a writ which lay for claiming the fourth part or more of tithes which belong to the church: Reg of Writs, fol 29b. The writ was founded on section 4 of chapter 5 of the Statute of Westminster 1285. It was obsolete by 1876.
* Arrestandis bonis ne dissipentur was a writ which lay for a man whose cattle or goods were taken by another, who was likely, during the controversy, to make away with them, and would hardly have been able to make satisfaction for them afterwards. Reg of Writs 126. Cowel. The writ lay to seize the cattle and goods in the hands of a party, and to hold them during the pendency of a suit, to prevent their being made away with. Reg Orig 126b. In 1816, Williams said the writ lay anciently. Also called bonis arrestandis.
* Arrestando ipsum qui pecuniam recepit was a writ which anciently lay for the apprehension of him who had taken prest money for the king&#x27;s wars, and afterwards hid himself, when he should have been ready to go. Reg Orig 24. Cowel.
* Arresto facto super bonis mercatorum alienigenorum was a writ that lay for a denizen against the goods of aliens found in the kingdom, as a recompense for goods taken from him in a foreign country after a refusal to restore them. Reg Orig 129; Cowel. The writ was equivalent to clarigatio.
* Attornato faciendo, or de attornato faciendo or atturnato faciendo or attornato recipiendo or dedimus potestatem de attornato faciendo or Attornato faciendo vel recipiendo, was a writ, commanding a sheriff or steward of a county court, or hundred court to receive an attorney for the person taking out the writ, and to admit his appearance by him. Cowel. Sweet said it was the writ dedimus potestatem. In 1760, Wynne said that the writ &quot;de attornato faciendo&quot; was obsolete.
* Auxilium ad filium militem faciendum et filiam maritandam, or Auxilium ad filium primogenitum militem faciendum, vel ad filiam primogenitam maritandam, was a writ directed to the sheriff of every county where the king or other lord had tenants, to levy of them reasonable aid towards the knighting of his son and the marriage of his eldest daughter. Cowel. No man was entitled to have this writ before his son had attained the age of fifteen years, or his daughter the age of seven years. FNB 82 A; Reg Orig 87; Glanvil, l 9, c 8; Statute of Westminster 1275 c 36. This writ was abolished by the Tenures Abolition Act 1660 (12 Cha. 2. c. 24).
* Ayel, or ayle or de avo or aile or aiel, was a writ which lay for an heir to recover the possession of lands of which a grandfather or grandmother was seized in fee simple on the day of his or her death; and a stranger entered on that day and abated or dispossessed the heir of the inheritance. FNB 221D; 3 Bl Com 186. It was a possessory ancestral writ. 1 Rosc Real Act 127. It was abolished by section 36 of the Real Property Limitation Act 1833 (3 &amp; 4 Will 4 c 27). Ayle was one of a group of writs consisting of ayle, besayle, tresayle, and cosinage.
* Chartis reddendis was a writ which lay against him that has charters of feoffment delivered him to be kept, and refuses to deliver them. Old Nat Brev, fol 66. Reg Orig, fol 159. It was a writ of detinue of charters. It had fallen into disuse by 1816 and was obsolete by 1843.

==Writ of election==

In some Westminster systems, for example, Canada and some other parliamentary systems, the phrase &#x27;dropping the writ&#x27; refers colloquially to a dissolution of parliament and the beginning of an election campaign to form a new one. This phrase derives from the fact that to hold an election in such a system, a writ of election must be issued on behalf of the monarch ordering the High Sheriffs of each county to set in motion the procedure for elections.

==United States law==
Early law of the United States adopted the traditional English writ system, in the sense of a rigid set of forms of relief that the law courts were authorized to grant. The All Writs Act authorizes United States federal courts to &quot;issue all writs necessary or appropriate in aid of their respective jurisdictions and agreeable to the usages and principles of law.&quot; However, the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, adopted in 1938 to govern civil procedure in the United States district courts, provide that there is only one form of action in civil cases, and explicitly abolish certain writs by name. Relief formerly available by a writ is now commonly available by a lawsuit (civil action) or a motion in a pending civil action. Nonetheless, a few writs have escaped abolition and remain in current use in the U.S. federal courts:
* The writ of &quot;habeas corpus&quot;, usually used to test the legality of a prisoner&#x27;s detention, has expressly been preserved. It is explicitly mentioned in Article I, Section 9, Clause 2 of the Constitution of the United States. In the United States federal courts, the writ is most often used to review the constitutionality of criminal convictions rendered by state courts. The writ&#x27;s application does not stop there: the Supreme Court has held the writ of &quot;habeas corpus&quot; open to all individuals held by the federal government, including Guantanamo Bay detainees. See &quot;Boumediene v. Bush&quot;.
* By statute, the Supreme Court of the United States uses the writ of &quot;certiorari&quot; to review cases from the United States courts of appeals or the state courts.
* In extraordinary circumstances, the United States court of appeals can use the common law writ of prohibition under the All Writs Act to control proceedings in the district courts.
* Some courts have held that in rare circumstances in a federal criminal case, a United States district court may use the common law writ of error &quot;coram nobis&quot; under the All Writs Act to set aside a conviction when no other remedy is available.
* In modern times, the All Writs Act is most commonly used as authority for federal courts to issue injunctions to protect their jurisdiction or effectuate their judgments.

The situation in the courts of the various U.S. states varies from state to state but is often similar to that in the federal courts. Some states continue to use writ procedures, such as &quot;quo warranto&quot;, that have been abolished as a procedural matter in federal courts.

In an attempt to purge Latin from the language of the law, California law has for many years used the term &#x27;writ of mandate&#x27; in place of &quot;writ of mandamus&quot; and &quot;writ of review&quot; in place of &quot;writ of certiorari&quot;.

===Prerogative writs===
The &quot;prerogative&quot; writs are a subset of the class of writs, those that are to be heard ahead of any other cases on a court&#x27;s docket except other such writs. The most common of the other such prerogative writs are &quot;habeas corpus&quot;, &quot;quo warranto&quot;, &quot;prohibito&quot;, &quot;mandamus&quot;, &quot;procedendo&quot;, and &quot;certiorari&quot;.

The due process for &#x27;petitions for&#x27; such writs is not simply civil or criminal because they incorporate the presumption of non-authority so that the official who is the respondent has the burden to prove his authority to do or not do something, failing which the court has no discretion but to decide for the petitioner, who may be any person, not just an interested party. In this, they differ from a motion in a civil process in which the burden of proof is on the movant and in which there can be a question of standing.

===Other writs===
* A &quot;writ of attachment&quot; permits the seizure of private property.
* A &quot;writ of audita querela&quot; inhibits the unconscionable use of a lawful judgment because of matters arising after the judgment.
* A &quot;writ of capias&quot; directs an officer to take the person named in the writ or order into custody.
* A &quot;writ of coram nobis&quot; corrects a previous error &quot;of the most fundamental character&quot; to &quot;achieve justice&quot; where &quot;no other remedy&quot; is available, e.g., when a judgment was rendered without full knowledge of the facts.
* A &quot;writ of elegit&quot; orders the seizure of a portion of a debtor&#x27;s lands and all his goods (except work animals) towards satisfying a creditor until the debt is paid off.
* A &quot;writ of error&quot; is issued by an appellate court and directs a lower court of record to submit its record of the case laid for appeal.
* A &quot;writ of exigent&quot; (or &quot;exigend&quot;) commands a sheriff to summon a defendant indicted for a felony who had failed to appear in court to deliver himself upon pain of outlawry or forfeiture of his goods.
* A &quot;writ of fieri facias&quot; (colloquially &quot;fi fa&quot;) commands a sheriff to take and auction off enough property from a losing party to pay the debt (plus interest and costs) owed by a judgment debtor.
* A &quot;writ of mittimus&quot; orders either (1) a court to send its record to another or (2) a jailor to receive the accused in their custody at any point during the investigative or trial process.
* A &quot;writ of ne exeat&quot; restrains a defendant from fleeing the country or jurisdiction.
* A &quot;writ of praemunire&quot; instructs a sheriff to order someone to appear in court to answer for several different crimes.
* A &quot;writ of scire facias&quot; revives a dormant judgment.
* A &quot;writ of supersedeas&quot; contains a command to stay the proceedings at law.
* A &quot;writ of venire facias&quot; summons jurors to appear in court.

== Indian law ==
Under the Indian legal system, jurisdiction to issue &#x27;prerogative writs&#x27; is given to the Supreme Court of India and the High Courts of Judicature of all Indian states. Parts of the law relating to writs are outlined in the Constitution of India. The Supreme Court, the highest in the country, may issue writs under Article 32 of the Constitution for enforcement of fundamental rights and under Article 139 for enforcement of rights other than fundamental rights, while High Courts, the superior courts of the States, may issue writs under Articles 226. The Constitution broadly provides for five kinds of &quot;prerogative&quot; writs: &quot;habeas corpus&quot;, &quot;certiorari&quot;, &quot;mandamus&quot;, &quot;quo warranto&quot; and prohibition:

* The &quot;writ of prohibition&quot; (forbid) is issued by a higher court to a lower court, prohibiting it from taking up a case because it falls outside the jurisdiction of the lower court. Thus, the higher court transfers the case to itself.
* The &quot;writ of habeas corpus&quot; (to have the body of) is issued to a detaining authority, ordering the detainer to produce the detained person in the issuing court, along with the cause of their detention. If the detention is illegal, the court issues an order to free the person.
* The &quot;writ of certiorari&quot; (be informed) is issued to a lower court directing that the record of a case be sent up for review, together with all supporting files, evidence, and documents, usually to overrule the judgment of the lower court. It is one of the mechanisms by which the fundamental rights of the citizens are upheld.
* The &quot;writ of mandamus&quot; (command) is issued to a subordinate court, an officer of the government, or a corporation or other institution commanding the performance of certain acts or duties. But it cannot be issued against a Public Authority for enforcing a Private Contractual Obligation read more
* The &quot;writ of quo warranto&quot; (by what authority; under what warrant) is issued against a person who claims or usurps a public office. Through this writ, the court inquires &#x27;by what authority&#x27; the person supports their claim.

==See also==

*List of writs

==Notes==
==Bibliography==
*Maitland F. W. The Forms of Action at Common Law. Cambridge University Press 1962.
*Baker, J. H. &quot;&quot;. Butterworths 1990. 
*Milsom, S. F. C. &quot;&quot; (second edition). Butterworths 1981. 
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="3" end="13" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001059" start="17" end="21" title="Writ" label="writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="155" end="167" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="211" end="216" title="court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477326" start="218" end="226" title="Warrant (legal)" label="Warrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240696" start="228" end="244" title="prerogative writ" label="prerogative writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="247" end="255" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056352" start="268" end="278" title="certiorari" label="certiorari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446027" start="511" end="521" title="Feudalism in England" label="feudal era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518201" start="568" end="584" title="tenant-in-chief" label="tenants-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q694166" start="619" end="626" title="retinue" label="retinue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038380" start="731" end="747" title="writ of election" label="writ of election"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="825" end="841" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="868" end="884" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888937" start="993" end="1005" title="High sheriff" label="High sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="1056" end="1072" title="general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="1140" end="1150" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1185" end="1199" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="1331" end="1345" title="Hereditary peer" label="barons by writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="1401" end="1414" title="History of Anglo-Saxon England" label="tenth century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001059" start="1485" end="1489" title="writ" label="writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114830" start="1599" end="1603" title="Great Seal of the Realm" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="1803" end="1829" title="Norman Conquest of England" label="Norman Conquest of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="1908" end="1914" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="1915" end="1930" title="King of England" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="1932" end="1953" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q672507" start="2096" end="2107" title="Curia Regis" label="Curia Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="2503" end="2518" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570373" start="2558" end="2566" title="Chancery (medieval office)" label="Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2591" end="2599" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114830" start="2799" end="2809" title="Great Seal of the Realm" label="royal seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q237945" start="3397" end="3417" title="Anglo-Saxon monarchs" label="Anglo-Saxon monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797791" start="3499" end="3503" title="Seal (contract law)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="3520" end="3530" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217027" start="3554" end="3564" title="land grant" label="land grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="3714" end="3720" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="3837" end="3858" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="4155" end="4163" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="4355" end="4369" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261744" start="5047" end="5068" title="Court of Common Pleas" label="Court of Common Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q284804" start="5240" end="5257" title="court of Chancery" label="court of Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178387" start="5462" end="5479" title="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench (England)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q206634" start="5483" end="5495" title="Court of Common Pleas (England)" label="Common Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991489" start="5538" end="5555" title="County Palatine" label="Counties Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="5909" end="5918" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422978" start="5988" end="5992" title="Eyre (legal term)" label="Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137765" start="6592" end="6601" title="Exchequer of Pleas" label="Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376924" start="6755" end="6763" title="Frederic William Maitland" label="Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="6793" end="6806" title="King Henry II of England" label="King Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651672" start="7236" end="7247" title="Boilerplate text" label="boilerplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="7835" end="7840" title="nobility" label="noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630360" start="8221" end="8241" title="Provisions of Oxford" label="Provisions of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q672507" start="8342" end="8361" title="Curia Regis" label="King&amp;#x27;s council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469934" start="8528" end="8542" title="form of action" label="form of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="8579" end="8588" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="8768" end="8777" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469934" start="8872" end="8887" title="Form of action" label="Forms of Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="9127" end="9135" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="9602" end="9623" title="High Court of Justice of England and Wales" label="High Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754298" start="9644" end="9656" title="County Court (England and Wales)" label="county court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055840" start="9742" end="9755" title="Woolf Reforms" label="Woolf Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055840" start="9877" end="9898" title="Civil Procedure Rules" label="Civil Procedure Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="10363" end="10368" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604665" start="10475" end="10502" title="Statute of Westminster 1285" label="Statute of Westminster 1285"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11164" end="11175" title="prest money" label="prest money"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126965" start="11568" end="11578" title="clarigatio" label="clarigatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="11821" end="11834" title="hundred court" label="hundred court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184057" start="11964" end="11982" title="dedimus potestatem" label="dedimus potestatem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12340" end="12343" title="Feudal aid#In England" label="aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="12356" end="12362" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q15206109" start="12599" end="12626" title="Statute of Westminster 1275" label="Statute of Westminster 1275"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700943" start="12664" end="12690" title="Tenures Abolition Act 1660" label="Tenures Abolition Act 1660"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560526" start="12692" end="12701" title="12 Cha. 2" label="12 Cha. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520498" start="12864" end="12870" title="Seisin" label="seized"/>
<link wikidata="Q843280" start="12874" end="12884" title="fee simple" label="fee simple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13041" end="13066" title="possessory ancestral writ" label="possessory ancestral writ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13127" end="13160" title="Real Property Limitation Act 1833" label="Real Property Limitation Act 1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="13334" end="13341" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197216" start="13346" end="13355" title="feoffment" label="feoffment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13469" end="13488" title="detinue of charters" label="detinue of charters"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="13581" end="13599" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="13637" end="13658" title="parliamentary systems" label="parliamentary systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038380" start="13677" end="13694" title="dropping the writ" label="dropping the writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q741182" start="13726" end="13751" title="dissolution of parliament" label="dissolution of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q847301" start="13776" end="13793" title="election campaign" label="election campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038380" start="13892" end="13908" title="writ of election" label="writ of election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888937" start="13962" end="13974" title="High Sheriff" label="High Sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="14066" end="14090" title="law of the United States" label="law of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="14196" end="14201" title="court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729881" start="14233" end="14246" title="All Writs Act" label="All Writs Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="14258" end="14286" title="United States federal courts" label="United States federal courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440427" start="14448" end="14480" title="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure" label="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q206937" start="14508" end="14523" title="civil procedure" label="civil procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="14531" end="14559" title="United States district court" label="United States district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="14737" end="14744" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917734" start="14765" end="14771" title="motion (legal)" label="motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="14921" end="14934" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="15106" end="15139" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308934" start="15274" end="15286" title="State court (United States)" label="state courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243677" start="15468" end="15492" title="Guantanamo Bay detainees" label="Guantanamo Bay detainees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949777" start="15504" end="15522" title="Boumediene v. Bush" label="Boumediene v. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="15548" end="15582" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056352" start="15606" end="15616" title="certiorari" label="certiorari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="15739" end="15769" title="United States court of appeals" label="United States court of appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724714" start="15801" end="15812" title="prohibition (writ)" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16025" end="16054" title="Coram nobis#Writ of error coram nobis" label="error &amp;quot;coram nobis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="16240" end="16250" title="injunction" label="injunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="16357" end="16367" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724781" start="16507" end="16519" title="quo warranto" label="quo warranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503379" start="16654" end="16668" title="California law" label="California law"/>
<link wikidata="Q312424" start="16756" end="16764" title="mandamus" label="mandamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724714" start="17158" end="17167" title="prohibito" label="prohibito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247142" start="17203" end="17213" title="procedendo" label="procedendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q683979" start="17774" end="17782" title="standing (law)" label="standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817894" start="17807" end="17837" title="Attachment (law)" label="&amp;quot;writ of attachment&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819955" start="17883" end="17917" title="Audita querela" label="&amp;quot;writ of audita querela&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q584041" start="18022" end="18048" title="Capias" label="&amp;quot;writ of capias&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q444278" start="18132" end="18163" title="coram nobis" label="&amp;quot;writ of coram nobis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358695" start="18391" end="18417" title="elegit" label="&amp;quot;writ of elegit&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="18619" end="18634" title="appeal" label="appellate court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447276" start="18948" end="18980" title="fieri facias" label="&amp;quot;writ of fieri facias&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q584041" start="19166" end="19194" title="mittimus" label="&amp;quot;writ of mittimus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641566" start="19367" end="19395" title="Ne exeat" label="&amp;quot;writ of ne exeat&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q10638321" start="19464" end="19494" title="praemunire" label="&amp;quot;writ of praemunire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434039" start="19595" end="19627" title="Scire facias" label="&amp;quot;writ of scire facias&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920020" start="19747" end="19780" title="Venire facias de novo" label="&amp;quot;writ of venire facias&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240696" start="19893" end="19909" title="prerogative writ" label="prerogative writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="19933" end="19955" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="19997" end="20010" title="States of India" label="Indian states"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="20067" end="20088" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345485" start="20209" end="20227" title="Fundamental rights in India" label="fundamental rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724714" start="20608" end="20627" title="writ of prohibition" label="writ of prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="20853" end="20874" title="writ of habeas corpus" label="writ of habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056352" start="21142" end="21160" title="writ of certiorari" label="writ of certiorari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349389" start="21422" end="21440" title="Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of India" label="fundamental rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q312424" start="21481" end="21497" title="writ of mandamus" label="writ of mandamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724781" start="21790" end="21810" title="writ of quo warranto" label="writ of quo warranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q113013160" start="22039" end="22052" title="List of writs" label="List of writs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158493" wikidata="Q823881" url="?curid=158493" title="New Jersey Route 66">
<text>Route 66 is a state highway located in Monmouth County, New Jersey, United States. It runs between Route 33 in Tinton Falls and Route 35 at County Route 16 on the border of Ocean Township and Neptune Township, just to the west of Asbury Park. The route serves as an important connector between the Garden State Parkway to the west and Route 18 and Asbury Park to the east. It runs concurrent with County Route 16 from Bowne/Wayside Roads to the eastern terminus at Route 35. Route 66, which varies from a two-lane undivided road to a four-lane divided highway, passes through commercial areas for most of its length with some wooded areas. The route was created in 1953, replacing what had been Route 33A (formerly the Route 33-35 Link). There is currently a proposal to widen the two-lane portion between Jumping Brook Road and Wayside Road in order to better handle the traffic that uses this road.

==Route description==

Route 66 begins at an intersection with Route 33 in Tinton Falls, heading to the northeast as a two-lane road. A short distance past Route 33, it comes to an interchange with the Garden State Parkway, where the road becomes a three lane undivided road with one eastbound lane and two westbound lanes. Past this interchange, the route heads into commercial areas, where it widens into a four-lane divided highway that passes south of the Jersey Shore Premium Outlets, with an interchange serving the outlet mall at Premium Outlets Boulevard/Hovchild Boulevard. Following this, the road heads into Neptune Township.
After the intersection with Jumping Brook Road, the divided highway ends and Route 66 becomes a two-lane undivided road. The route heads through a patch of woods before passing more businesses and coming to an intersection with County Route 16 (Asbury Avenue). Here, the road becomes a four-lane divided highway again and heads east along the border of Ocean Township to the north and Neptune Township to the south, concurrent with County Route 16. It passes through woodland before coming to a cloverleaf interchange with Route 18. Past Route 18, the road heads into commercial areas again, with the Seaview Square Shopping Center located to the north of the route. Route 66 ends at the Asbury Park Circle with Route 35, where County Route 16 continues east toward Asbury Park on Asbury Avenue.

==History==

Route 66 was legislated in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering to replace what had been Route 33-35 Link and Route 33A. There is a proposal to widen the two-lane portions of Route 66 between Jumping Brook Road and Wayside Road. The need for this widening is due to the need to handle traffic going to Asbury Park in the summer months as well as an evacuation route for the coastal regions of Monmouth County, and the poor design of the current roadway, which lacks turning lanes and facilities for bicycles and pedestrians. In addition, a proposed outlet mall called the Jersey Shore Premium Outlets was planned along the route in Tinton Falls, with improvements planned to the route in the vicinity of the project including an overpass to the outlet mall. In 2006, Neptune Township refused to cooperate with these plans because the original agreement for the outlet mall project in 2001 was no longer up to date with the current traffic demands. Despite this opposition, the plans were approved by the borough of Tinton Falls in 2007 and the Jersey Shore Premium Outlets opened in November 2008. As for the widening of Route 66, a meeting was held in August 2009 between members of the 11th state Legislative district and the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

== Major intersections ==



==See also==
*

==References==
== External links ==
*New Jersey Roads: Route 66
*New Jersey Highway Ends: 66
*Speed Limits for State Roads: Route 66</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q823881" start="0" end="8" title="New Jersey Route 66" label="Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788582" start="14" end="27" title="state highway" label="state highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q502424" start="39" end="54" title="Monmouth County, New Jersey" label="Monmouth County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="56" end="66" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="68" end="81" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q822416" start="99" end="107" title="New Jersey Route 33" label="Route 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085364" start="111" end="123" title="Tinton Falls, New Jersey" label="Tinton Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q822485" start="128" end="136" title="New Jersey Route 35" label="Route 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q867139" start="140" end="155" title="County Route 16 (Monmouth County, New Jersey)" label="County Route 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885976" start="173" end="187" title="Ocean Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey" label="Ocean Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641218" start="192" end="208" title="Neptune Township, New Jersey" label="Neptune Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q201127" start="230" end="241" title="Asbury Park, New Jersey" label="Asbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q811493" start="298" end="318" title="Garden State Parkway" label="Garden State Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q821814" start="335" end="343" title="New Jersey Route 18" label="Route 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="544" end="559" title="divided highway" label="divided highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q823881" start="695" end="704" title="New Jersey Route 66" label="Route 33A"/>
<link wikidata="Q823881" start="719" end="735" title="New Jersey Route 66" label="Route 33-35 Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q822416" start="965" end="973" title="New Jersey Route 33" label="Route 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085364" start="977" end="989" title="Tinton Falls, New Jersey" label="Tinton Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q811493" start="1104" end="1124" title="Garden State Parkway" label="Garden State Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="1321" end="1336" title="divided highway" label="divided highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085364" start="1362" end="1390" title="Jersey Shore Premium Outlets" label="Jersey Shore Premium Outlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641218" start="1521" end="1537" title="Neptune Township, New Jersey" label="Neptune Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q867139" start="1767" end="1782" title="County Route 16 (Monmouth County, New Jersey)" label="County Route 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885976" start="1892" end="1906" title="Ocean Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey" label="Ocean Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="1955" end="1965" title="concurrency (road)" label="concurrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075207" start="2034" end="2056" title="cloverleaf interchange" label="cloverleaf interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q821814" start="2062" end="2070" title="New Jersey Route 18" label="Route 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442257" start="2140" end="2170" title="Seaview Square Shopping Center" label="Seaview Square Shopping Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q822485" start="2251" end="2259" title="New Jersey Route 35" label="Route 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q201127" start="2305" end="2316" title="Asbury Park, New Jersey" label="Asbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q867442" start="2380" end="2421" title="1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering" label="1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering"/>
<link wikidata="Q606332" start="2707" end="2717" title="Emergency evacuation" label="evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="3606" end="3645" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158497" wikidata="Q517034" url="?curid=158497" title="List of motorways in the United Kingdom">
<text>This list of motorways in the United Kingdom is a complete list of motorways in the United Kingdom. Note that the numbering scheme used for Great Britain does not include roads in Northern Ireland, which are allocated numbers on an ad hoc basis.
==Great Britain==
The following motorways are sorted following the motorway numbering scheme used in Great Britain.

===M-designated motorways===
===Upgraded A-road designations===
===Former motorways===
==Northern Ireland==

===M-designated motorways===
===Upgraded A-road designations===
==See also==
*List of motorway service areas in the United Kingdom
*Roads in the United Kingdom
*List of numbered roads in the British Isles
*Motorways in the Republic of Ireland
*List of controlled-access highway systems
*Evolution of motorway construction in European nations

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q517034" start="5" end="44" title="List of motorways in the United Kingdom" label="list of motorways in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="67" end="75" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="84" end="98" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q387692" start="114" end="153" title="Great Britain road numbering scheme" label="numbering scheme used for Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="180" end="196" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="313" end="338" title="Great_Britain_road_numbering_scheme#Motorways" label="motorway numbering scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629340" start="550" end="602" title="List of motorway service areas in the United Kingdom" label="List of motorway service areas in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339655" start="604" end="631" title="Roads in the United Kingdom" label="Roads in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631522" start="633" end="676" title="List of numbered roads in the British Isles" label="List of numbered roads in the British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374898" start="678" end="714" title="Motorways in the Republic of Ireland" label="Motorways in the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613531" start="716" end="757" title="List of controlled-access highway systems" label="List of controlled-access highway systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717458" start="759" end="813" title="Evolution of motorway construction in European nations" label="Evolution of motorway construction in European nations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158498" wikidata="Q9292762" url="?curid=158498" title="Mustang Ranch">
<text>The Mustang Ranch is a brothel in Storey County, Nevada, about east of Reno. 

Under the past and original owner Joe Conforte, Mustang Ranch Brothel, the precursor to Mustang Ranch, became Nevada&#x27;s first licensed brothel in 1971. This eventually led to the legalization of brothels in 10 of 17 counties in the state. Mustang Ranch opened to the public in 1971 and was America&#x27;s largest brothel with , and the most profitable.

The Mustang Ranch was forfeited to the federal government in 1999 following Conforte&#x27;s convictions for tax fraud, racketeering and other crimes.

The Mustang Ranch was auctioned off by the United States government on eBay. Lance Gilman’s bid was the last bid for $145,100 and he reopened the Mustang Ranch 5 miles away.

==Operation==

The courtesans lived on the ranch during their entire shift, which lasted from several days to several weeks. In the early 1970s, the women were lingerie clad. Conforte claimed in 1971 that the age range of the working girls was 18 to 35. Conforte could provide women of any age, race or size on request of the high rollers. The shifts lasted 12 hours per day. Clothing and salon services were provided by vendors who traveled from as far away as San Francisco and by non-courtesan employees who lived in Sparks, Nevada. Doctors came to the ranch to do pelvic exams and check for sexually transmitted diseases. Although many of the women working were from Reno or Sparks, many commuted from Sacramento and San Francisco. Others came from all parts of the country. Women not working on the ranch were not allowed in. Owner Joe Conforte allowed &quot;out parties&quot; for high rollers to take the women to hotels in Reno.

Las Vegas reporter Colin McKinlay visited the Mustang Ranch to do one of the first reports ever allowed by Mustang management. He wrote, &quot;The women were the most beautiful of any fantasy of man.&quot;

As in other Nevada brothels, customers were buzzed in through the parlor door. Once in, they chose a woman from a lineup in a lobby, and negotiated prices and services. She checked the penis for any open sores or signs of venereal disease and tested the pre-ejaculatory fluid. A short negotiation was made as to the type of &quot;party&quot; the customer wanted. The house received half of anything the women made. After the negotiations were over, the courtesan collected the money and deposited it with a cashier.

Joe Conforte in 1986 wrote his autobiography and history of the Mustang Ranch, with Nevada writer, David W. Toll.

==History==
The brothel started out as a set of four double-wide trailers, run by Richard Bennett and initially called &quot;Mustang Bridge Ranch.&quot; Joe Conforte (1925-2019), (&quot;Look&quot; gave his age as 48 in 1971) who had owned several brothels in Nevada together with his wife, Sally Burgess Conforte aka Jesse E. Conforte (1917–1992) since October 1955, took over the Mustang Bridge Ranch in 1967. At this time, brothels were not explicitly illegal in Nevada, but some had been closed as public nuisances.

Conforte gained political influence in Storey County (by renting out cheap trailers and telling the renters how to vote) and persuaded county officials to pass a brothel-licensing ordinance, which came into effect in 1971. Joe Conforte was featured in &quot;Look&quot;, June 29, 1971, the article titled &quot;Legal Prostitution Spreads in Nevada&#x27;&quot; by Gerald Astor, &quot;Look&quot; Senior Editor. Joe was on the cover of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine November 23, 1972.

The Nevada Supreme Court upheld the right of a county to legalize prostitution, and several counties followed suit. Conforte converted the trailers into a permanent structure with 54 bedrooms.

In 1976, the world class boxer Oscar Bonavena (1942–1976), who was a former friend of Conforte&#x27;s and probably had an affair with his wife Sally, was shot dead at the ranch by Conforte&#x27;s bodyguard.

In 1982, Mustang II with 48 bedrooms was built a hundred meters away from Mustang I. A bit smaller and not as luxurious as Mustang I, mostly new women and women demoted from Mustang I for some infraction worked there. Mustang 1 was subsequently rebranded as the &quot;World Famous Mustang Ranch&quot;.

=== Forfeiture and sale following tax fraud ===
After losing a tax fraud case in 1990, the brothel was closed for three months and auctioned off. Conforte fled the United States to Brazil. The brothel was bought by a holding company and stayed open. After that company and the brothel&#x27;s manager (a former county commissioner) lost a federal fraud, racketeering and conspiracy case in 1999, the Mustang Ranch was closed and forfeited to the federal government. That same year, the Brazil Supreme Court ruled Conforte could not be extradited.

In 2002, the brothel&#x27;s furniture, paintings and accessories were auctioned off. The Bureau of Land Management sold the Ranch&#x27;s pink stucco structures on eBay in 2003. Bordello owner Lance Gilman purchased the buildings for $145,100 and moved them to his Wild Horse Adult Resort &amp; Spa five miles (8 km) to the east, where the relocated and extensively renovated buildings eventually became the second brothel located at that complex. However, the rights to the name Mustang Ranch, which Gilman had hoped to use for this new brothel, were tied up in a court battle with David Burgess, the owner of the Old Bridge Ranch, nephew of Joe Conforte, and manager of the Mustang Ranch from 1979 until 1989. In December 2006, a federal judge ruled that Gilman was the &quot;exclusive owner of the Mustang Ranch trademark&quot; giving him the rights to use the name and branding.

In late March 2007, the final remaining building, the Annex II which had been bought for $8,600 by Dennis Hof, was burned down in a fire department training exercise. A &quot;Reno Gazette-Journal&quot; report cited plans for the restoration of natural conditions to the section of the Truckee River flowing through the land, following the completion of a similar restoration five miles downstream on McCarran Ranch land owned by The Nature Conservancy.

Contrary to a popular urban legend circulated by email, the Mustang Ranch was never operated by the U.S. government. It was operated by the Bankruptcy Trustee appointed by the United States Bankruptcy Court on behalf of the United States Government.

==In media==
The 1973 motion picture &quot;Charley Varrick&quot; contained a scene filmed at Mustang Ranch, with a cameo by Joe Conforte. Nevada writer Gabriel R. Vogliotti (1908–1983) did research living at the Mustang Ranch. In 1975, he authored &quot;The Girls of Nevada,&quot; with a subtitle on the dust jacket, &quot;Featuring Joe Conforte, Overseer of the Mustang Ranch.&quot; In 1978, Robert Goralnick wrote and directed &quot;Mustang: The House That Joe Built.&quot;

The 2010 film &quot;Love Ranch&quot; starring Helen Mirren is loosely based on the events at the Mustang Ranch. After a visit to the new Mustang Ranch in 2008, Mirren announced she was a &quot;complete believer in legal brothels&quot;.

The brothel was the subject of the 2003 BBC TV documentary film Louis and the Brothel.&quot;

The first episode of the second series of &quot;Stacey Dooley Sleeps Over USA&quot;, titled &quot;The Brothel&quot;, was set in the Mustang Ranch. It was first broadcast in March 2024.

== See also ==

* Prostitution in Nevada
* List of brothels in Nevada

== References ==
==External links==
* &quot;Mustang Ranch&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9292762" start="4" end="17" title="Mustang Ranch" label="Mustang Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="23" end="30" title="brothel" label="brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q484431" start="34" end="47" title="Storey County, Nevada" label="Storey County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="49" end="55" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="71" end="75" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q105580944" start="113" end="125" title="Joseph Conforte" label="Joe Conforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q15279749" start="545" end="554" title="Tax avoidance and tax evasion" label="tax fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283181" start="556" end="568" title="Racket (crime)" label="racketeering"/>
<link wikidata="Q376924" start="782" end="791" title="courtesan" label="courtesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q855691" start="923" end="931" title="lingerie" label="lingerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q211629" start="1283" end="1297" title="Sparks, Nevada" label="Sparks, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="1299" end="1306" title="Physician" label="Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="1358" end="1387" title="sexually transmitted diseases" label="sexually transmitted diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="1469" end="1479" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="1484" end="1497" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="1700" end="1709" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977253" start="1919" end="1934" title="prostitution in Nevada" label="Nevada brothels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740768" start="2725" end="2729" title="Look (American magazine)" label="Look"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="3497" end="3510" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q932112" start="3550" end="3570" title="Nevada Supreme Court" label="Nevada Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q293159" start="3771" end="3785" title="Oscar Bonavena" label="Oscar Bonavena"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4415" end="4428" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="4432" end="4438" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="4597" end="4602" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283181" start="4604" end="4616" title="racketeering" label="racketeering"/>
<link wikidata="Q519138" start="4736" end="4756" title="Supreme Federal Court (Brazil)" label="Brazil Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="4887" end="4912" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="4940" end="4946" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="4961" end="4965" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000664" start="4990" end="5002" title="Lance Gilman" label="Lance Gilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000664" start="5062" end="5095" title="Wild Horse Adult Resort &amp;amp; Spa" label="Wild Horse Adult Resort &amp;amp; Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q54959685" start="5412" end="5428" title="Old Bridge Ranch" label="Old Bridge Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258518" start="5780" end="5790" title="Dennis Hof" label="Dennis Hof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313391" start="5856" end="5876" title="Reno Gazette-Journal" label="Reno Gazette-Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142338" start="5966" end="5979" title="Truckee River" label="Truckee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269382" start="6081" end="6089" title="Pat McCarran" label="McCarran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813186" start="6110" end="6132" title="The Nature Conservancy" label="The Nature Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189349" start="6157" end="6169" title="urban legend" label="urban legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q860287" start="6429" end="6444" title="Charley Varrick" label="Charley Varrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q549902" start="6883" end="6893" title="Love Ranch" label="Love Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q349391" start="6909" end="6921" title="Helen Mirren" label="Helen Mirren"/>
<link wikidata="Q106899512" start="7242" end="7271" title="Stacey Dooley Sleeps Over USA" label="Stacey Dooley Sleeps Over USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977253" start="7398" end="7420" title="Prostitution in Nevada" label="Prostitution in Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608309" start="7423" end="7449" title="List of brothels in Nevada" label="List of brothels in Nevada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158501" wikidata="Q14317" url="?curid=158501" title="Oviedo">
<text>Oviedo () or Uviéu (Asturian: ) is the capital city of the Principality of Asturias in northern Spain and the administrative and commercial centre of the region. It is also the name of the municipality that contains the city. Oviedo is located approximately southwest of Gijón and southeast of Avilés, both of which lie on the shoreline of the Bay of Biscay. Oviedo&#x27;s proximity to the ocean of less than in combination with its elevated position with areas of the city more than 300 metres above sea level causes the city to have a maritime climate, in spite of its not being located on the shoreline itself.

==History==

The Kingdom of Asturias began in 720, with the Visigothic aristocrat Pelagius&#x27;s (685–737) revolt against the Muslims who at the time were occupying most of the Iberian Peninsula. The Moorish invasion that began in 711 had taken control of most of the peninsula, until the revolt in the northern mountains by Pelagius. The resulting Kingdom of Asturias, located in an economically poor region of Iberia, was largely ignored by the Muslims. In 720, the area where Oviedo is now located was still uninhabited.

It is said that two monks, Máximo and Fromestano (), founded the city in 761. That settlement was soon to be completed with the construction of a small church dedicated to Saint Vincent. Oviedo was established on an uninhabited hillside, with no Visigothic or Roman foundation before it became an Asturian city. Following Pelagius, who died in 737, Alfonso I (739–57) founded a dynasty that reigned until 1037. The Asturian Kingdom was on hostile terms with southern Moorish Spain. In 794, Oviedo was sacked and pillaged by Caliph Hisham I in one of his numerous campaigns against the Christian kingdoms.

King Alfonso I is said to have &quot;set in place the whole order of the Goths, as it had been in Toledo, as much in the church as in the palace.&quot; The intention with Oviedo was to shape it into a city similar to that of Visigothic Toledo. Once kings had settled in Oviedo, they adopted as much of the architectural style and imagery of Toledo. Even with this in mind, Oviedo did not necessarily resemble the old Visigothic capital in Toledo. The churches and buildings of Oviedo follow instead late provincial Roman tradition. Since Asturias at the time was an agriculturally poor area of Spain the scale of the buildings is quite impressive.

Oviedo&#x27;s rich architectural tradition began with King Fruela I (757–768). King Fruela I of Asturias, the fourth of the Asturian monarchs, was the first decided promoter of the city as may be witnessed by his construction of both a palace and a nearby church. This church was later restored by Alfonso II. Oviedo owes to a later king, Alfonso II The Chaste (791–842), its establishment as a capital city and ruling seat as a result of the moving of the court from Pravia and the creation of the Pilgrim&#x27;s Route to Santiago de Compostela, a major event in the history of Oviedo, a church dedicated to The Saviour, the Cathedral of San Salvador, and a royal palace formed the nucleus of Oviedo. Also constructed during Alfonso II&#x27;s reign was the San Julian de los Prados church, which is one of the best preserved Asturian churches. Alfonso II&#x27;s successor, Ramiro I (842–850), continued Alfonso II&#x27;s construction streak. Ramiro I constructed two buildings, the Church Santa Maria del Naranco and San Miguel de Lillo. The Church Santa Maria de Naranco was likely to originally be Ramiro I&#x27;s palace and later changed into a church. By this time the Court of the Palace was centered in Oviedo, which was the main royal residence. This court was controlled by members of the Asturian nobility.

Ramiro I&#x27;s (842–850) eight-year tenure was uneasy, he faced rebellions from the Counts of the Palace. The first rebellion against Ramiro I was led by Alroitus, and the second rebellion was led by Piniolus. Both of these rebellions were unsuccessful in removing Ramiro I. These rebellions may have been why Ramiro I built his palace in the mountains surrounding Oviedo, presumably away from the violence. During the 9th century in Oviedo, Roman style property law is common. 9th century documents also indicate small scale aristocracies across the kingdom, as well as a large presence of a landowning peasantry.

Following Ramiro I&#x27;s reign, Ordoño I (850–866) came into power and began the Asturian king&#x27;s father-son succession. Ordoño I was the first king to push southwards into Arab territory. Following Ordoño I&#x27;s death on 27 May 866, usurpers attempted to take the throne. The following king Alfonso III (866–910), who was thirteen at the time, took refuge in Castile until his followers had killed the usurper.

Alfonso III&#x27;s contributions to building construction are not nearly as well documented as Ramiro I&#x27;s or Alfonso II&#x27;s contributions. The Chronicle of Alfonso III does not mention any buildings created by Alfonso III, neither does the Chronicle of Albelda. In 882, the body of the Cordoban martyr Eulogius was sent to Oviedo. This was meant a diplomatic gift from Emir Muhammad I (852–886). Eulogius was executed in 859. The body was likely accompanied by Eulogius&#x27;s book collection. In the 16th century, the only manuscript of Eulogius&#x27;s writings was discovered in the Oviedo Cathedral Library. Here it was copied once before it disappeared completely from the library. Following an offensive in 881 against an Umayyad army, Alfsonso III returned to Oviedo to rebuild churches. It was at this time he constructed one or more palaces. The Chronicle of Albelda and the Chronicle of Sampiro tie Alfonso III&#x27;s victories in battle to his program of church building in Oviedo. In 908, Alfonso III commissioned a gold and jewelled cross to contain the cross carried by Pelagius I at Covadonga. This &quot;Cross of Victory&quot; is located in the Camara Sancta in the Oviedo Cathedral. However, recent Carbon14 analysis of the wooden cross indicates that it was no older than the golden casing created to surround the cross. The commission of the casing shows us Alfonso III&#x27;s interest in perpetuating the legend of Pelagius I.

Towards the end of Alfonso III&#x27;s reign, he faced many challenges. In 901, a prophet named Alhaman led a &quot;great army of Muslims&quot; and attempted to take Zamora. To add to this, Alfonso III&#x27;s brother Vermudo revolted in Astorga. There were several attempts at the aging Alfonso III&#x27;s life by his sons. Alfonso III was overthrown by sons, and died in Zamora. His body was taken to Oviedo for burial.

The moving of the royal court to León, after the death of Alfonso III, &#x27;The Great&#x27;, links the life of the city to the relics preserved in its cathedral and the passing of pilgrims that visit El Salvador, and continue on their way to Santiago de Compostela. Kings spent less and less time in Oviedo following the change, and spent more time in the rich Duero Plains. León was built up after it became the capital, and eventually surpassed Oviedo in terms of construction.

During the 12th century, many Royal Charters were fabricated by Bishop Pelayo de Oviedo, &quot;el fabulador&quot; (&quot;the fabulist&quot;). Since there were few checks on internal bookkeeping in the kingdom actions like this had become commonplace throughout Asturias. When original documents faded, they were copied onto cartularies and often with alterations that suited the needs of those who copied the documents. The most glaring example can be seen in the &quot;Liber Testamentorum&quot;, which was compiled by Bishop Pelayo de Oviedo in 1109. This document contained many confirmation rights and property rights of the Oviedo cathedral by Asturian and Leonese Kings. Bishop Pelayo&#x27;s intent behind this was to try to gain the independence of his see from the archbishop of Toledo or Santiago, as well as to promote Oviedo as a pilgrim destination. According to Sánchez-Albornoz, &quot;He (Bishop Pelayo) always, always, always falsified.&quot; It is assumed that Bishop Pelayo never committed forgery for the enjoyment, but primarily to promote the church of Oviedo.

The following centuries (12th–16th) witness the development of the medieval city, the outlines of which are still preserved today, the construction of the city walls, a devastating fire which took place on Christmas Eve in 1521, and the aqueduct works, &quot;Los Pilares&quot;, constructed in order to provide the city with water throughout the 16th century.

The foundation of the Arts College (University of Oviedo) by Fernando de Valdés Salas, at the beginning of the 17th century, opened Oviedo to a progressive urban expansion. Further impulse was in the 18th century by the regional nobility and the construction of remarkable palaces; in the 19th century by industrial growth and the suburban development of Uría Street; and finally in the 20th century by administrative and commercial development.

In October 1934, there was a left-wing revolt against the conservative government, based in several cities. In Asturias, the fighting developed into a small, short-lived civil war: the Asturian miners&#x27; strike of 1934. 50,000 workers, mostly miners, armed themselves with dynamite and captured Oviedo after heavy fighting. They gained control of the arsenal with 30,000 rifles and machine guns. The Army Chief of Staff, General Francisco Franco sent in soldiers who overpowered the rebels after severe street fighting that left 3,000 rebels dead and 7,000 wounded. The cathedral was badly damaged, with its eighth-century chapel blown up by a mine. In the aftermath, many false atrocity stories circulated.

The Siege of Oviedo in 1936 was a memorable event in the Spanish Civil War. The army garrison rose in support of the Nationalist coup d&#x27;état and withstood a siege of three months by an improvised Republican force until relieved in 1937.

==Geography==
Oviedo is located in the centre of Asturias between the Nalón River and Nora River. To the north lie Las Regueras and Llanera, to the south Mieres del Camino and Ribera de Arriba, to the east Siero and Langreo, and to the west Grado and Santo Adriano. The altitude of Oviedo is between 80 and 709 metres above sea level. The city is protected against strong winds by Monte Naranco in the north and the Sierra del Aramo in the south. The city centre is rather hilly.
==Economy==
The economy is strongly dependent on the service sector, with many office buildings in the city centre. Oviedo&#x27;s status as the administrative centre of the region supports a large number of jobs in public administration. The manufacturing sector, which remains important in this part of Spain, is not prevalent in Oviedo itself, but is more important in the adjacent municipalities of Siero and Llanera which lie to the north of the city, between Oviedo and Gijon. In 2009, the municipality had a total debt of €135 million.

==Architecture==
Oviedo contains a very rich architectural history, with many buildings dating back to the early medieval period. Many of the building projects were undertaken during Alfonso II&#x27;s (791-842) reign and Ramiro I&#x27;s (842-850) reign. Alfonso III&#x27;s contributions are not as well documented.

Alfonso II is said to have built four churches, one dedicated to Christ the Saviour, the Blessed Virgin Mary, St. Tyrsus, and SS Julian and Basilissa. There are few traces of the churches dedicated to the Saviour, the Virgin Mary, and St. Tyrsus. The San Salvador church, which was dedicated to the Saviour, is likely beneath the Cathedral of Oviedo. The church of Santa Maria de la Corte, which was dedicated to the Virgin Mary, was demolished in 1702. As for St. Tyrsus, the church dedicated to him exists today as the church of San Tirso. Only a wall and a three light window are believed to have been built by Alfonso II, the majority of the rest of the church is dated to the 14th century. The best preserved church constructed during Alfonso II&#x27;s time was San Julian de los Prados.

Two buildings are said to have been built during Ramiro I&#x27;s reign, one was a church dedicated to the Virgin Mary and the other construction was a palace. These were built just outside Oviedo, on Monte Lignum. The church Santa Maria de Naranco seems to originally have been a palace, but later repurposed into a church. The church has an atypical plan from other churches at its time, possibly because it was supposed to contain a throne room for the king. The other church built during Ramiro I&#x27;s time was San Miguel de Lillo.

The Chronicle of Albelda, one of the primary sources used to discern which King commissioned which building, only extends to 883. Because of this, constructions undertaken during Alfonso III&#x27;s time as king were not documented.

The following is a list of the notable architectural sites in Oviedo:
* Cathedral of San Salvador, was erected in 1388 over the previous cathedral, which was founded in the 8th century. The original church was built by Fruela I the Cruel (757), and then built upon by Alfonso II (791-842). The Tower on the south side of the church was erected in 1556. The north tower was never completed.
* Cámara Santa de Oviedo. Dating from 802. It is located within the Cathedral, attached to the southern transept of the cathedral, and it is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Houses the Arca Santa chest reliquary of the Sudarium of Oviedo. The Cámara Sancta houses many Christian treasures. It contained the great gold and jeweled cross of victory for Alfonso III, which was made for housing a wooden cross used by the first Asturian king, Pelayo. The wooden cross was supposedly used in the Asturian victory at the battle of the Covadonga in 718. The Arca Sancta itself, which is covered with decorated silver plates, was commissioned by Alfonso VI (1072–1109).
* Santa María del Naranco Hall, 9th century. A relatively large pavilion, part of a palace complex built for the King Ramiro I.
* San Miguel de Lillo (small church), 9th century.
* Basilica of San Julián de los Prados. This church was originally constructed by Alfonso II (791-842), and is one of the best preserved Asturian churches. The church features a fresco decoration style. Although it was reported to have been placed near a palace, no trace of such palace has been found. Ideologically it would appear that church was opposed to religious imagery, which seems to parallel the iconoclast movement in the Byzantine Empire. However, there was no documentation of this ideal circulating in Spain at this point in time, so the Asturian stance on iconoclasm should not be inferred from this fact.
* La Foncalada. Fountain of the 9th century. It is the only preserved Pre-Romanesque civil work in the whole of Europe.
* The University of Oviedo was created in 1574, but only inaugurated on 21 September 1608, the feast of Saint Matthew. It was funded by the terms of the will of Archbishop D. Fernando Valdés Salas, minister and General Inquisitor under Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor and Philip II.
* Town Hall (Casa Consistorial). Dates from 1662.
* La Balesquida Chapel (13th century). Associated with Oviedo&#x27;s taylors&#x27; guild. Repeatedly restored in the 17th, 19th and 20th centuries. It is dedicated to the Virgin of Hope.
* House of the Llanes (18th century). It is the best Baroque façade in the whole of Asturias.
* Deán Payarinos&#x27; House (20th century). A building on the Beaux Arts style. Nowadays, it houses the Eduardo Martínez Torner Conservatory.
* The Monastery of San Vicente (8th century). At the moment, home of the Archaeological Museum of Asturias.
* The Convent Church of Santo Domingo, Oviedo (16th century). One of the monastic settlements outside the city walls. The original building burnt down in 1934 and it was heavily reconstructed after the Civil War.
* El Fontán Market (17th-18th centuries). A simple but rather monumental complex; an 18th-century porticoed square, which housed the vegetable market. It fell victim to speculative manoeuvres. It was left to deteriorate on its own; claiming that it was beyond repair, it was then demolished in 1998 and rebuilt offering all modern amenities, but with its original proportions radically changed; the original complex being much lower than its modern replacement.
* Casas del Cuitu, early 20th century Art Nouveau apartment building.
* Palacio de Congresos de Oviedo projected by Santiago Calatrava.
*Church of San Tirso, or the Church of Saint Thyrsus, is located south west of the main cathedral. Only the east end of the church can trace its roots to Alfonso II&#x27;s reign, with the rest of the church created during the 14th century. The triple arcaded window and east wall are the only portions of the church made during the early 9th century.
* Camposagrado Palace built in 1728 and 1744 combining baroque and neo-classical architectures. It is presently the home of the Regional Court of Asturias.

===Plazas and squares===
* Plaza de la Escandalera, located in the downtown area
* Plaza del Fontán, located in the old quarters of the city. It has been used as a marketplace for many centuries.
* Corrada del Obispo
* Plaza Porlier, located by the cathedral in the downtown area.

==Culture==

Oviedo inspired the fictional city of &quot;Vetusta&quot; in Leopoldo Alas&#x27;s &quot;La Regenta&quot;. Other Spanish writers were inspired by the city, including Ramón Pérez de Ayala in &quot;Tigre Juan&quot; and Dolores Medio in her novel &quot;Nosotros los Rivero&quot;.

Oviedo was featured prominently in Woody Allen&#x27;s movie &quot;Vicky Cristina Barcelona&quot;.

Museums in Oviedo:
* Archaeological Museum of Asturias
* Museum of Fine Arts of Asturias
* Camara Santa within the Cathedral houses the Arca Santa and Sudarium of Oviedo
* Diocesan Museum
* &quot;Tabularium Artis Asturiensis&quot;
* Center for the reception and understanding of Preromanesque Art

Other cultural centres in Oviedo:
* Campoamor Theatre, opera house
* Filarmónica Theatre
* Palacio de Congresos de Oviedo
* Prince Felipe Auditorium

Cultural institutions:
Orquesta Sinfonica del Principado de Asturias is the premier orchestra of the region, the Principality of Asturias. This full-time symphony orchestra performs a wide range of the classical repertoire with world class soloists and conductors. It is based in the Auditorio Principe Felipe in Oviedo, but it also performs regularly at the main concert venues in Gijón and Avilés. It is Internationally recognized as one of the best orchestras in Spain, it is also committed to adventurous programing with strong emphasis on education and community partnerships. Rossen Milanov is the Music Director.

Oviedo also hosts the annual Princess of Asturias Awards (previously called the Prince of Asturias Awards). This prestigious event, held in the city&#x27;s Campoamor Theatre, recognizes international achievement in eight different categories. Previous award winners include Oscar Niemeyer, Bob Dylan and Francis Ford Coppola in the category of Arts; Nelson Mandela, the International Space Station and Al Gore in the category of International Cooperation; and Mario Bunge, CNN and Quino in the category of Communications and Humanities.

Oviedo University&#x27;s international campus attracts many foreign scholars from all over the globe.

The city lends its name to the sudarium of Oviedo a religious relic revered there since the 9th century.

==Politics==
The current mayor is Alfredo Canteli (PP).

===Councillors distribution in local elections===
== Sports ==

===Formula One===
The most famous athlete from Oviedo is 2005 and 2006 Formula One world champion Fernando Alonso, famous for being Spain&#x27;s only Formula One title winner, having raced for Minardi, Renault, Ferrari, McLaren, Alpine, and Aston Martin. Alonso has his official career and life museum, together with a karting circuit designed by himself, in Llanera, nearby Oviedo.

=== Sports teams in Oviedo===
*&quot;Real Oviedo&quot;, football team. (La Liga Smartbank, second division)
*&quot;Real Oviedo Rugby&quot;, rugby union team. (División de Honor B, second division)
*&quot;Oviedo CB&quot;, basketball team. (LEB Oro, second division)
*Balonmano Base Oviedo, handball team. (División de Honor Plata, second division)
*&quot;Oviedo Booling&quot;, roller hockey team. (OK Plata, second division)
*Real Oviedo Femenino, football team. (Segunda División)

===Annual sports events===

* International Showjumping Competition
* City of Oviedo Horse Show
* City of Oviedo San Silvestre* Outdoor Sports Climbing
* Vuelta a España (Cycling)
* Vuelta a Asturias (Cycling)
* Ascent of Naranco (Cycling)
* City of Oviedo Mountain Bike Open
* City of Oviedo Cycle Criterium
* Base Hockey International Tournament
* Prince of Asturias International Rally
* National Auto-Cross Championship
* International Hurdles Competition
* International Chess Open
* Boxing Nights
* Ascension Bowls Tournament
* San Mateo Bowls Tournament
* Open de España (Disc Golf)

==Feasts and traditions==

The Festive Calendar:
* Cabalgata de los Reyes Magos de Oriente: The traditional Twelve Night parade, where the Three Wise Men of the East and their retinue parade through the city main streets, reaching the Cathedral Square, where they make their offering to the Child Jesus.
* &quot;L&#x27;Antroxu&quot; (Carnival)
* The Sudarium of Oviedo is displayed to the public three times a year: Good Friday, the Feast of the Triumph of the Cross on 14 September, and its octave on 21 September.
* The Feast of the &quot;Ascension&quot;
* &quot;La Foguera de San Xuan&quot; (Saint John&#x27;s Bonfire):
* &quot;La Balesquida&quot; or &quot;Martes del Bollu&quot; or &quot;Martes del campo&quot;: A public holiday, on a Tuesday in mid-May, where people make a picnic in parks
* The Feast of San Mateo, a popular week-long festival with street food, music, concerts in the cathedral square and the &quot;Día de América en Asturias&quot;
* &quot;El Desarme&quot; (Disarmament&#x27;s Day), commemorating the cunning victory of the locals over a Carlist army during the First Carlist War, during the 1830s

Typical gastronomy of the province:

* &quot;Fabada&quot;, bean stew with selected cuts of pork, etc.
* &quot;Callos&quot;, tripe
* &quot;Carne gobernada&quot;, (chunks of meat, prepared with onion, garlic and white wine sauce)
* &quot;Chorizo a la sidra&quot;, (chorizo sausage prepared in cider)
* &quot;Paxarines&quot;, figures made from breadcrumb and egg coloured with saffron
* &quot;Carbayones&quot;, Oviedo&#x27;s typical almond pastry
* &quot;Sidra&quot;, (cider), Asturian typical drink, fermented apple cider
* &quot;Arroz con leche&quot;, similar to rice pudding
* &quot;Frixuelos&quot;, similar to a crêpe

==Climate==
Oviedo&#x27;s climate is oceanic (Cfb in the Köppen climate classification). Its climate is very similar to neighbouring city Gijón, with only slightly wider fluctuations in temperature due to its higher altitude and more inland location. Oviedo&#x27;s warmest month is in August with an average high of . The city centre is located at a lower elevation than the weather station so is likely somewhat milder year-round since both are located in an upwards gradient away from the sea. Its maritime position renders winters much milder than in continental Spain such as in the Madrid capital region, but summers naturally are far less hot than in the interior. There is a slight drying tendency during summer, albeit less than in other areas of Spain.

==Transport==

===Airports===
Oviedo is served by the Asturias Airport, about from the center of the city; it is located in the municipality of Castrillón. The airport is connected to the city by the A-8 motorway, the A-66 motorway and scheduled bus service (Alsa).

===Public transport===
Oviedo currently has 15 bus lines and one (owl) line. The owl services run on Saturdays, Sundays and on the eve of public holidays, except Christmas Day and Christmas Eve. Last two lines (&quot;Línea U&quot; y &quot;Línea V&quot;) that connect rural zones of Oviedo were implemented in March 2020 and they only operate between Monday and Friday.

===Rail===
The Oviedo railway station provides a wide range of long- and middle-distance services, in addition to regional and suburban (&quot;cercanías&quot;) services operated by Renfe, and the narrow-gauge Renfe Feve lines. Within the municipality, there are others rail stations on the Cercanías Asturias network, in La Corredoria, Llamaquique, El Caleyo, Olloniego, Santa Eulalia de Manzaneda, Tudela-Veguín, Parque Principado, Colloto, Argañosa-Lavapiés, Las Campas, Las Mazas, San Claudio, Soto-Udrión, Trubia, Fuso de la Reina, and Caces.

===Mining railway===
The Oviedo-Villapérez mining railway was narrow gauge railway. It was just over long and ran from Oviedo to the iron ore mines in the &quot;Villapérez&quot; and &quot;Naranco&quot; mining areas from 1880 to 1916.

===Tramway===
From 1922 to 1956, there was a tramway system in Oviedo.

==Notable people==

*HM Queen Letizia of Spain the consort of the Spanish King Felipe VI.
*Leopoldo Alas &quot;Clarín&quot;, 19th century novelist and literary critic.
*Fernando Alonso, racing driver, winner of the Formula One World Drivers&#x27; Championship in and and the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 2018 and 2019.
*Galo Blanco, professional tennis player and coach
*Enrique Castro &quot;Quini&quot;, retired footballer. He was widely regarded as one of the country&#x27;s best strikers.
*Sabino Fernández-Campo, chief of the Spanish Royal House between 1990 and 1993. Count of Latores and Grandee of Spain 
*Carmen Domínguez (born 1969), glaciologist
*Antonio Gamoneda winner of the 2006 Cervantes Prize.
*Ángel González, poet.
*Sid Lowe, well known international football journalist predominantly known for his contributions to The Guardian, studied in the University of Oviedo.
*Juan Mata, Manchester United footballer. World and European champion along with 2012 UEFA Champions League winner with Chelsea
*Melendi, popular singer.
*Michu, former Swansea City footballer.
*Ramón Pérez de Ayala, writer.
*Carmen Polo, wife of Spain&#x27;s dictator Francisco Franco.
*Indalecio Prieto, socialist politician. One of the leaders of the Spanish Socialist Workers&#x27; Party up to the end of the Civil War and the posterior exile.
*Ángela Salvadores, basketball player
*Samuel Sánchez, cyclist. 2008 Olympic Road Race Champion.
*Jorge Suárez Carbajal, Asturian piper
*Tioda, 9th-century architect who designed several of the city pre-romanesque buildings.
*Tino Casal, singer, songwriter and producer in the town of Tudela Veguín, in the municipality of Oviedo.
*El Sueño de Morfeo, musical group
*Noemí Pinilla-Alonso, planetary scientist, astrophysicist.

==Other places in the municipality==

* Trubia
* Colloto (divided between two municipalities: Oviedo and Siero)
* San Claudio
* San Esteban de les Cruces
* Latores
* Olloniego

==International relations==


===Twin towns — sister cities===
Oviedo is twinned with:
* Oviedo, Florida (U.S.) since 1877
* Valparaíso, Chile, since 1976
* Bochum, Germany, since 1979
* Buenos Aires, Argentina, since 1983
* Veracruz, Mexico, since 1983
* Clermont-Ferrand, France, since 1988
* Tampa, Florida (U.S.) since 1991
* Santiago de Compostela, Spain, since 1993
* Santa Clara, Cuba, since 1995
* Jersey City, New Jersey (U.S.), since 1998
* Holon, Israel, since 1999
* Zamora, Spain, since 9 October 2001
* Torrevieja, Spain, since 2 January 2004
* Hangzhou, China, since 2006
* Valencia de Don Juan, Spain, since 2006
* Viseu, Portugal, since 10 April 2007
* Maranello, Italy, since 28 April 2010

==See also==
*Iglesia de Santa María (Oviedo)
*Virtway (1999)

==References==
==Bibliography==
==External links==
* Asturias Cities
* Municipality of Oviedo
* Municipality of Oviedo and touristic informations
* University of Oviedo
* Oviedo city guide at HitchHikers Handbook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14317" start="0" end="6" title="Oviedo" label="Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14317" start="13" end="18" title="Oviedo" label="Uviéu"/>
<link wikidata="Q29507" start="20" end="28" title="Asturian language" label="Asturian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="75" end="83" title="Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="96" end="101" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273" start="271" end="276" title="Gijón" label="Gijón"/>
<link wikidata="Q14649" start="294" end="300" title="Avilés" label="Avilés"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="344" end="357" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="537" end="553" title="maritime climate" label="maritime climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q231392" start="632" end="651" title="Kingdom of Asturias" label="Kingdom of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q14655" start="697" end="705" title="Pelagius of Asturias" label="Pelagius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="793" end="810" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="816" end="832" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="Moorish invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q318974" start="1313" end="1326" title="Vincent of Saragossa" label="Saint Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q333609" start="1490" end="1499" title="Alfonso I of Asturias" label="Alfonso I"/>
<link wikidata="Q348593" start="1672" end="1680" title="Hisham I of Córdoba" label="Hisham I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="1845" end="1851" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q351715" start="2480" end="2500" title="Fruela I of Asturias" label="Fruela I of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q360388" start="2735" end="2745" title="Alfonso II of Asturias" label="Alfonso II"/>
<link wikidata="Q820469" start="2864" end="2870" title="Pravia" label="Pravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="2919" end="2941" title="Santiago de Compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3005" end="3016" title="Jesus Christ" label="The Saviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534288" start="3022" end="3047" title="Oviedo Cathedral" label="Cathedral of San Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q168363" start="3270" end="3278" title="Ramiro I of Asturias" label="Ramiro I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246842" start="3379" end="3409" title="Santa María del Naranco" label="Church Santa Maria del Naranco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812874" start="3414" end="3433" title="San Miguel de Lillo" label="San Miguel de Lillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q223646" start="4364" end="4372" title="Ordoño I" label="Ordoño I"/>
<link wikidata="Q311138" start="4625" end="4641" title="Alfonso III of Asturias" label="king Alfonso III"/>
<link wikidata="Q246000" start="5061" end="5069" title="Eulogius of Córdoba" label="Eulogius"/>
<link wikidata="Q127959530" start="5609" end="5633" title="The Chronicle of Albelda" label="The Chronicle of Albelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033937" start="5642" end="5662" title="Sampiro" label="Chronicle of Sampiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149782" start="5919" end="5932" title="Cámara Santa" label="Camara Sancta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15699" start="6660" end="6664" title="León, León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q311138" start="6685" end="6696" title="Alfonso III of León" label="Alfonso III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553612" start="7173" end="7186" title="Pelagius of Oviedo" label="Bishop Pelayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365216" start="7190" end="7196" title="Bishopric of Oviedo" label="Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553612" start="7579" end="7598" title="Liber Testamentorum" label="Liber Testamentorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423027" start="7895" end="7901" title="Archbishopric of Toledo" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q474" start="8427" end="8435" title="aqueduct (watercourse)" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303432" start="8586" end="8606" title="University of Oviedo" label="University of Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069570" start="8611" end="8635" title="Fernando de Valdés Salas" label="Fernando de Valdés Salas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587277" start="9182" end="9218" title="Asturian miners&amp;#x27; strike of 1934" label="Asturian miners&amp;#x27; strike of 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="9429" end="9445" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q752564" start="9713" end="9728" title="Siege of Oviedo" label="Siege of Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="9766" end="9783" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742116" start="9826" end="9837" title="Nationalist faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436825" start="9838" end="9854" title="Spanish coup of July 1936" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456351" start="9910" end="9920" title="Republican faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q14516" start="10022" end="10033" title="Nalón (river)" label="Nalón River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777091" start="10038" end="10048" title="Nora River" label="Nora River"/>
<link wikidata="Q842644" start="10067" end="10079" title="Las Regueras" label="Las Regueras"/>
<link wikidata="Q744114" start="10084" end="10091" title="Llanera, Asturias" label="Llanera"/>
<link wikidata="Q818376" start="10106" end="10123" title="Mieres" label="Mieres del Camino"/>
<link wikidata="Q842661" start="10128" end="10144" title="Ribera de Arriba" label="Ribera de Arriba"/>
<link wikidata="Q744130" start="10158" end="10163" title="Siero" label="Siero"/>
<link wikidata="Q493806" start="10168" end="10175" title="Langreo" label="Langreo"/>
<link wikidata="Q617580" start="10193" end="10198" title="Grado, Asturias" label="Grado"/>
<link wikidata="Q932781" start="10203" end="10216" title="Santo Adriano" label="Santo Adriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q539792" start="10333" end="10346" title="Monte Naranco" label="Monte Naranco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10368" end="10384" title="Sierra del Aramo" label="Sierra del Aramo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="10485" end="10499" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="10674" end="10694" title="manufacturing sector" label="manufacturing sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q744130" start="10834" end="10839" title="Siero" label="Siero"/>
<link wikidata="Q744114" start="10844" end="10851" title="Llanera, Asturias" label="Llanera"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273" start="10907" end="10912" title="Gijon" label="Gijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q360388" start="11158" end="11168" title="Alfonso II of Asturias" label="Alfonso II"/>
<link wikidata="Q168363" start="11196" end="11204" title="Ramiro I of Asturias" label="Ramiro I"/>
<link wikidata="Q311138" start="11229" end="11240" title="Alfonso III of Asturias" label="Alfonso III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534288" start="11542" end="11561" title="Cathedral of San Salvador, Oviedo" label="San Salvador church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117165" start="11656" end="11679" title="Church of Santa María de la Corte" label="Santa Maria de la Corte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220100" start="11812" end="11831" title="Church of San Tirso, Oviedo" label="church of San Tirso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067282" start="12058" end="12082" title="San Julian de los Prados" label="San Julian de los Prados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246842" start="12310" end="12332" title="Santa María del Naranco" label="Santa Maria de Naranco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812874" start="12601" end="12620" title="San Miguel de Lillo" label="San Miguel de Lillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q127959530" start="12623" end="12647" title="Codex Vigilanus" label="The Chronicle of Albelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534288" start="12928" end="12953" title="Cathedral of San Salvador (Oviedo)" label="Cathedral of San Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q351715" start="13075" end="13093" title="Fruela I of Asturias" label="Fruela I the Cruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149782" start="13248" end="13270" title="Cámara Santa, Oviedo" label="Cámara Santa de Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="13389" end="13395" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="13396" end="13415" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785047" start="13428" end="13438" title="Arca Santa" label="Arca Santa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573410" start="13462" end="13480" title="Sudarium of Oviedo" label="Sudarium of Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246842" start="13907" end="13930" title="Santa María del Naranco" label="Santa María del Naranco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812874" start="14035" end="14054" title="San Miguel de Lillo" label="San Miguel de Lillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067282" start="14098" end="14122" title="San Julián de los Prados" label="San Julián de los Prados"/>
<link wikidata="Q155414" start="14708" end="14720" title="La Foncalada" label="La Foncalada"/>
<link wikidata="Q708807" start="14776" end="14790" title="Pre-Romanesque" label="Pre-Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="14818" end="14824" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303432" start="14832" end="14852" title="Universidad de Oviedo" label="University of Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43600" start="14930" end="14943" title="Saint Matthew" label="Saint Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="15062" end="15091" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="15096" end="15105" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q804907" start="15159" end="15179" title="Capilla de la Balesquida" label="La Balesquida Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="15397" end="15404" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15543" end="15579" title="Eduardo Martínez Torner Conservatory" label="Eduardo Martínez Torner Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415387" start="15587" end="15611" title="San Vicente de Oviedo" label="Monastery of San Vicente"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785394" start="15654" end="15687" title="Archaeological Museum of Asturias" label="Archaeological Museum of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15703" end="15734" title="Santo Domingo de Guzmán, Oviedo" label="Church of Santo Domingo, Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="16402" end="16413" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q168482" start="16436" end="16466" title="Palacio de Congresos de Oviedo" label="Palacio de Congresos de Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q168482" start="16480" end="16498" title="Santiago Calatrava" label="Santiago Calatrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220100" start="16501" end="16520" title="Church of San Tirso, Oviedo" label="Church of San Tirso"/>
<link wikidata="Q11272763" start="16853" end="16872" title="Camposagrado Palace (Oviedo)" label="Camposagrado Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080188" start="17035" end="17058" title="Plaza de la Escandalera" label="Plaza de la Escandalera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050303" start="17075" end="17083" title="downtown" label="downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q312747" start="17364" end="17377" title="Leopoldo Alas" label="Leopoldo Alas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784466" start="17391" end="17401" title="La Regenta" label="La Regenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q727717" start="17468" end="17488" title="Ramón Pérez de Ayala" label="Ramón Pérez de Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17498" end="17508" title="Tigre Juan" label="Tigre Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395811" start="17519" end="17532" title="Dolores Medio" label="Dolores Medio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17552" end="17571" title="Nosotros los Rivero" label="Nosotros los Rivero"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="17615" end="17626" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212123" start="17646" end="17670" title="Vicky Cristina Barcelona" label="Vicky Cristina Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785394" start="17700" end="17733" title="Archaeological Museum of Asturias" label="Archaeological Museum of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773707" start="17736" end="17767" title="Museum of Fine Arts of Asturias" label="Museum of Fine Arts of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149782" start="17770" end="17782" title="Camara Santa" label="Camara Santa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785047" start="17815" end="17825" title="Arca Santa" label="Arca Santa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231888" start="17851" end="17866" title="Diocesan Museum" label="Diocesan Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17875" end="17903" title="Tabularium Artis Asturiensis" label="Tabularium Artis Asturiensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17912" end="17975" title="Center for the reception and understanding of Preromanesque Art" label="Center for the reception and understanding of Preromanesque Art"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18013" end="18030" title="Teatro Campoamor" label="Campoamor Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q168482" start="18068" end="18098" title="Palacio de Congresos de Oviedo" label="Palacio de Congresos de Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q329157" start="18777" end="18804" title="Princess of Asturias Awards" label="Princess of Asturias Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q134165" start="19022" end="19036" title="Oscar Niemeyer" label="Oscar Niemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="19038" end="19047" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="19052" end="19072" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="19092" end="19096" title="Arts" label="Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="19098" end="19112" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="19118" end="19145" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="19150" end="19157" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q708853" start="19208" end="19219" title="Mario Bunge" label="Mario Bunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="19221" end="19224" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q317139" start="19229" end="19234" title="Quino" label="Quino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303432" start="19286" end="19303" title="Oviedo University" label="Oviedo University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573410" start="19420" end="19438" title="sudarium of Oviedo" label="sudarium of Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q185088" start="19546" end="19548" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Spain)" label="PP"/>
<link wikidata="Q69880" start="19673" end="19677" title="2005 Formula One season" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q69893" start="19682" end="19686" title="2006 Formula One season" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="19687" end="19698" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514" start="19714" end="19729" title="Fernando Alonso" label="Fernando Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q142381" start="19809" end="19816" title="Minardi" label="Minardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="19818" end="19825" title="Renault F1" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="19827" end="19834" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="19836" end="19843" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q98930155" start="19845" end="19851" title="Alpine F1 Team" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074" start="19857" end="19869" title="Aston Martin" label="Aston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271574" start="20037" end="20048" title="Real Oviedo" label="Real Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="20056" end="20064" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q35615" start="20072" end="20089" title="Segunda División" label="La Liga Smartbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q517805" start="20115" end="20132" title="Oviedo RC" label="Real Oviedo Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="20140" end="20151" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325446" start="20159" end="20178" title="División de Honor B de Rugby" label="División de Honor B"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401630" start="20204" end="20213" title="Oviedo CB" label="Oviedo CB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="20221" end="20231" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824570" start="20239" end="20246" title="LEB Oro" label="LEB Oro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20266" end="20287" title="Balonmano Base Oviedo" label="Balonmano Base Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="20289" end="20297" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20354" end="20368" title=":es:Oviedo Booling Club" label="Oviedo Booling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440462" start="20376" end="20389" title="roller hockey" label="roller hockey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20425" end="20445" title="Real Oviedo Femenino" label="Real Oviedo Femenino"/>
<link wikidata="Q606060" start="20447" end="20455" title="Women&amp;#x27;s association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q111710124" start="20463" end="20479" title="Segunda División Pro (women)" label="Segunda División"/>
<link wikidata="Q33937" start="20636" end="20651" title="Vuelta a España" label="Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q786110" start="20664" end="20681" title="Vuelta a Asturias" label="Vuelta a Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640138" start="20694" end="20711" title="Subida al Naranco" label="Ascent of Naranco"/>
<link wikidata="Q657449" start="21194" end="21200" title="parade" label="parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="21407" end="21415" title="Carnival" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="21489" end="21500" title="Good Friday" label="Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q815520" start="21506" end="21539" title="Exaltation of the Holy Cross" label="Feast of the Triumph of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21668" end="21693" title="Saint John&amp;#x27;s Bonfire" label="Saint John&amp;#x27;s Bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23374" start="22458" end="22465" title="chorizo" label="chorizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="22486" end="22491" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="22661" end="22666" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="22852" end="22859" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="22872" end="22901" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="23402" end="23408" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430901" start="23632" end="23648" title="Asturias Airport" label="Asturias Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q294510" start="23837" end="23841" title="ALSA (bus company)" label="Alsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033747" start="23926" end="23938" title="Night service (public transport)" label="owl services"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="24007" end="24020" title="Christmas Day" label="Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="24025" end="24038" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394520" start="24230" end="24252" title="Oviedo railway station" label="Oviedo railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054782" start="24358" end="24367" title="cercanías" label="cercanías"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476154" start="24396" end="24401" title="Renfe Operadora" label="Renfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143007" start="24424" end="24434" title="Renfe Feve" label="Renfe Feve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054739" start="24505" end="24523" title="Cercanías Asturias" label="Cercanías Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q121411523" start="24788" end="24820" title="Oviedo-Villapérez mining railway" label="Oviedo-Villapérez mining railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="24825" end="24837" title="narrow gauge" label="narrow gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q201589" start="25091" end="25116" title="Letizia Ortiz Rocasolano" label="HM Queen Letizia of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q191045" start="25149" end="25158" title="Felipe VI" label="Felipe VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q312747" start="25161" end="25193" title="Leopoldo Alas y Ureña" label="Leopoldo Alas &amp;quot;Clarín&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514" start="25239" end="25254" title="Fernando Alonso" label="Fernando Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="25285" end="25296" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q172863" start="25297" end="25329" title="List of Formula One World Drivers&amp;#x27; Champions" label="World Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="25345" end="25364" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356375" start="25384" end="25395" title="Galo Blanco" label="Galo Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q379756" start="25435" end="25467" title="Quini" label="Enrique Castro &amp;quot;Quini&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893207" start="25557" end="25579" title="Sabino Fernández Campo, 1st Count of Latores" label="Sabino Fernández-Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414413" start="25594" end="25613" title="Spanish royal family" label="Spanish Royal House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="25658" end="25674" title="Grandee of Spain" label="Grandee of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901895" start="25677" end="25693" title="Carmen Domínguez" label="Carmen Domínguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q602119" start="25721" end="25737" title="Antonio Gamoneda" label="Antonio Gamoneda"/>
<link wikidata="Q81466" start="25757" end="25772" title="Cervantes Prize" label="Cervantes Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q715118" start="25775" end="25789" title="Ángel González Muñiz" label="Ángel González"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077003" start="25798" end="25806" title="Sid Lowe" label="Sid Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="25898" end="25910" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q168740" start="25950" end="25959" title="Juan Mata" label="Juan Mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="25961" end="25978" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="25991" end="25996" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="World"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669" start="26001" end="26018" title="UEFA Euro 2012" label="European champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q485002" start="26030" end="26056" title="2011–12 UEFA Champions League" label="2012 UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="26069" end="26076" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q623353" start="26078" end="26085" title="Melendi" label="Melendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q350982" start="26104" end="26109" title="Michu" label="Michu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="26118" end="26130" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q727717" start="26144" end="26164" title="Ramón Pérez de Ayala" label="Ramón Pérez de Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q943785" start="26175" end="26186" title="Carmen Polo" label="Carmen Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="26218" end="26234" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q433615" start="26237" end="26253" title="Indalecio Prieto" label="Indalecio Prieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="26303" end="26340" title="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18957309" start="26398" end="26415" title="Ángela Salvadores" label="Ángela Salvadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q298185" start="26436" end="26450" title="Samuel Sánchez" label="Samuel Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388107" start="26495" end="26516" title="Jorge Suárez Carbajal" label="Jorge Suárez Carbajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808691" start="26534" end="26539" title="Tioda" label="Tioda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058238" start="26623" end="26633" title="Tino Casal" label="Tino Casal"/>
<link wikidata="Q288341" start="26729" end="26747" title="El Sueño de Morfeo" label="El Sueño de Morfeo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26764" end="26784" title=":es:Noemí Pinilla-Alonso" label="Noemí Pinilla-Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q624765" start="26864" end="26870" title="Trubia" label="Trubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777570" start="26873" end="26880" title="Colloto" label="Colloto"/>
<link wikidata="Q744130" start="26929" end="26934" title="Siero" label="Siero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413544" start="26938" end="26949" title="San Claudio" label="San Claudio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26952" end="26977" title="San Esteban de les Cruces" label="San Esteban de les Cruces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26980" end="26987" title="Latores" label="Latores"/>
<link wikidata="Q9052163" start="26990" end="26999" title="Olloniego" label="Olloniego"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="27074" end="27081" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813449" start="27090" end="27105" title="Oviedo, Florida" label="Oviedo, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="27126" end="27136" title="Valparaíso" label="Valparaíso"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="27138" end="27143" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103" start="27158" end="27164" title="Bochum" label="Bochum"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="27166" end="27173" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="27188" end="27200" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="27202" end="27211" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="27226" end="27234" title="Veracruz, Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="27236" end="27242" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q42168" start="27257" end="27273" title="Clermont-Ferrand" label="Clermont-Ferrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="27275" end="27281" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="27296" end="27301" title="Tampa" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="27303" end="27310" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="27331" end="27353" title="Santiago de Compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q211590" start="27375" end="27386" title="Santa Clara, Cuba" label="Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="27388" end="27392" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="27407" end="27418" title="Jersey City" label="Jersey City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="27420" end="27430" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q192213" start="27452" end="27457" title="Holon" label="Holon"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="27459" end="27465" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15696" start="27480" end="27486" title="Zamora, Spain" label="Zamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q221749" start="27518" end="27528" title="Torrevieja" label="Torrevieja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="27560" end="27568" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="27570" end="27575" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q385017" start="27590" end="27610" title="Valencia de Don Juan" label="Valencia de Don Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q117676" start="27632" end="27637" title="Viseu" label="Viseu"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="27639" end="27647" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q100060" start="27671" end="27680" title="Maranello" label="Maranello"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="27682" end="27687" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991983" start="27724" end="27755" title="Iglesia de Santa María (Oviedo)" label="Iglesia de Santa María (Oviedo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935253" start="27757" end="27764" title="Virtway" label="Virtway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158507" wikidata="Q4906230" url="?curid=158507" title="The Big Rock Candy Mountains">
<text>&quot;The Big Rock Candy Mountains&quot;, first recorded and copyrighted by Harry McClintock in 1928, is a country folk song about a hobo&#x27;s idea of paradise, a modern version of the medieval concept of Cockaigne. It is a place where &quot;hens lay soft-boiled eggs&quot; and there are &quot;cigarette trees&quot;. McClintock said that he wrote the song in 1895, based on tales from his youth hoboing through the United States while working for the railroad as a brakeman. It is catalogued as Roud Folk Song Index No. 6696.

==History==
The song was first recorded by McClintock, also known by his &quot;hobo&quot; name of Haywire Mac. McClintock said that he wrote the song, though it was likely partially based on other ballads, including &quot;An Invitation to Lubberland&quot; and &quot;The Appleknocker&#x27;s Lament&quot;. Other popular itinerant songs of the day such as &quot;Hobo&#x27;s Paradise&quot;, &quot;Hobo Heaven&quot;, &quot;Sweet Potato Mountains&quot;, and &quot;Little Streams of Whiskey&quot; likely served as inspiration, as they mention concepts similar to those in &quot;Big Rock Candy Mountain&quot;. &quot;The Big Rock Candy Mountains&quot;, along with its A-side &quot;The Bum Song—No. 2&quot;, was first recorded on September 6, 1928, in Hollywood, California. Victor Talking Machine Company released the single on November 16, 1928, with the artist name &quot;Mac (Harry McClintock)&quot;.

Before recording the song, McClintock cleaned it up considerably from the version he sang as a street busker in the 1890s. Originally the song described a child being recruited into hobo life by tales of the &quot;big rock candy mountain&quot;. In later years, when McClintock appeared in court as part of a copyright dispute, he cited the original words of the song, the last stanza of which was:

The lyrics of the missing line have not been made public; in the released version the entire verse was omitted.

The song was not popularized until 1939, when it peaked at #1 on &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine&#x27;s country music charts. But it achieved more widespread popularity in 1949 when a sanitized version intended for children was re-recorded by Burl Ives. It has been recorded by many artists throughout the world, but a version recorded in 1960 by Dorsey Burnette to date was the biggest success for the song in the post-1954 &quot;rock era&quot;, having reached No. 102 on Billboard&#x27;s chart.

The most famous version has this refrain:

Sanitized versions have been popular, especially with children&#x27;s musicians; in these, the &quot;cigarette trees&quot; become peppermint trees, and the &quot;streams of alcohol&quot; trickling down the rocks become streams of lemonade. The lake of whiskey becomes a lake of soda pop.

==Editions==
Folklorist John Greenway published the song in his &quot;American Folksongs of Protest&quot; (1953), redacting only the second to last line. Bowdlerized versions are included in Irwin Silber&#x27;s &quot;Songs of the Great American West&quot; (1967) and Alan Lomax&#x27;s &quot;The Penguin Book of American Folk Songs&quot; (1964).

A folk version of the song is included in the Gordon &quot;Inferno&quot; Collection in the Library of Congress, under the title &quot;The Appleknocker&#x27;s Lament&quot;.

==Recordings==
* Immediately after Harry McClintock record, in November 1928, Ernie Hare recorded the song as Hobo Jack Turner.
* Vernon Dalhart and Company recorded this as The Big Rock Candy Mountains, on Edison Diamond Disc No. 52472-L, in February 1929. This version is now available on cylinder record, released in November 2016 by the Vulcan Cylinder Record Company.
* A version of the song was recorded by Pete Seeger for Folkways Records in 1957 (Track 2, Side 2 in the American Favorite Ballads, Vol. 1 LP).
* Bing Crosby included the song in a medley on his album &quot;101 Gang Songs&quot; (1961)
* The New Christy Minstrels did a version of the song, which was included in a special compilation by Columbia Records of children&#x27;s songs.
* Roger Whittaker performed a version of this tune on his 1975 children&#x27;s album The Magical World of Roger Whittaker 
* The Beat Farmers recorded a version on their 1985 studio album Tales of the New West 
* The song was used in the 1987 film &quot;Ironweed&quot; and sung by Tom Waits.
* Musician Tom Chapin included a children&#x27;s version of the song on his 1988 album &quot;Family Tree&quot;.
* Larry Groce sang the song on &quot;Disney Children&#x27;s Favorite Songs 4&quot; in 1990.
* Red Grammer sang it on &quot;Favorite Sing-Along Songs.&quot;
* Hudson Shad, an acapella group, recorded a version in their 2002 album, &quot;Wand’rin’ Stars&quot;.
* Lisa Loeb sang a kid&#x27;s version of the song on her 2004 children&#x27;s album &quot;Catch the Moon&quot;.
* In his 2004 album &quot;The Nifty Mervous Thrifty&quot;, Muck Sticky covered this song.
* A version of the song was recorded by The Restarts, a punk band from London, England.
* In 2014, The Okee Dokee Brothers recorded a more family-friendly version of the song for their album &quot;Through the Woods&quot;, replacing references to alcohol and whiskey with chocolate and marmalade, for example.

===Other renditions===
* The song was used in a 1981 showtape at Chuck E. Cheese&#x27;s Pizza Time Theatre restaurants.

*The song was used in a 2005 Burger King commercial, although the lyrics were changed to reference the Burger King TenderCrisp Bacon Cheddar Ranch sandwich. In the commercial almost all of the promises of the song are shown in detail. Darius Rucker appears as the cowboy singing the song. Brooke Burke also appears as a cowgirl.
*Comedian Sarah Silverman sang a version on &quot;The Sarah Silverman Program&quot; in the episode &quot;There&#x27;s No Place Like Homeless&quot;.
*The song was sung by Harry Dean Stanton in his role as Roman Grant in the HBO series &quot;Big Love&quot;.
*Singer-songwriter Bruce Hornsby has occasionally used the song as an intro to his song &quot;Candy Mountain Run&quot; in live performances.
*Natalie Maines of The Chicks sang a version of the song on the 2016 episode &quot;Gal of Constant Sorrow&quot; of the television show &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, with references to characters on the show.

==References to the song==
===Physical locations===

A cluster of brightly colored hills just north of Marysvale, Utah, near the Fishlake National Forest, is named the &quot;Big Rock Candy Mountain&quot;. In 1928, after the song had been released, some Utah residents jokingly placed a sign at the base of the hills labeling it the &quot;Big Rock Candy Mountain&quot;, along with a sign next to a nearby spring proclaiming it &quot;Lemonade Springs&quot;. The Big Rock Candy Mountain Resort currently sits at the base of the hills offering lodging and an assortment of high adventure activities through Big Rock Adventure. The resort is also a major hub on the infamous Paiute ATV trail.

Other rock formations in the United States have also borrowed the name of the song; the largest exposed rock in the South Platte rock climbing area of Colorado is also called &quot;Big Rock Candy Mountain&quot; because of its colored stripes resembling a candy cane. Additionally, one of the peaks in the Capitol State Forest in Washington State is named &quot;Big Rock Candy Mountain&quot;.

===In literature===
*In 1943, Wallace Stegner published an autobiographical novel titled &quot;The Big Rock Candy Mountain&quot;. He published a further autobiographical work in 1992 entitled &quot;Where the Bluebird Sings to the Lemonade Springs&quot;, a reference to a line in the song.
*In 1945, George Orwell referenced the song in the book &quot;Animal Farm&quot; with an animal version of heaven named Sugarcandy Mountain.
*In Glen Cook&#x27;s 1982 novel &quot;Shadowline&quot;, first in the &quot;Starfishers&quot; trilogy, a planet named the Big Rock Candy Mountain is the location for several scenes.
*The song is discussed in depth in the book &quot;The Areas of My Expertise&quot; by John Hodgman, and performed by Jonathan Coulton in the audiobook.
*In 2005, Lucius Shepard referenced the song in the story &#x27;Over Yonder&#x27;.
*In Mur Lafferty&#x27;s &quot;Heaven&quot; novella series, the Big Rock Candy Mountain is portrayed as the hobo afterlife.
*In the 2014 Valiant Comics series &quot;The Delinquents&quot;, the Big Rock Candy Mountain is presented as a mesa, atop which is the &quot;lost treasure of the hobos&quot;, a giant horn of plenty.
*In Elizabeth Bear&#x27;s 2020 Novel &quot;Machine&quot;, second in the &quot;White Space&quot; series, an ancient generation ship is named Big Rock Candy Mountain.

===In film and television===
*The 1963 Famous Studios Screen Song, &quot;Hobo&#x27;s Holiday&quot;, features the adult lyrics which appear on screen with a bouncing ball.
*The 1977 Rankin/Bass special &quot;The Easter Bunny Is Comin&#x27; to Town&quot; includes the famous refrain (with &quot;peppermint trees&quot;), but not the rest of the song.
*In 1987, photographer Robert Frank directed a screenplay by Rudy Wurlitzer entitled &quot;Candy Mountain&quot; that references the song.
*The 2000 Coen Brothers film &quot;O Brother, Where Art Thou?&quot; uses this song in the opening credits.
*A performance of the song by John Hartford appears on the &quot;Down from the Mountain&quot; concert film and soundtrack in 2000.
*The theme song to the 2008-2010 TV series &quot;The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack&quot; is a version of the song with modified lyrics, referring to &quot;a place called Candied Island&quot; instead of &quot;Big Rock Candy Mountain&quot;. The series itself echoes the song, as it features two hobo-like characters searching for the fabled paradise of Candied Island.
*In the 2005 movie &quot;Brokeback Mountain&quot;, when Lureen is speaking to Ennis on the phone after Jack&#x27;s death, she says that she was never sure if Brokeback Mountain was a real location: &quot;knowing Jack, it was probably some pretend place, where bluebirds sing and there&#x27;s a whiskey spring...&quot;--the bluebirds and whiskey parts of this line being paraphrases from &quot;Big Rock Candy Mountain.&quot; 
*During the first dream sequence in the 2011 horror film &quot;Twixt&quot;, the lyrics of the song are sung with an alternate melody.
*In the 2003 film &quot;Runaway Jury&quot;, an adaptation of a John Grisham legal thriller, Jacob Wood has to learn the words of the song for his son&#x27;s birthday. This does not occur in the novel.
*In the 2012-2014 Cartoon Network show, adapted from a YouTube series, &quot;The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange&quot; there is a character named Big Rock Candy Monster, from the planet of Marshmalia (a land that is an allusion to this song). Big Rock Candy Monster also appears in the Annoying Orange parody of &quot;Gangnam Style&quot;, &quot;ORANGE NYA NYA STYLE (GANGNAM STYLE PARODY)&quot;.
*In the 2015 film &quot;Room&quot;, Ma (Brie Larson) sings a version of the song to her son Jack (Jacob Tremblay).
*In the SyFy channel series &quot;Van Helsing&quot;, Sam sings bits of the song in the episode &quot;Little Thing&quot; and the Burl Ives rendition is played over the closing credits of several episodes.
*The Ives version of the song is played in the season 4 episode &quot;Something Stupid&quot; of AMC&#x27;s crime drama &quot;Better Call Saul&quot;.
*Throughout the 2019 &quot;DuckTales&quot; episode &quot;GlomTales&quot;, Scrooge McDuck and his family are traveling to Rock Candy Mountain to find the Hobo King&#x27;s treasure.
*The song appears in the background of a 2021 TV advertisement for the Chevrolet Silverado truck.

===In music===
*The song &quot;Candy Mountain Cave&quot;, from the online video &quot;Charlie the Unicorn&quot;, parodies this song (to the tune of the &quot;Clarinet Polka&quot;).
*In 1978, country singer Mel Tillis released the single &quot;Ain&#x27;t No California&quot;, which includes the line, &quot;Ain&#x27;t no Big Rock Candy Mountain.&quot;
*In the year 1997, the Northern Irish group &quot;Barnbrack&quot; covered the song, making slight changes to the lyrics.

==References==
==Further reading==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4906230" start="6" end="34" title="The Big Rock Candy Mountains" label="The Big Rock Candy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q918848" start="76" end="92" title="Harry McClintock" label="Harry McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q106298881" start="107" end="119" title="country folk" label="country folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q843281" start="133" end="137" title="hobo" label="hobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363340" start="153" end="161" title="paradise" label="paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="187" end="195" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645" start="207" end="216" title="Cockaigne" label="Cockaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062531" start="253" end="268" title="soft-boiled egg" label="soft-boiled egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="296" end="305" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q637934" start="467" end="475" title="brakeman" label="brakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49679" start="497" end="517" title="Roud Folk Song Index" label="Roud Folk Song Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750105" start="751" end="778" title="An Invitation to Lubberland" label="An Invitation to Lubberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="1271" end="1292" title="Hollywood, California" label="Hollywood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470329" start="1294" end="1324" title="Victor Talking Machine Company" label="Victor Talking Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q823571" start="1527" end="1533" title="busking" label="busker"/>
<link wikidata="Q849816" start="1643" end="1653" title="rock candy" label="rock candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="2002" end="2039" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; magazine&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q315723" start="2179" end="2188" title="Burl Ives" label="Burl Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q374936" start="2283" end="2298" title="Dorsey Burnette" label="Dorsey Burnette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389651" start="2531" end="2552" title="children&amp;#x27;s music" label="children&amp;#x27;s music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="2578" end="2587" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q156037" start="2607" end="2617" title="peppermint" label="peppermint"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="2650" end="2657" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q893" start="2707" end="2715" title="lemonade" label="lemonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="2729" end="2736" title="whiskey" label="whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="2755" end="2763" title="soft drink" label="soda pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236222" start="2790" end="2803" title="John Greenway (folklorist)" label="John Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356261" start="2957" end="2969" title="Irwin Silber" label="Irwin Silber"/>
<link wikidata="Q558104" start="3033" end="3043" title="Alan Lomax" label="Alan Lomax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584765" start="3158" end="3195" title="Gordon &amp;quot;Inferno&amp;quot; Collection" label="Gordon &amp;quot;Inferno&amp;quot; Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="3203" end="3222" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q918848" start="3320" end="3336" title="Harry McClintock" label="Harry McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394511" start="3363" end="3373" title="Ernie Hare" label="Ernie Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q704781" start="3415" end="3429" title="Vernon Dalhart" label="Vernon Dalhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q244441" start="3698" end="3709" title="Pete Seeger" label="Pete Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="3714" end="3730" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="3804" end="3815" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q20685801" start="3865" end="3879" title="101 Gang Songs" label="101 Gang Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569364" start="3895" end="3920" title="The New Christy Minstrels" label="The New Christy Minstrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q436759" start="4040" end="4055" title="Roger Whittaker" label="Roger Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17135206" start="4123" end="4159" title="The Magical World of Roger Whittaker" label="The Magical World of Roger Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892926" start="4163" end="4179" title="The Beat Farmers" label="The Beat Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q123190713" start="4226" end="4247" title="Tales of the New West" label="Tales of the New West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545071" start="4292" end="4300" title="Ironweed (film)" label="Ironweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="4319" end="4328" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815258" start="4341" end="4351" title="Tom Chapin" label="Tom Chapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490426" start="4444" end="4455" title="Larry Groce" label="Larry Groce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282437" start="4479" end="4518" title="Disney Children&amp;#x27;s Favorite Songs 4" label="Disney Children&amp;#x27;s Favorite Songs 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304197" start="4536" end="4547" title="Red Grammer" label="Red Grammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q237654" start="4703" end="4712" title="Lisa Loeb" label="Lisa Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051711" start="4791" end="4805" title="Catch the Moon" label="Catch the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931154" start="4872" end="4883" title="Muck Sticky" label="Muck Sticky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760317" start="4943" end="4955" title="The Restarts" label="The Restarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754781" start="5002" end="5025" title="The Okee Dokee Brothers" label="The Okee Dokee Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438391" start="5278" end="5319" title="Chuck E. Cheese" label="Chuck E. Cheese&amp;#x27;s Pizza Time Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="5363" end="5374" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699578" start="5449" end="5460" title="TenderCrisp" label="TenderCrisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q445405" start="5569" end="5582" title="Darius Rucker" label="Darius Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q439927" start="5623" end="5635" title="Brooke Burke" label="Brooke Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q229013" start="5673" end="5688" title="Sarah Silverman" label="Sarah Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786313" start="5713" end="5740" title="The Sarah Silverman Program" label="The Sarah Silverman Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q314290" start="5833" end="5851" title="Harry Dean Stanton" label="Harry Dean Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q859050" start="5903" end="5911" title="Big Love" label="Big Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q918502" start="5938" end="5951" title="Bruce Hornsby" label="Bruce Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q242605" start="6061" end="6075" title="Natalie Maines" label="Natalie Maines"/>
<link wikidata="Q142636" start="6079" end="6089" title="The Chicks" label="The Chicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q22954716" start="6143" end="6165" title="Gal of Constant Sorrow" label="Gal of Constant Sorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="6201" end="6213" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q483434" start="6368" end="6383" title="Marysvale, Utah" label="Marysvale, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642417" start="6394" end="6418" title="Fishlake National Forest" label="Fishlake National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q130892" start="7070" end="7082" title="South Platte" label="South Platte"/>
<link wikidata="Q827331" start="7088" end="7101" title="climbing area" label="climbing area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="7105" end="7113" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103699" start="7209" end="7219" title="candy cane" label="candy cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035930" start="7259" end="7279" title="Capitol State Forest" label="Capitol State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="7283" end="7293" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q203460" start="7377" end="7392" title="Wallace Stegner" label="Wallace Stegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717772" start="7442" end="7469" title="The Big Rock Candy Mountain (novel)" label="The Big Rock Candy Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="7646" end="7659" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396889" start="7698" end="7709" title="Animal Farm" label="Animal Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="7742" end="7748" title="heaven" label="heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396889" start="7755" end="7774" title="Sugarcandy Mountain" label="Sugarcandy Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q922071" start="7780" end="7789" title="Glen Cook" label="Glen Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714218" start="8007" end="8032" title="The Areas of My Expertise" label="The Areas of My Expertise"/>
<link wikidata="Q329372" start="8042" end="8054" title="John Hodgman" label="John Hodgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q611179" start="8073" end="8089" title="Jonathan Coulton" label="Jonathan Coulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q256959" start="8118" end="8132" title="Lucius Shepard" label="Lucius Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563022" start="8195" end="8207" title="Mur Lafferty" label="Mur Lafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q508154" start="8327" end="8341" title="Valiant Comics" label="Valiant Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q623319" start="8424" end="8428" title="mesa" label="mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q332682" start="8496" end="8510" title="Cornucopia" label="horn of plenty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029497" start="8516" end="8530" title="Elizabeth Bear" label="Elizabeth Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q964131" start="8627" end="8642" title="generation ship" label="generation ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066286" start="8717" end="8731" title="Famous Studios" label="Famous Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439019" start="8732" end="8743" title="Screen Songs" label="Screen Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949837" start="8834" end="8847" title="bouncing ball (music)" label="bouncing ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q724622" start="8859" end="8870" title="Rankin/Bass" label="Rankin/Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731452" start="8885" end="8924" title="The Easter Bunny Is Comin&amp;#x27; to Town" label="The Easter Bunny Is Comin&amp;#x27; to Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q467574" start="9049" end="9061" title="Robert Frank" label="Robert Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="9174" end="9187" title="Coen Brothers" label="Coen Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q501874" start="9199" end="9225" title="O Brother, Where Art Thou?" label="O Brother, Where Art Thou?"/>
<link wikidata="Q704700" start="9301" end="9314" title="John Hartford" label="John Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302947" start="9336" end="9358" title="Down from the Mountain" label="Down from the Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q367313" start="9451" end="9490" title="The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack" label="The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q160618" start="9800" end="9818" title="Brokeback Mountain" label="Brokeback Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408534" start="10263" end="10268" title="Twixt (film)" label="Twixt"/>
<link wikidata="Q151870" start="10358" end="10370" title="Runaway Jury" label="Runaway Jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q106465" start="10397" end="10409" title="John Grisham" label="John Grisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319429" start="10612" end="10659" title="The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange" label="The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q890" start="10865" end="10878" title="Gangnam Style" label="Gangnam Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q18703032" start="10961" end="10977" title="Room (2015 film)" label="&amp;quot;Room&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q29328" start="10983" end="10994" title="Brie Larson" label="Brie Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20965633" start="11041" end="11055" title="Jacob Tremblay" label="Jacob Tremblay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23787669" start="11086" end="11109" title="Van Helsing (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Van Helsing&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741448" start="11332" end="11348" title="Something Stupid (Better Call Saul)" label="Something Stupid"/>
<link wikidata="Q294660" start="11358" end="11368" title="AMC (TV channel)" label="AMC&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q14925221" start="11387" end="11403" title="Better Call Saul" label="Better Call Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q28739895" start="11432" end="11453" title="DuckTales (2017 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;DuckTales&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11937" start="11485" end="11499" title="Scrooge McDuck" label="Scrooge McDuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q871329" start="11662" end="11681" title="Chevrolet Silverado" label="Chevrolet Silverado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960903" start="11776" end="11795" title="Charlie the Unicorn" label="Charlie the Unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126989" start="11848" end="11862" title="Clarinet Polka" label="Clarinet Polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238180" start="11896" end="11906" title="Mel Tillis" label="Mel Tillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810869" start="11933" end="11957" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t No California" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t No California"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="12064" end="12078" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861458" start="12091" end="12100" title="Barnbrack" label="Barnbrack"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158511" wikidata="Q4750105" url="?curid=158511" title="An Invitation to Lubberland">
<text>&quot;An Invitation to Lubberland&quot; was a broadside ballad first printed in 1685. Many believe that it inspired the hobo ballad which formed the basis of the song &quot;The Big Rock Candy Mountains&quot; recorded in 1928 by Harry McClintock. Lubberland is the Swedish name for Cockaigne, land of plenty in medieval myth.

==Lyrics==
Sung to the tune of &quot;Billy and Molly&quot; or &quot;The Journey-man Shoemaker&quot; by Daniel Cooper.

==Notes==
==References==
*Beinecke Rare Book &amp; Manuscript Library at Yale
*The Roxburghe Ballads
*National Library of Australia Catalogue entry
*Early English Books Online (pay site)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4750105" start="6" end="33" title="An Invitation to Lubberland" label="An Invitation to Lubberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q849965" start="46" end="62" title="broadside ballad" label="broadside ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q843281" start="120" end="124" title="hobo" label="hobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906230" start="173" end="201" title="The Big Rock Candy Mountains" label="The Big Rock Candy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q918848" start="228" end="244" title="Harry McClintock" label="Harry McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645" start="281" end="290" title="Cockaigne" label="Cockaigne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158512" wikidata="Q1569078" url="?curid=158512" title="Hyder Ali">
<text>Hyder Ali (&quot;Haidar&#x27;alī&quot;; ; 1720 – 7 December 1782) was the Sultan and &quot;de facto&quot; ruler of the Kingdom of Mysore in southern India. Born as Hyder Ali, he distinguished himself as a soldier, eventually drawing the attention of Mysore&#x27;s rulers. Rising to the post of Dalavayi (commander-in-chief) to Krishnaraja Wodeyar II, he came to dominate the titular monarch and the Mysore government. He became the &quot;de facto&quot; ruler, King of Mysore as Sarvadhikari (Chief Minister) by 1761. During intermittent conflicts against the East India Company during the First and Second Anglo–Mysore Wars, Hyder Ali was the military leader.

Though illiterate, Hyder Ali concluded an alliance with the French, and used the services of French workmen in raising his artillery and arsenal. His rule of Mysore was characterised by frequent warfare with his neighbours and rebellion within his territories. This was not unusual for the time as much of the Indian subcontinent was then in turmoil. He left his eldest son, Tipu Sultan, an extensive kingdom bordered by the Krishna River in the north, the Eastern Ghats in the east and the Arabian Sea in the west.

==Ancestry==
According to some historians, Hyder Ali is thought to be of Arab ancestry. According to this tradition, his ancestors were Nawayath Arab from Quraysh tribe, who arrived in India through sea-route and later came to South India from Delhi during the reign of Muhammad Adil Shah or were settled in Punjab, before moving to South India. According to another school of historians, Hyder Ali was of Punjabi origin, and was a Punjabi adventurer in the army of Mysore. The contemporary British Raj sources of Hyder Ali describe him as a Punjabi.

==Early life==

The exact date of Hyder Ali&#x27;s birth is not known with certainty. He was born to Fath Muhammad. Various historical sources provide dates ranging between 1717 and 1722 for his birth. His father, Fath Muhammad, was born in Kolar, and served as a commander of 50 men in the bamboo rocket artillery (mainly used for signalling) in the army of the Nawab of Carnatic. Fath Muhammad eventually entered the service of the Wodeyar Rajas of the Kingdom of Mysore, where he rose to become a powerful military commander. The Wodeyars awarded him Budikote as a jagir (land grant), where he then served as naik (Lord).

Hyder Ali was born in Budikote, today in Kolar district, Karnataka; he was Fath Muhammad&#x27;s fifth child, and the second by his third wife Razia Bibi, a sister of sufi pir Ibrahim Saheb, whose ancestors were Arab Nawayath. His early years are not well documented; he entered military service along with his brother Shahbaz after their father died in combat. Although Hyder Ali was from Mysore his early loyalties were to the Nizam of Hyderabad, through whom Hyder Ali and his companions became Sepoys in the Deccan with partial investiture from the &quot;Great Moghul&quot; of that period. After serving for a number of years under the rulers of Arcot, they came to Srirangapatna, where Hyder&#x27;s uncle served. He introduced them to Devaraja, the &quot;dalwai&quot; (chief minister, military leader, and Commander-in-chief) of Krishnaraja Wodeyar II, and Nanjaraja, Devaraja&#x27; brother who also held important ministerial posts. Hyder and his brother were both given commands in the Mysorean army; Hyder served under Shahbaz, commanding 100 cavalry and 2,000 infantry.

==Rise to power==
===Carnatic Wars===

In 1748, Qamar-ud-din Khan, Asaf Jah I, the longtime Nizam of Hyderabad, died. The struggle to succeed him is known as the Second Carnatic War, and pitted Asaf Jah&#x27;s son Nasir Jung against a nephew, Muzaffar Jung.

Both sides were supported by other local leaders, and French and British forces were also involved.

Devaraja had started vesting more military authority in his brother, and in 1749 Nanjaraja marched the Mysorean army in support of Nasir Jung. The army went to Devanhalli, where the Mysoreans participated in the Siege of Devanahalli Fort.

The fort was held by Muzaffar Jung&#x27;s forces and the siege was conducted by the Marquis de Bussy. During the successful eight-month siege, Hyder Ali and his brother distinguished themselves, and were rewarded by the dalwai with enlarged commands.

In the wars against Hyder Ali in 1751 and during the siege of Tiruchirappalli in 1752, Thondaiman sent 400 cavalry and 3000 Kallar infantry to Tiruchirappalli to support the British and the Nawab of Arcot.

By 1755 Hyder Ali commanded 3,000 infantry and 1,500 cavalry, and was reported to be enriching himself on campaigns by plunder. In that year he was also appointed Faujdar (military commander) of Dindigul. In this position he first retained French advisers to organise and train his artillery companies. He is also known to have personally served alongside de Bussy, and is believed to have met both Muzaffar Jung and Chanda Shahib.

In these early wars he also came to dislike and mistrust Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah, the Nawab of the Carnatic. In fact Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah and the Mysorean leaders were long at odds with each other, seeking territorial gains at the other&#x27;s expense. Muhammad Ali Khan Wallajah had by then formed an alliance with the British, and he was accused by Hyder Ali in later years of effectively preventing him from making any sort of long-lasting alliances or agreements with the British.

Throughout the Carnatic Wars, Hyder Ali and his Mysore battalions served alongside French commanders such as Joseph Francois Dupleix, Count de Lally and de Bussy, he also assisted Chanda Sahib on various occasions. Hyder Ali supported the claims of Muzaffar Jung and later sided with Salabat Jung.

===Skills===
Early in his career, Hyder Ali retained as one of his chief financial assistants a Brahmin named Khande Rao. Hyder Ali, who was illiterate, was reported to be blessed with a prodigious memory and numerical acumen.

Hyder Ali could rival or outperform expert accountants with his great arithmetic skills and worked to develop a system, with Rao, that included checks and balances so that all manner of income, including plunder of physical goods of all types, could be accounted for with little possibility for fraud or embezzlement.

This financial management may have played a role in Hyder Ali&#x27;s rise in power.

===Control of Srirangapatna===

In 1757, Hyder Ali was called to Srirangapatna to support Devaraja against threats from Hyderabad and the Marathas. Upon his arrival he found the Mysorean army in disarray and near mutiny over pay. While Devaraja bought his way out of the threats to Srirangapatna, Hyder Ali arranged for the army to be paid and arrested the ringleaders of the mutiny.

===Campaigns against Calicut===
In 1757, to resist the invasion of the Zamorin of Calicut – an East India Company ally at the time, the Palakkad Raja sought the help of Hyder Ali. Hyder Ali then led campaigns against the Zamorin of Calicut in the Malabar Coast of India. In 1766, Hyder Ali defeated the Zamorin of Kozhikode and absorbed Kozhikode into his state. The smaller princely states in northern and north-central parts of modern-day state of Kerala (Malabar region) including Kolathunadu, Kottayam, Kadathanadu, Kozhikode, Tanur, Valluvanad, and Palakkad were unified under the rulers of Mysore and were made a part of the larger Kingdom of Mysore. For his role in these activities Hyder Ali was rewarded by Devaraja with the jaghir (regional governorship) of Bangalore.

===Capture of Bangalore (1758)===
In 1758 Hyder Ali successfully forced the Marathas to lift a siege of Bangalore. Hyder Ali&#x27;s forces entered the city, thus capturing it.

By 1759 Hyder Ali was in command of the entire Mysorean army.

===Siege of Channapatna (1759)===
In the year 1759, Balaji Baji Rao launched a military expedition against Bangalore and Channapatna, with Gopal Hari and Anand Rao leading the forces. However, Hyder Ali managed to defeat the much larger Maratha army with a smaller force. As a result, Channapatna and the surrounding districts were incorporated into the Mysore territory.

===Nawab of Mysore (1759)===

The young King of Mysore Krishnaraja Wodeyar II rewarded Hyder Ali&#x27;s performance by granting him the title of &quot;Fath Hyder Bahadur&quot; or &quot;Nawab Hyder Ali Khan&quot;. Hyder Ali is also known to be the first ruler of Mysore to be granted the title of Nawab, thus it can be said that he was briefly the &quot;Nawab of Mysore&quot; by 1759.

Because of the ongoing conflicts with the Marathas the Mysorean treasury was virtually bankrupted, prompting the queen mother to force into exile Nanjaraj, who had assumed the position of dalwai upon his brother&#x27;s death in 1758. Hyder Ali was a beneficiary of this action, rising in influence in the court.

===Deposition of Khande Rao===

In 1760, the queen mother conspired with Khande Rao, who had gone into the raja&#x27;s service, to oust Hyder Ali. He was precipitously forced out of Seringapatam, leaving his family, including his son Tipu Sultan, under house arrest.

The sudden departure left Hyder Ali with few resources. He may have been fortuitously aided at this time by the faraway Third Battle of Panipat, in which the Marathas suffered a major defeat on 14 January 1761. Because of this loss, the Marathas withdrew forces from Mysore and Hyder Ali&#x27;s brother-in-law Makdum Ali chased them into Bidnur and Sunda.

Hyder Ali soon consolidated his strength by placing Mirza Sahib as the commander of Sira, a Sufi Pir Ibrahim Sahib (maternal uncle of Hyder Ali) in Bangalore and Amin Sahib his cousin in Basnagar. Soon afterward Hyder Ali marched alongside Makdum Ali&#x27;s forces, which numbered about 6,000, along with the 3,000 men from his garrison at Bangalore, toward Seringapatam.

They clashed with Khande Rao&#x27;s forces before reaching the capital. Khande Rao, with 11,000 men, won the battle, and Hyder Ali was forced to apply to the exiled Nanjaraj for support. Nanjaraj gave him command of his army, and the title of Dalwai.

With this force, Hyder Ali again moved out against Khande Rao. Hyder Ali sent letters appearing to be from Nanjaraj to some of Khande Rao&#x27;s commanders, confirming their agreement to hand Khande Rao over to Hyder Ali. Fearing a conspiracy, Khande Rao fled into Seringapatam.

After a minor battle against the now-leaderless army, Hyder Ali took over most of its remnants and surrounded Seringapatam. The ensuing negotiations left Hyder Ali in nearly complete military control of Mysore. Concessions that he extracted included the surrender of Khande Rao, who Hyder Ali imprisoned in Bangalore.

==Ruler of Mysore==

Hyder Ali became king of Mysore in 1761 after overthrowing the prime minister and making the king, Krishnaraja Wodeyar II, a prisoner in his own palace.

Hyder Ali formally styled himself &quot;Sultan Hyder Ali Khan&quot; in his correspondence with the Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II. Hyder Ali retained his title during the first Anglo-Mysore War that raged in 1766, and onwards.

He was very cautious in his diplomacy with the Nizam of Hyderabad, who was, according to an official Mughal &quot;firman&quot;, the sovereign of all Muslim-ruled territories in southern India.

The English and the Marathas continued to refer to Hyder Ali and later his son Tipu Sultan as &quot;nabobs&quot;.

===Expansion and alliances===
Over the next few years Hyder expanded his territories to the north. Two key acquisitions were Sira, taken from the Marathas, and the kingdom of Bednore, where as a &quot;casus belli&quot; he agreed to support a claimant to its throne against usurpers. In 1763 he took its capital, Ikkeri, which included a large treasury. He renamed the capital Haidernagar, and began styling himself &quot;Hyder Ali Khan Bahadur&quot;, a title that had been bestowed on him by Salabat Jung as reward for his taking of Sira. He moved most of his family to Ikkeri, a natural fortress, in the hopes that it would &quot;serve him for a safe refuge&quot;. He assumed the trappings of the ruler of Bednore, began issuing coins, and established a system of weights and measures. He made sure his son Tipu received a quality education, &quot;employing learned tutors&quot; and &quot;appointing a suitable hand of attendants&quot; to see to his upbringing. He cultivated a suspicion of foreigners, specifically refusing to allow the East India Company to have a resident at his court. His security, however, was not assured in Bednore: a bout of illness and a widespread conspiracy against him convinced him that it would not make an ideal capital for his domain, and he returned to Mysore.

The taking of Bednore included several ports on the Malabar coast, including Mangalore. Hyder used these ports to establish a small navy. The documentary record on the navy is fragmentary; Portuguese records indicate that the fleet was launched sometime between 1763 and 1765. It was apparently officered by Europeans, and its first admiral was an Englishman; by 1768 its admiral was a Mysorean cavalry officer named Ali Bey (or Lutf Ali Beg), apparently chosen by Hyder because he did not trust the European captains.

Hyder had amicable relations with the Christian population in Mangalore, which had long been under Portuguese influence and had a sizeable Roman Catholic population, and with Christians in general. He had a very close friendship with two Goan Catholic clergymen, Bishop Noronha and Fr. Joachim Miranda, and allowed a Protestant missionary to live at his court. Hyder&#x27;s army also included Catholic soldiers, and he allowed Christians to build a church at Seringapatam, where French generals used to offer prayers and priests used to visit. Mangalorean historian A. L. P. D&#x27;Souza mentions that Hyder also had Christians in his administration. Pursuant to treaties concluded with the Portuguese, he also allowed Portuguese priests to settle disputes among Christians. However, many Mangaloreans (not just Christians) disliked him for the heavy tax burden he imposed on them.

==Hyder Ali attacks the Maratha Confederacy==


The Maratha Confederacy had just been routed at the Third Battle of Panipat by Ahmad Shah Durrani and the Mughals had been restored in the year 1761.

The Maratha Empire was very vulnerable and feeble to any attack and the Peshwa&#x27;s power had been almost eliminated in all of Northern India.

At this point in his life Hyder Ali decided to go to war with the Marathas and put an end to the threat they posed to his power.

He therefore attacked the Maratha-aligned Rani of Bednore. She had appealed to the Nawab of Savanur for assistance when Hyder invaded. Hyder consequently threatened the Nawab, attempting to extort tribute from him. Failing in this, he overran that territory, reaching as far as Dharwad, north of the Tungabhadra River.

Since Savanur was a tributary of the Marathas, the Peshwa, Madhavrao I, countered with a strong force and defeated Hyder near Rattihalli and in decisive Battle of Jadi Hanwati . Following the victory the Marathas restored their power under the reign of Madhavrao Peshwa. The Maratha victory forced Hyder to retreat; he had to abandon Bednore, although he was able to remove its treasures to Seringapatam. Hyder paid 35 lakhs rupees in tribute to end the war, and returned most of his gains, although he did retain Sira.

In 1766 Hyder Ali returned to the Malabar, this time at the invitation of the raja of Cannanore, who sought independence from the Zamorin, the ruler of Calicut who held sway over Cannanore. Hyder also claimed a debt of tribute from the Zamorin, who had supported Hyder&#x27;s opponents in earlier campaigns. After a difficult campaign, Hyder reached Calicut, where the Zamorin, after promising to make payment, failed to deliver. Hyder placed the Zamorin under house arrest and had his finance minister tortured. Fearing similar treatment, the Zamorin set fire to his palace and perished in the flames, ending Eradi dynastic rule of Calicut. After establishing control of Calicut, Hyder departed, but was forced to return several months later when the Nairs rebelled against the rule of his lieutenant, Reza Sahib. Hyder&#x27;s response was harsh: after putting down the rebellion, many rebels were executed, and thousands of others were forcibly relocated to the Mysorean highlands.

Mysore&#x27;s titular ruler Krishnaraja died in April 1766, while Hyder was in Malabar. Hyder had left orders that Krishnaraja&#x27;s son Nanjaraja Wodeyar be invested should that happen, and he only later came to formally pay his respects to the new rajah. He took advantage of this opportunity to engage in a sort of house cleaning: the raja&#x27;s palace was plundered, and its staff reduced to the point where virtually everyone employed there was also a spy for Hyder Ali.

==First Anglo-Mysore War==
After the Battle of Buxar, the British, led by Hector Monro, decided to support the Maratha Confederacy against the Shah Alam II, the Nawabs and Mysore.

As the power struggle between Mysore and the Peshwa continued it soon began to involve the British and other European trading companies.

Being himself a former ally of the French, Hyder Ali expected the support of the British against the Marathas, but such support never materialized.

In 1766 Mysore began to become drawn into territorial and diplomatic disputes between the Nizam of Hyderabad and the East India Company, which had by then become the dominant European power on the Eastern Indian coast. The Nizam, seeking to deflect the company from their attempts to gain control of the Northern Circars, made overtures to Hyder Ali to launch an invasion of the Carnatic. Company representatives also appealed to Hyder Ali, but he rebuffed to them. The Nizam then ostensibly struck a deal with the Company administration in the Madras Presidency for their support, but apparently did so with the expectation that when Hyder Ali was prepared for war, the deal with the British would be broken. This diplomatic manoeuvring resulted in the start of the First Anglo-Mysore War in August 1767 when a company outpost at Changama was attacked by a combined Mysore-Hyderabad army under Hyder Ali&#x27;s command. Despite significantly outnumbering the British force (British estimates place the allied army size at 70,000 to the British 7,000), the allies were repulsed with heavy losses. Hyder Ali moved on to capture Kaveripattinam after two days of siege, while the British commander at Changama, Colonel Joseph Smith, eventually retreated to Tiruvannamalai for supplies and reinforcements. There Hyder Ali was decisively repulsed on 26 September 1767. With the onset of the monsoon season, Hyder Ali opted to continue campaigning rather than adopting the usual practice of suspending operations because of the difficult conditions the weather created for armies. After over-running a few lesser outposts, he besieged Ambur in November 1767, forcing the British to resume campaigning. The British garrison commander refused large bribes offered by Hyder Ali in exchange for surrender, and the arrival of a relief column in early December forced Hyder Ali to lift the siege. He retreated northward, covering the movements of the Nizam&#x27;s forces, but was disheartened when an entire corps of European cavalry deserted to the British. The failures of this campaign, combined with successful British advances in the Northern Circars and secret negotiations between the British and the Nizam Asaf Jah II, led to a split between Hyder Ali and the Nizam. The latter withdrew back to Hyderabad and eventually negotiated a new treaty with the British company in 1768. Hyder Ali, apparently seeking an end to the conflict, made peace overtures to the British, but was rebuffed.

In early 1768, the Bombay Presidency in Bombay organised an expedition to Mysore&#x27;s Malabar coast territories. Hyder Ali&#x27;s fleet, which the British reported as numbering about ten ships, deserted en masse, apparently because the captains were unhappy with the oustering of their British admirals and some even demanded the return of Ali Raja Kunhi Amsa II, but Hyder Ali chose a cavalry commander Lutf Ali Beg as fleet commander. Owing to a British bluff, Lutf Ali Beg also withdrew much of the Mangalore garrison to move on what he perceived to be the British target, Onore. The British consequently captured Mangalore with minimal opposition in February. This activity, combined with the loss of the Nizam as an ally, prompted Hyder Ali to withdraw from the Carnatic, and move with speed to Malabar. Dispatching his son Tipu with an advance force, Hyder Ali followed, and eventually re-took Mangalore and the other ports held by the over-extended British forces. He also levied additional taxes as punishment against local malabari Nair chieftains which were then stripped of rights and authority.

After his reconquest, Hyder Ali learned that the Mangalorean Catholics had helped the British in their conquest of Mangalore, behaviour he considered treasonous. He summoned a Portuguese officer and several Christian priests from Mangalore to suggest an appropriate punishment to impose on the Mangalorean Catholics for their treachery. The Portuguese officer suggested the death penalty for those Catholics who helped the British as a typical punishment for the betrayal of one&#x27;s sovereign in Catholic nations. But Hyder Ali exhibited a diplomatic stance and instead imprisoned those Christians who were condemned for treachery. He afterwards opened negotiations with the Portuguese, and reached an agreement with them that removed suspicion from the clergy and other Christians. The Mangalorean Catholic community flourished during the rest of Hyder Ali&#x27;s reign.

During Hyder Ali&#x27;s absence from the Carnatic, the British recovered many places that Hyder Ali had taken and only weakly garrisoned, and advanced as far south as Dindigul. They also convinced the Marathas to enter the conflict, and a large force of theirs, under the command of Morari Rao, joined with Colonel Smith at Ooscota in early August 1768. This army then began preparations to besiege Bangalore, but Hyder Ali returned to Bangalore from Malabar on 9 August, in time to harass the allies before the siege could begin. On 22 August, Hyder Ali and his Mysore forces attacked the Maratha camp during the Battle of Ooscota, but was repulsed when faced with the large Maratha reinforcements. Hyder Ali was then foiled in an attempt to prevent the arrival of a second British column at the allied camp; the strength of these combined forces convinced him to retreat from Bangalore toward Gurramkonda, where he was reinforced by his brother in law. He also attempted diplomatic measures to prevent a siege of Bangalore, offering to pay ten lakhs rupees and grant other land concessions in exchange for peace. The Company administration countered with a list of demands that included payments of tribute to the Nizam and several land concessions to the East India Company. Hyder Ali specifically refused to deal with Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah, his nemesis in the Carnatic. The negotiations failed to reach common ground.

On 3 October, Hyder Ali, while moving his army from Guuramkonda back toward Bangalore, surprised a small garrison of Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah&#x27;s men at a rock fort call Mulwagal, near Ooscota. British reinforcements were sent, and Colonel Wood was able to recover the lower fort but not the upper. The next day he went out with a few companies of men to investigate movements that might have been cover for enemy reinforcements. This small force, numbering four companies, was surrounded by Hyder Ali&#x27;s entire army in the Battle of Mulwagal. A stratagem by another officer, Colonel Brooks, prevented the loss of this detachment; Colonel Brooks and another two companies dragged two cannons to the top of a nearby rise, and Brooks called out &quot;Smith! Smith!&quot; while firing the cannons. Both sides interpreted this to mean that Colonel Smith was arriving in force, and Hyder&#x27;s troops began to retreat. This enabled Colonel Wood to join with Brooks and other reinforcements from Mulwagal before Hyder Ali realised his tactical error. Hyder Ali renewed his attack, but was eventually repulsed with heavy losses: he was estimated to lose 1,000 men while the British lost about 200. The severity of the conflict convinced Colonel Smith that he would be unable to effectively besiege Bangalore without first inflicting a major defeat on Hyder Ali in open battle. Company officials blamed Smith for the failure to decisively defeat Hyder Ali, and recalled him to Madras. Hyder Ali took the opportunity to besiege Hosur, and Colonel Wood marched in relief of the town. As Wood approached, Hyder Ali raised the siege, sneaked around Wood&#x27;s column, and attacked his baggage train in a battle near Bagalur. Hyder Ali successfully captured supplies and arms, and drove Wood in disgrace toward Venkatagiri. Wood was consequently recalled and replaced by Colonel Lang.

Hyder Ali then raised additional forces in Mysore and went on the offensive. In November 1768 he split his army into two, and crossed the ghats into the Carnatic, regaining control of many minor posts held by the British. En route to Erode Hyder Ali overwhelmed one contingent of British, who were sent as prisoners to Seringapatam when it was established that one of its officers was serving in violation of a parole agreement. After rapidly establishing control over much of the southern Carnatic, his march approached Madras. This prompted the British to send an envoy to discuss peace; because of Hyder Ali&#x27;s insistence that the Nawab of the Carnatic be excluded from the negotiations, they went nowhere. Hyder Ali then surprised Company authorities by taking a picked force of 6,000 cavalry and a small number of infantry, and made in three days a forced march of to the gates of Madras.

This show of force compelled the company to negotiate further. Hyder Ali, who was seeking diplomatic leverage against the Marathas, wanted an alliance of mutual defence and offence. The Company refused to accede to an offensive military treaty; the treaty signed at Madras on 29 March 1769, restored the &quot;status quo ante bellum&quot;, except for Mysore&#x27;s acquisition of Karur, and also included language that each side would help the other defend its territory. In summarising Hyder Ali&#x27;s conduct of the war, biographer Lewin Bowring notes that he &quot;evinced high qualities as a tactician and the sagacity of a born diplomatist.&quot;

==Arab, Persian and Turkish relations==

When Hyder took over the Malabar territories, he took advantage of the coastal access to develop relations with trading partners overseas. To this end he established port tariffs that were biased against European traders and preferential for Mysorean and Arab traders. Beginning in 1770 he sent ambassadors to Abu Hilal Ahmad bin Said in Muscat and Karim Khan in Shiraz, then the capital of Persia, seeking military and economic alliances.

In a 1774 embassy to Karim Khan, the ruler of Persia, he sought to establish a trading post on the Persian Gulf. Karim responded by offering Bandar Abbas, but nothing further seems to have passed between them on the subject. Karim Khan later did send 1,000 troops to Mysore in 1776 in response to another embassy in 1775.

Nursullah Khan, Hyder&#x27;s ambassador, had more success in Muscat, where a trading house was established in 1776.

During the final years of his reign Hyder Ali also planned to send an embassy to the Ottoman Sultan Mustafa III, but it was his son Tipu Sultan who succeeded in making direct contact with Istanbul.

==Second war with the Maratha Confederacy==
Hyder, believing he would be supported by the British in conflict with the Marathas, began demanding tribute payments from smaller states on the frontiers between Maratha and Mysore territories, and refused to pay tributes demanded by the Marathas. The Marathas responded in November 1770 with an invasion by an army of 35,000 men. Pursuant to their treaty, Hyder requested British assistance. The Company refused, and Hyder retreated, slashing and burning as he went to deny the bounty of the land to the Marathas. The Marathas captured much of north-eastern Mysore, and consolidated their gains during the monsoon season. Hyder offered to pay some of the tribute demanded, but his offer was rejected as insufficient, and the Marathas renewed the offensive after the monsoons. They advanced to the vicinity of Seringapatam, and then feinted a withdrawal to the north. When Hyder followed, they turned in force, and claimed to inflict serious casualties on Hyder&#x27;s army, and captured most of its baggage. They then fruitlessly besieged Seringapatam for five weeks, before abandoning the effort and instead took Bangalore. Hyder again appealed to the British for help, but their pre-conditions and proposed terms were unacceptable to him, and an attempt by Hyder to get them to go on the offensive scuttled the negotiations. In 1772 Hyder finally sued for peace. He agreed to pay 3.6 million rupees in tribute arrears, and 1.4 million rupees in annual tribute, and ceded territory all the way to Bangalore. Upon his return to Seringapatam after the peace was concluded, Hyder learned that Nanjaraja, the titular ruler of Mysore, had been engaged in secret communications with the Marathas. Hyder ordered Nanjaraja strangled, and placed his brother Chamaraja on the throne.
The peace with the Marathas was short-lived. The Peshwa Madhavrao I died late in 1772, beginning a struggle for his succession. In 1773, Hyder used this opportunity to send Tipu with an army to recover territories lost to the Marathas to the north, while he descended into Coorg, which provided a more secure route to the Malabar territories he wanted to recover from the Marathas. A claimant to the Coorg throne had asked for Hyder&#x27;s assistance in 1770 when he was pre-occupied with the Marathas. He quickly captured Coorg&#x27;s capital, Merkara, imprisoning Raja Vira Rajendra. He installed a Brahmin as Governor to collect revenues before continuing to Malabar, where by the end of 1774 he had recovered all his lost territory. The Coorgs rose in rebellion against his Governor, upon which Hyder returned to Coorg, crushed the rebellion, and hanged most of the ring-leaders. This did not stop the restive Coorgs from becoming a continuing problem for Hyder, and for, Tipu after his death.

In 1776 the young Raja Chamaraja Wodeyar VIII died. To choose a successor, Hyder had all of the children of the royal family brought together, and watched them play. A child, also named Chamaraja Wodeyar IX, chose to play with a jewelled dagger, and was supposedly selected on that basis as the new Raja of Mysore.

By March 1775, the leadership situation at Poona, the Maratha capital, had stabilised, and the Marathas joined an alliance with the Nizam of Hyderabad to oppose Hyder. The Maratha army was routed by one of Hyder&#x27;s Generals in 1776, and Hyder either bribed or sufficiently threatened the Nizam&#x27;s military leaders so that they withdrew from the campaign. This only temporarily halted the conflict, which was fought with renewed vigor until 1779. Hyder successfully extended his domain to the Krishna River after a lengthy siege of Dharwad. In a controversial action, Hyder in 1779, dealt harshly with Madakari Nayaka, the ruler of Chitradurga. Madakari had supported Hyder in earlier conflicts, but in 1777 had changed allegiance to the Marathas. After seizing Chitradurga, Hyder sent Madakari Nayaka to Seringapatam as a prisoner, where he died. Hyder further sent 20,000 of Madakari&#x27;s followers to Seringapatam, where the boys among them were allegedly forcibly converted to Islam and formed into so-called &quot;chela&quot; battalions in the Mysorean army.

==Second Anglo-Mysore War==

During the lengthy conflict with the Marathas, Hyder had several times requested the assistance of the East India Company, and it had each time been refused, in part due to the influence at Madras, of Hyder&#x27;s enemy, the Nawab of Arcot. The British had also angered the Marathas by repudiating treaties, with whom they were at war for much of the 1770s, and they had also upset the Nizam of Hyderabad Asaf Jah II over their occupation of Guntur.

In 1771, Maratha envoys had approached Hyder with a proposal to ally against the company, with the goal of wresting control of eastern India from their rule. Since Hyder was at the time still attempting alliance with the British, he informed them of this offer, noting that he thought the Marathas would gain too much power and even threaten his own position under those circumstances. The Marathas, still at war with the British, renewed an offer of alliance in 1779. In this case, the alliance was to include the Nizam. His decision to join this alliance was prompted by two British actions. The first was the British capture by capitulation of the west-coast port of Mahé, part of a concerted effort by the British to capture all French outposts after the 1778 French entry into the American Revolutionary War. Hyder received much of his French-supplied equipment through this French-controlled port, and had provided troops for its defence. Furthermore, the action had provoked the Nairs on the Malabar coast to rise in rebellion again, although Hyder had quickly put this down. The second offence was the movement of British troops through territory under his control (and also other territory controlled by the Nizam) from Madras to Guntur. There was a skirmish in the hills, and the British detachment ended up retreating to Madras.

Hyder Ali began rebuilding his navy in 1778. Employing Joze Azelars, a Dutchman, he had built eight ketches with masts and 40 cannons and eight smaller dhows. When the war broke out in 1779, Azelars noted that the Brahmans and their allies made every possible effort to halt progress of the newly rebuilt navy based at Bhatkal.

The alliance planned to make virtually simultaneous attacks on British holdings all throughout India, while the Marathas agreed to honour Hyder&#x27;s claims to territories he currently held north of the Tungabhadra River and reduced the amount of tribute he was required to pay under earlier agreements. Hyder expected to receive assistance from the French, especially in the Carnatic, the territory he sought to conquer. However, diplomatic actions by Governor Warren Hastings and the Company successfully convinced both the Nizam and the Marathas not to take up arms, and Hyder ended up fighting the war on his own.

He successfully gained alliances with Ali Raja Bibi Junumabe II of Cannanore Arakkal Kingdom and the Muslim Mappila community and later even met with Muslim Malays from Malacca, who were in Dutch service.

===Descent upon the Carnatic===

The army Hyder assembled was one of the largest seen in southern India, estimated to number 83,000. Carefully co-ordinating the actions of his subordinate commanders, he swept down the Eastern Ghats onto the coastal plain in July 1780, laying waste the countryside. Due to Hyder&#x27;s secrecy and poor British intelligence, officials in Madras were unaware of his movements until the fires of burning villages just away were seen in Madras. Hyder himself organised the Siege of Arcot, while detaching his son &quot;Karim Khan Sahib&quot; to take Porto Novo. The movement in August of Sir Hector Munro with a force of over 5,000 from Madras to Kanchipuram (Conjeevaram) prompted Hyder to lift the siege of Arcot and move to confront him. Word then arrived that Munro was awaiting the arrival of reinforcements from Guntur under Colonel William Baillie, so he sent a detachment under Tipu to intercept them, and eventually followed in strength himself, when Munro sent a force from his army to meet Baillie. Tipu and Hyder surrounded Baillie&#x27;s force, and compelled the surrender of about 3,000 men in the Battle of Pollilur on 10 September; it was the first effective use of rocket artillery and made a strong impression upon the British. Hyder then renewed the siege of Arcot, which fell in November.

Shortly after the outbreak of hostilities, Governor Hastings had sent General Sir Eyre Coote south from Bengal to take charge of British forces opposing Hyder. He arrived at Madras in November to take command from Munro. Coote marched into the Carnatic, and eventually occupied Cuddalore. After being re-supplied there, he besieged Chidambram, where an assault on the fort was repulsed.

Hyder had in the mean-time descended into Tanjore, with severe consequences. After extracting the allegiance of the Maratha king Thuljaji, Hyder plundered the country, destroying cattle and crops. The economic output of Tanjore is estimated to have fallen by 90% between 1780 and 1782. The economic devastation wrought by these attacks was so severe that Tanjore&#x27;s economy did not recover until the start of the 19th century; the era is referred to in local folklore as the &quot;Hyderakalam&quot;.

With General Coote at Cuddalore, Hyder then made a forced march to interpose his army between Chidambram and Cuddalore, cutting Coote&#x27;s supply line. Coote marched to face him, and won a decisive victory in the Battle of Porto Novo on 1 July 1781; Coote estimated that Hyder lost 10,000 men in the battle. Hyder then dispatched Tipu in an attempt to prevent the junction of Coote&#x27;s army with reinforcements from Bengal. This failed, and in late August the two armies met again at Pollilur, chosen by Hyder as a place to make a stand, because it was the site of his victory over Baillie the previous year. Hyder was defeated this time, although the battle was not decisive. While Coote re-grouped and searched for provisions, Hyder took the opportunity to besiege Vellore. Madras authorities convinced the ageing Coote to put off his retirement and relieve the fortress there. Hyder and Coote met in battle at Sholinghur, near Vellore. Hyder&#x27;s artillery was ineffective, and the re-provisioned Vellore, which had been on the brink of surrender.

Lord Macartney, who had recently arrived to take the Governorship of Madras, also brought news that Britain was at war with the Dutch. Consequent to this, the company was instructed to seize Dutch holdings in India, and Macartney had ordered a detachment from Tanjore, under Colonel Braithwaite, to capture the main Dutch post at Negapatam. Hyder made an agreement with the Dutch to provide troops for its defence, but was himself forced away from Negapatam by Braithwaite. The British took Negapatam after a three-week siege in October and November 1781. This setback forced Hyder to withdraw from most of Tanjore.

In January 1782, General Coote, his health failing, again set out to re-provision Vellore. Hyder did not prevent the re-supply, but shadowed the British back toward Tripassore, offering battle near Sholinghur. Coote successfully manoeuvred away from Hyder without battle. In February, Hyder detached Tipu with a sizeable force to recover Tanjore. Intelligence failures led the main British garrison to become surrounded by this superior force; Colonel Brathwaite and 2,000 men surrendered. Hyder was also pre-occupied by bad news from the west. A Mysorean force that had been besieging Tellicherry was broken, with its commander and his siege guns captured, and Coorg and Malabar were also descending into open rebellion. Hyder consequently sent forces west to deal with these matters, and was preparing to follow himself when word arrived on 10 March that a French force had landed at Porto Novo. Hyder immediately sent Tipu from Tanjore to meet with them, and followed himself from Arcot. At this time he had a celebrated meeting with the French Admiral Suffren, and the allies agreed on a plan to establish Cuddalore as a French base. Cuddalore was occupied without resistance on 8 April, and Hyder&#x27;s army, joined by the French, marched toward Permacoil, which fell in May. Coote responded by marching toward Arni, where Hyder had a major supply depot. Hyder and the French had been considering an assault on Wandiwash, but abandoned that idea and marched to face Coote. They skirmished there on 2 June. In August the British landed a force on the Malabar coast, to which Hyder responded by sending additional troops under Tipu to the west. The onset of the monsoon season then suspended most military activity on the eastern plain, and Hyder established his camp near Chittoor.

==Death==
Hyder Ali, who had suffered from a cancerous growth on his back, died in his camp on 6 December 1782. Some other accounts record it as 7 December 1782 and some historical accounts in the Persian language record the death in dates ranging from Hijri 1 Moharram 1197 to Hijri 4 Moharram 1197 in the Islamic calendar. The differences in recorded dates may be due to the lunar calendar and the differences in moon sightings in the surrounding kingdoms.

Hyder&#x27;s advisers tried to keep his death a secret until Tipu could be recalled from the Malabar coast. Upon learning of his father&#x27;s death Tipu immediately returned to Chittoor to assume the reins of power. His accession was not without problems: he had to put down an attempt by an uncle to place Tipu&#x27;s brother Abdul Karim on the throne. The British learned of his death within 48 hours of its occurrence, but the dilatory attitude of Coote&#x27;s replacement, James Stuart, meant that they were unable to capitalise on it militarily.

Hyder Ali was buried at the Gumbaz in Seringapatam, the mausoleum raised by his son Tipu Sultan in 1782–84.

==Mysore Navy==
In 1763, Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan established their first naval fleet on the Malabar Coast, under the command of Ali Raja Kunhi Amsa II a large and well armed fleet consisting of 10 dhows and 30 larger ketches in the Indian Ocean, in his attempts to conquer islands that had withstood the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb. In 1763 his allies, the Ali Rajas, sailed from Lakshadweep and Cannanore carrying on board sepoys and on its pennons the colours and emblems of Hyder Ali, and captured the Maldives.

Ali Raja returned to Mysore to pay homage to Hyder Ali, presenting him the captured and blinded Sultan of the Maldives Hasan &#x27;Izz ud-din. Outraged at this excess, Hyder Ali stripped Ali Raja of the command of his fleet.

Hyder Ali, like his son Tipu Sultan protected foreign merchant ships, and the Mysore navy is even known to have protected and convoyed Chinese merchant ships in the region.

In 1768, Hyder Ali lost two grabs and 10 gavilats in a naval skirmish with forces of the East India Company. He was left with eight garbs and ten galivats, most of them damaged beyond repair.

On 19 February 1775, two of Hyder Ali&#x27;s ketches attacked , which drove them off after a brief exchange of fire.

On 8 December 1780 Edward Hughes attacked Hyder Ali&#x27;s fleet causing considerable damage once again. Mysore is known to have lost some of the best ships it ever constructed in that naval-battle at Mangalore. But the British were unable to stop Suffren&#x27;s fleet in 1781.

==Military rocket innovations==

Hyder Ali was an innovator in the military use of rockets, which were used against positions and territories held by the East India Company during the Anglo-Mysore Wars. Although rocket technology originated in China and had made its way to India and Europe by the 13th century, development of accurate cannons had sidelined rockets as a military technology in Europe. Rocket technology was already in use when Hyder&#x27;s father served (he commanded a company of 50 rocketmen), but it was Hyder who improved them and significantly expanded their use in the military. Technological innovations included the use of high-quality iron casing (better than was then available in Europe) for the combustion chamber, enabling the use of higher-powered explosive charges. He also organised companies of rocketmen who were experienced in aiming rockets based on the size of the rocket and the distance to the target. Rockets could also be mounted on carts that improved their mobility and made possible the firing of large numbers of them all at once. Rockets developed by Hyder and Tipu led to a renaissance of interest in the technology in Britain, where William Congreve, supplied with rocket cases from Mysore, developed what became known as Congreve rockets in the early 19th century.

In Hyder&#x27;s time the Mysorean army had a rocket corps of as many as 1,200 men, which Tipu increased to 5,000. At the 1780 Battle of Pollilur, during the second war, Colonel William Baillie&#x27;s ammunition stores are thought to have been detonated by a hit from one of Hyder&#x27;s rockets, contributing to the British defeat.

==Economic policy==

The peak of Mysore&#x27;s economic power was under Hyder Ali and his son Tipu Sultan in the post-Mughal era of the mid-late 18th century. They embarked on an ambitious program of economic development, aiming increase the wealth and revenue of Mysore.

==Family==
Details are sketchy on Hyder&#x27;s personal life. He had at least two wives. His second wife was Fatima, the mother of Tipu, his brother Karim, and a daughter. He may have also married the sister of Abdul Hakim Khan, the Nawab of Savanur; Bowring describes it as a marriage, but Punganuri Rao&#x27;s translator, citing Wilks, claims this was a &quot;concubine marriage&quot;. Karim and the daughter were both married to Abdul Hakim&#x27;s children to cement an alliance in 1779.

==See also==
*Tipu Sultan
*Husain Ali Khan Bahadur
*Mughal weapons
*Nawab of Savanur
*Arakkal Kingdom

==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* Rao Punganuri was, according to Brown, in the employ of both Hyder and Tipu.
*
*
* Biography of Hyder and memoir by one of his French officers; coauthor Gholam Mohammed was Tipu Sultan&#x27;s son.
*

==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1569078" start="0" end="9" title="Hyder Ali" label="Hyder Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="74" end="80" title="Sultan" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q266923" start="119" end="136" title="Kingdom of Mysore" label="Kingdom of Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="140" end="154" title="southern India" label="southern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q15914014" start="294" end="302" title="Dalavayi" label="Dalavayi"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="304" end="322" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437602" start="327" end="349" title="Krishnaraja Wodeyar II" label="Krishnaraja Wodeyar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424757" start="478" end="490" title="Sarvadhikari" label="Sarvadhikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="559" end="577" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q617070" start="589" end="594" title="First Anglo-Mysore War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q233663" start="599" end="605" title="Second Anglo-Mysore War" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q617321" start="606" end="623" title="Anglo–Mysore Wars" label="Anglo–Mysore Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="643" end="651" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838112" start="700" end="711" title="Franco-Indian alliances" label="an alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="721" end="727" title="Kingdom of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="971" end="990" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q10088" start="1036" end="1047" title="Tipu Sultan" label="Tipu Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193499" start="1086" end="1099" title="Krishna River" label="Krishna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q465055" start="1118" end="1131" title="Eastern Ghats" label="Eastern Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="1152" end="1163" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="1251" end="1255" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982894" start="1314" end="1327" title="Nawayath" label="Nawayath Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q485732" start="1333" end="1340" title="Quraysh" label="Quraysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="1422" end="1427" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646551" start="1448" end="1466" title="Mohammed Adil Shah, Sultan of Bijapur" label="Muhammad Adil Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="1486" end="1492" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893558" start="1584" end="1591" title="Punjabi Muslim" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1669" end="1680" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437262" start="1831" end="1844" title="Fath Muhammad" label="Fath Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q727181" start="1971" end="1976" title="Kolar, Karnataka" label="Kolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="2021" end="2027" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q167682" start="2028" end="2044" title="rocket artillery" label="rocket artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277580" start="2093" end="2110" title="Carnatic Sultanate" label="Nawab of Carnatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349225" start="2164" end="2171" title="Wodeyar" label="Wodeyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q684172" start="2172" end="2176" title="Raja" label="Raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q266923" start="2185" end="2202" title="Kingdom of Mysore" label="Kingdom of Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985099" start="2284" end="2292" title="Budikote" label="Budikote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678467" start="2298" end="2303" title="jagir" label="jagir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983069" start="2342" end="2346" title="Nayak (title)" label="naik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985099" start="2378" end="2386" title="Budikote" label="Budikote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509866" start="2397" end="2411" title="Kolar district" label="Kolar district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="2413" end="2422" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437262" start="2431" end="2444" title="Fath Muhammad" label="Fath Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="2522" end="2526" title="Sufism" label="sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q268385" start="2527" end="2530" title="Pir (Sufism)" label="pir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982894" start="2572" end="2580" title="Nawayath" label="Nawayath"/>
<link wikidata="Q613006" start="2784" end="2802" title="Nizam of Hyderabad" label="Nizam of Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q697185" start="2853" end="2858" title="Sepoy" label="Sepoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q589185" start="3005" end="3010" title="Arcot" label="Arcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q653988" start="3025" end="3038" title="Srirangapatna" label="Srirangapatna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15914014" start="3115" end="3121" title="Dalavayi" label="dalwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="3166" end="3184" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437602" start="3189" end="3211" title="Krishnaraja Wodeyar II" label="Krishnaraja Wodeyar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q29896" start="3483" end="3512" title="Qamar-ud-din Khan, Asaf Jah I" label="Qamar-ud-din Khan, Asaf Jah I"/>
<link wikidata="Q613006" start="3527" end="3545" title="Nizam of Hyderabad" label="Nizam of Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q976827" start="3597" end="3616" title="Second Carnatic War" label="Second Carnatic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859436" start="3649" end="3659" title="Nasir Jang Mir Ahmad" label="Nasir Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621758" start="3678" end="3691" title="Muhyi ad-Din Muzaffar Jang Hidayat" label="Muzaffar Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087756" start="3955" end="3965" title="Devanhalli" label="Devanhalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959500" start="4119" end="4135" title="Marquis de Bussy-Castelnau" label="Marquis de Bussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207754" start="4349" end="4364" title="Tiruchirappalli" label="Tiruchirappalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795930" start="4374" end="4384" title="Thondaman dynasty" label="Thondaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353581" start="4411" end="4417" title="Kallar (caste)" label="Kallar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207754" start="4430" end="4445" title="Tiruchirappalli" label="Tiruchirappalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398386" start="4657" end="4664" title="Faujdar" label="Faujdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q853945" start="4689" end="4697" title="Dindigul" label="Dindigul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621758" start="4893" end="4906" title="Muzaffar Jung" label="Muzaffar Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634921" start="4911" end="4924" title="Chanda Shahib" label="Chanda Shahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932941" start="4984" end="5010" title="Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah" label="Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277580" start="5016" end="5037" title="Nawab of the Carnatic" label="Nawab of the Carnatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q976827" start="5437" end="5450" title="Carnatic Wars" label="Carnatic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q560071" start="5531" end="5554" title="Joseph Francois Dupleix" label="Joseph Francois Dupleix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374634" start="5556" end="5570" title="Thomas Arthur, comte de Lally" label="Count de Lally"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634921" start="5602" end="5614" title="Chanda Sahib" label="Chanda Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621758" start="5671" end="5684" title="Muzaffar Jung" label="Muzaffar Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642200" start="5706" end="5718" title="Salabat Jung" label="Salabat Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="6491" end="6499" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Marathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122988" start="6809" end="6827" title="Zamorin" label="Zamorin of Calicut"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="6833" end="6851" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006240" start="6874" end="6882" title="Palakkad" label="Palakkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122988" start="6959" end="6966" title="Zamorin" label="Zamorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130261957" start="6970" end="6977" title="Calicut (kingdom)" label="Calicut"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="6985" end="6998" title="Malabar Coast" label="Malabar Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="7188" end="7194" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q239462" start="7196" end="7210" title="Malabar District" label="Malabar region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427080" start="7222" end="7233" title="Kolathunadu" label="Kolathunadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434313" start="7235" end="7243" title="Kingdom of Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q262562" start="7245" end="7256" title="Kadathanadu" label="Kadathanadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122988" start="7258" end="7267" title="Zamorin of Calicut" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985038" start="7269" end="7274" title="Kingdom of Tanur" label="Tanur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595848" start="7276" end="7286" title="Kingdom of Valluvanad" label="Valluvanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006240" start="7292" end="7300" title="Palakkad" label="Palakkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q266923" start="7376" end="7393" title="Kingdom of Mysore" label="Kingdom of Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678467" start="7472" end="7478" title="jaghir" label="jaghir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="7506" end="7515" title="Bangalore" label="Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629888" start="7810" end="7825" title="Balaji Baji Rao" label="Balaji Baji Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437602" start="8186" end="8208" title="Krishnaraja Wadiyar II" label="Krishnaraja Wodeyar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q10088" start="9063" end="9074" title="Tipu Sultan" label="Tipu Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259218" start="9217" end="9240" title="Third Battle of Panipat" label="Third Battle of Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="9602" end="9611" title="Bangalore" label="Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="9794" end="9803" title="Bangalore" label="Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="10893" end="10899" title="Sultan" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q719449" start="10967" end="10979" title="Shah Alam II" label="Shah Alam II"/>
<link wikidata="Q617321" start="11027" end="11043" title="Anglo-Mysore War" label="Anglo-Mysore War"/>
<link wikidata="Q613006" start="11125" end="11143" title="Nizam of Hyderabad" label="Nizam of Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130651" start="11192" end="11198" title="firman" label="firman"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="11292" end="11300" title="Maratha empire" label="Marathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017648" start="11372" end="11378" title="Nawab" label="nabobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625412" start="11512" end="11516" title="Sira, India" label="Sira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587991" start="11562" end="11569" title="Bednore" label="Bednore"/>
<link wikidata="Q45635" start="11588" end="11599" title="casus belli" label="casus belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827655" start="11699" end="11705" title="Ikkeri" label="Ikkeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642200" start="11879" end="11891" title="Salabat Jung" label="Salabat Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="12426" end="12444" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q572927" start="12455" end="12463" title="resident (title)" label="resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q127041" start="12762" end="12771" title="Mangalore" label="Mangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942174" start="13344" end="13358" title="Mangalorean Catholics" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533409" start="13443" end="13456" title="Goan Catholics" label="Goan Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259218" start="14188" end="14211" title="Third Battle of Panipat" label="Third Battle of Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="14215" end="14233" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Ahmad Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="14242" end="14249" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816155" start="14359" end="14365" title="Peshwa" label="Peshwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607154" start="14646" end="14662" title="Nawab of Savanur" label="Nawab of Savanur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852743" start="14841" end="14848" title="Dharwad" label="Dharwad"/>
<link wikidata="Q949183" start="14863" end="14880" title="Tungabhadra River" label="Tungabhadra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971343" start="14942" end="14953" title="Madhavrao I" label="Madhavrao I"/>
<link wikidata="Q15271960" start="15009" end="15019" title="Rattihalli" label="Rattihalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q124022681" start="15036" end="15058" title="Battle of Jadi Hanwati" label="Battle of Jadi Hanwati"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15422" end="15445" title="Mysore invasion of Kerala#Invasion by Hyder Ali" label="returned to the Malabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783847" start="15490" end="15499" title="Arakkal Kingdom" label="Cannanore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122988" start="15534" end="15541" title="Zamorin" label="Zamorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130261957" start="15556" end="15563" title="History of Kozhikode" label="Calicut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15693" end="15710" title="Zamorin - Palakkad War (1756–1757)" label="earlier campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384804" start="16014" end="16019" title="Eradi" label="Eradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036959" start="16342" end="16360" title="Captivity of Nairs at Seringapatam" label="forcibly relocated"/>
<link wikidata="Q15905163" start="16527" end="16544" title="Nanjaraja Wodeyar" label="Nanjaraja Wodeyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355467" start="16905" end="16920" title="Battle of Buxar" label="Battle of Buxar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5696873" start="16942" end="16954" title="Hector Munro, 8th laird of Novar" label="Hector Monro"/>
<link wikidata="Q719449" start="17011" end="17023" title="Shah Alam II" label="Shah Alam II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017648" start="17029" end="17034" title="Nawab" label="Nawab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816155" start="17094" end="17100" title="Peshwa" label="Peshwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="17453" end="17471" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147029" start="17640" end="17656" title="Northern Circars" label="Northern Circars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122041" start="17715" end="17723" title="Carnatic (region)" label="Carnatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772596" start="17881" end="17898" title="Madras Presidency" label="Madras Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q617070" start="18103" end="18125" title="First Anglo-Mysore War" label="First Anglo-Mysore War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246754" start="18296" end="18309" title="Presidency armies" label="British force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135463" start="18463" end="18477" title="Kaveripattinam" label="Kaveripattinam"/>
<link wikidata="Q162830" start="18590" end="18604" title="Tiruvannamalai" label="Tiruvannamalai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821560" start="18658" end="18677" title="Battle of Tiruvannamalai" label="decisively repulsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509809" start="18956" end="18970" title="Siege of Ambur" label="besieged Ambur"/>
<link wikidata="Q720294" start="19538" end="19549" title="Ali Khan Asaf Jah II" label="Asaf Jah II"/>
<link wikidata="Q891827" start="19839" end="19856" title="Bombay Presidency" label="Bombay Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="19860" end="19866" title="Mumbai" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783847" start="20162" end="20184" title="Arakkal kingdom" label="Ali Raja Kunhi Amsa II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708098" start="20398" end="20403" title="Honnavar" label="Onore"/>
<link wikidata="Q853945" start="21973" end="21981" title="Dindigul" label="Dindigul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708186" start="22130" end="22137" title="Hoskote" label="Ooscota"/>
<link wikidata="Q60524422" start="22420" end="22437" title="Battle of Ooscota" label="Battle of Ooscota"/>
<link wikidata="Q57280723" start="22701" end="22712" title="Gurramkonda" label="Gurramkonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="23064" end="23082" title="Company rule in India" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932941" start="23128" end="23154" title="Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah" label="Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932941" start="23351" end="23377" title="Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah" label="Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23767" end="23785" title="Battle of Mulwagal" label="Battle of Mulwagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q297967" start="24763" end="24768" title="Hosur" label="Hosur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24935" end="24943" title="Battle of Bagalur" label="a battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841425" start="24949" end="24956" title="Bagalur, Krishnagiri district" label="Bagalur"/>
<link wikidata="Q719838" start="25043" end="25054" title="Venkatagiri" label="Venkatagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q9824" start="25352" end="25357" title="Erode" label="Erode"/>
<link wikidata="Q752847" start="26327" end="26349" title="status quo ante bellum" label="status quo ante bellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15182" start="26397" end="26402" title="Karur district" label="Karur"/>
<link wikidata="Q400949" start="27022" end="27046" title="Abu Hilal Ahmad bin Said" label="Abu Hilal Ahmad bin Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826" start="27050" end="27056" title="Muscat, Oman" label="Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q332583" start="27061" end="27071" title="Karim Khan" label="Karim Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397066" start="27075" end="27081" title="Shiraz" label="Shiraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="27103" end="27109" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q332583" start="27174" end="27184" title="Karim Khan" label="Karim Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="27252" end="27264" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q154814" start="27294" end="27306" title="Bandar Abbas" label="Bandar Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="27678" end="27685" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q199484" start="27693" end="27704" title="Mustafa III" label="Mustafa III"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="27781" end="27789" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971343" start="29669" end="29680" title="Madhavrao I" label="Madhavrao I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553185" start="29886" end="29891" title="Coorg" label="Coorg"/>
<link wikidata="Q298416" start="30158" end="30165" title="Merkara" label="Merkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="30214" end="30221" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15904977" start="30635" end="30657" title="Chamaraja Wodeyar VIII" label="Chamaraja Wodeyar VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q15905084" start="30798" end="30818" title="Chamaraja Wodeyar IX" label="Chamaraja Wodeyar IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="30971" end="30976" title="Poona" label="Poona"/>
<link wikidata="Q193499" start="31428" end="31441" title="Krishna River" label="Krishna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852743" start="31467" end="31474" title="Dharwad" label="Dharwad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724600" start="31537" end="31552" title="Madakari Nayaka" label="Madakari Nayaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q46415" start="31567" end="31578" title="Chitradurga" label="Chitradurga"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="31918" end="31923" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362209" start="32354" end="32365" title="First Anglo-Maratha War" label="were at war"/>
<link wikidata="Q613006" start="32417" end="32435" title="Nizam of Hyderabad" label="Nizam of Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q720294" start="32436" end="32447" title="Ali Khan Asaf Jah II" label="Asaf Jah II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15341" start="32473" end="32479" title="Guntur district" label="Guntur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="32628" end="32638" title="Company rule in India" label="their rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q277480" start="33152" end="33156" title="Mahé, India" label="Mahé"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="33268" end="33294" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q753784" start="33923" end="33928" title="ketch" label="ketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="33949" end="33956" title="cannons" label="cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q171799" start="33975" end="33979" title="dhow" label="dhow"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="34037" end="34044" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q759255" start="34142" end="34149" title="Bhatkal" label="Bhatkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q333994" start="34615" end="34630" title="Warren Hastings" label="Warren Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725139" start="34810" end="34835" title="Ali Raja" label="Ali Raja Bibi Junumabe II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783847" start="34849" end="34864" title="Arakkal Kingdom" label="Arakkal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595822" start="34880" end="34887" title="Mappila" label="Mappila"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="34929" end="34935" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="34941" end="34948" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="34962" end="34967" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q465055" start="35196" end="35209" title="Eastern Ghats" label="Eastern Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542786" start="35558" end="35568" title="Parangipettai" label="Porto Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5696873" start="35596" end="35612" title="Hector Munro, 8th of Novar" label="Sir Hector Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q212332" start="35655" end="35666" title="Kanchipuram" label="Kanchipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q568613" start="36120" end="36138" title="Battle of Pollilur" label="Battle of Pollilur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613325" start="36396" end="36410" title="Eyre Coote (East India Company officer)" label="Sir Eyre Coote"/>
<link wikidata="Q279951" start="36596" end="36605" title="Cuddalore" label="Cuddalore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36650" end="36660" title="Chidambram" label="Chidambram"/>
<link wikidata="Q41496" start="36748" end="36755" title="Tanjore" label="Tanjore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798776" start="36835" end="36843" title="Thuljaji" label="Thuljaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872089" start="37426" end="37446" title="Battle of Porto Novo" label="Battle of Porto Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872075" start="37687" end="37708" title="Battle of Pollilur (1781)" label="met again at Pollilur"/>
<link wikidata="Q300577" start="37983" end="37990" title="Vellore" label="Vellore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872372" start="38112" end="38125" title="Battle of Sholinghur" label="met in battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229686" start="38129" end="38139" title="Sholinghur" label="Sholinghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q335019" start="38270" end="38284" title="George Macartney, 1st Earl Macartney" label="Lord Macartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q576292" start="38370" end="38403" title="Fourth Anglo-Dutch War" label="Britain was at war with the Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q695585" start="38600" end="38609" title="Negapatam" label="Negapatam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510266" start="38779" end="38795" title="Siege of Negapatam" label="three-week siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436816" start="39052" end="39062" title="Tirupati (city)" label="Tripassore"/>
<link wikidata="Q367354" start="39473" end="39484" title="Tellicherry" label="Tellicherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q982584" start="39943" end="39950" title="Pierre André de Suffren de Saint Tropez" label="Suffren"/>
<link wikidata="Q581497" start="40204" end="40208" title="Arani, Tiruvannamalai District" label="Arni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40371" end="40387" title="Battle of Arni" label="skirmished there"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198998" start="40664" end="40672" title="Chittoor" label="Chittoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185688" start="41052" end="41066" title="lunar calendar" label="lunar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161433" start="41613" end="41625" title="James Stuart (d. 1793)" label="James Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q21022143" start="41716" end="41738" title="Gumbaz, Seringapatam" label="Gumbaz in Seringapatam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10088" start="41836" end="41847" title="Tipu Sultan" label="Tipu Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="41891" end="41904" title="Malabar Coast" label="Malabar Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783847" start="41927" end="41949" title="Arakkal kingdom" label="Ali Raja Kunhi Amsa II"/>
<link wikidata="Q171799" start="41996" end="42000" title="dhow" label="dhow"/>
<link wikidata="Q753784" start="42016" end="42021" title="ketch" label="ketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194651" start="42103" end="42117" title="Mughal Emperor" label="Mughal Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q485547" start="42118" end="42127" title="Aurangzeb" label="Aurangzeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="42176" end="42187" title="Lakshadweep" label="Lakshadweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="42192" end="42201" title="Cannanore" label="Cannanore"/>
<link wikidata="Q697185" start="42220" end="42225" title="sepoy" label="sepoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="42301" end="42309" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567406" start="42408" end="42430" title="Sultan of the Maldives" label="Sultan of the Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5678090" start="42431" end="42453" title="Hasan &amp;#x27;Izz ud-din" label="Hasan &amp;#x27;Izz ud-din"/>
<link wikidata="Q10088" start="42562" end="42573" title="Tipu Sultan" label="Tipu Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="42673" end="42680" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111684" start="42740" end="42745" title="Grab (ship)" label="grabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21879030" start="42753" end="42761" title="Gallivat (boat)" label="gavilats"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="42801" end="42819" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048560" start="43042" end="43055" title="Edward Hughes (Royal Navy officer)" label="Edward Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q127041" start="43224" end="43233" title="Mangalore" label="Mangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q982584" start="43271" end="43278" title="Pierre André de Suffren de Saint Tropez" label="Suffren"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="43385" end="43391" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q617321" start="43486" end="43503" title="Anglo-Mysore Wars" label="Anglo-Mysore Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="43638" end="43644" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948727" start="43950" end="43974" title="Mysorean rockets" label="high-quality iron casing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142083" start="44484" end="44500" title="Sir William Congreve, 2nd Baronet" label="William Congreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344031" start="44573" end="44588" title="Congreve rocket" label="Congreve rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q568613" start="44744" end="44762" title="Battle of Pollilur" label="Battle of Pollilur"/>
<link wikidata="Q10088" start="45045" end="45056" title="Tipu Sultan" label="Tipu Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="45069" end="45075" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607154" start="45457" end="45473" title="Nawab of Savanur" label="Nawab of Savanur"/>
<link wikidata="Q10088" start="45730" end="45741" title="Tipu Sultan" label="Tipu Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429368" start="45743" end="45766" title="Husain Ali Khan Bahadur" label="Husain Ali Khan Bahadur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932162" start="45768" end="45782" title="Mughal weapons" label="Mughal weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607154" start="45784" end="45800" title="Nawab of Savanur" label="Nawab of Savanur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783847" start="45802" end="45817" title="Arakkal Kingdom" label="Arakkal Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158529" wikidata="Q3469296" url="?curid=158529" title="Irish Social Season">
<text>The Irish Social Season was a period of aristocratic entertainment and social functions that stretched from January to St. Patrick&#x27;s Day of a given year. During this period, the major and minor nobility left their country residences and lived in Georgian mansions in places like Rutland Square (now Parnell Square), Mountjoy Square, Merrion Square and Fitzwilliam Square in Dublin. Those with less financial means lived in (or in some cases rented) smaller properties in streets nearby.

The focal point of the Social Season was the move of the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (the King&#x27;s representative) from his &#x27;out of season&#x27; residence, the Viceregal Lodge (now Áras an Uachtaráin, the residence of the President of Ireland) to live in state in the Viceregal Apartments in Dublin Castle, where he and his wife hosted a series of levées, drawing rooms, banquets and balls in the Castle.

The period of the social season also coincided with the parliamentary sessions of the Irish House of Lords, which many of the peers in Dublin would be attending. However, the Irish Parliament was abolished with the Act of Union, which merged the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland in 1801.

With the abolition of the lord lieutenancy in 1922, the emergence of a new nationalist state (the Irish Free State) the same year, and the economic and social downturn that resulted from World War I, the Social Season dwindled and then died. Most of the aristocratic homes in Merrion Square and Fitzwilliam Square were sold and are now used as corporate offices.

Among the Irish peers who would reside in Dublin during the &#x27;Social Season&#x27; were

*The Duke of Leinster &quot;(Ireland&#x27;s senior peer)&quot;
*The Marquess of Slane
*The Duke of Ormonde
*Viscount Powerscourt
*The Earl of Fingall
*The Earl of Headfort

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3469296" start="4" end="23" title="Irish Social Season" label="Irish Social Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="119" end="141" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467883" start="321" end="336" title="Mountjoy Square" label="Mountjoy Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q630780" start="338" end="352" title="Merrion Square" label="Merrion Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720781" start="357" end="375" title="Fitzwilliam Square" label="Fitzwilliam Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="379" end="385" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="550" end="576" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107474" start="660" end="675" title="Áras an Uachtaráin" label="Viceregal Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="722" end="742" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q742767" start="792" end="805" title="Dublin Castle" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="1121" end="1133" title="Act of Union 1800" label="Act of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="1298" end="1314" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1387" end="1398" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158530" wikidata="Q188593" url="?curid=158530" title="Cepheid variable">
<text>A Cepheid variable () is a type of variable star that pulsates radially, varying in both diameter and temperature. It changes in brightness, with a well-defined stable period (typically 1–100 days) and amplitude. Cepheids are important cosmic benchmarks for scaling galactic and extragalactic distances; a strong direct relationship exists between a Cepheid variable&#x27;s luminosity and its pulsation period.

This characteristic of classical Cepheids was discovered in 1908 by Henrietta Swan Leavitt after studying thousands of variable stars in the Magellanic Clouds. The discovery establishes the &quot;true luminosity&quot; of a Cepheid by observing its pulsation period. This in turn gives the distance to the star by comparing its known luminosity to its observed brightness, calibrated by directly observing the parallax distance to the closest Cepheids such as RS Puppis and Polaris.

Cepheids change brightness due to the κ–mechanism, which occurs when opacity in a star increases with temperature rather than decreasing. The main gas involved is thought to be helium. The cycle is driven by the fact doubly ionized helium, the form adopted at high temperatures, is more opaque than singly ionized helium. As a result, the outer layer of the star cycles between being compressed, which heats the helium until it becomes doubly ionized and (due to opacity) absorbs enough heat to expand; and expanded, which cools the helium until it becomes singly ionized and (due to transparency) cools and collapses again. Cepheid variables become dimmest during the part of the cycle when the helium is doubly ionized.

== Etymology ==
The term &quot;Cepheid&quot; originates from the star Delta Cephei in the constellation Cepheus, which was one of the early discoveries.

== History ==

On September 10, 1784, Edward Pigott detected the variability of Eta Aquilae, the first known representative of the class of classical Cepheid variables. The eponymous star for classical Cepheids, Delta Cephei, was discovered to be variable by John Goodricke a few months later. The number of similar variables grew to several dozen by the end of the 19th century, and they were referred to as a class as Cepheids. Most of the Cepheids were known from the distinctive light curve shapes with the rapid increase in brightness and a hump, but some with more symmetrical light curves were known as Geminids after the prototype ζ Geminorum.

A relationship between the period and luminosity for classical Cepheids was discovered in 1908 by Henrietta Swan Leavitt in an investigation of thousands of variable stars in the Magellanic Clouds. She published it in 1912 with further evidence. Cepheid variables were found to show radial velocity variation with the same period as the luminosity variation, and initially this was interpreted as evidence that these stars were part of a binary system. However, in 1914, Harlow Shapley demonstrated that this idea should be abandoned. Two years later, Shapley and others had discovered that Cepheid variables changed their spectral types over the course of a cycle.

In 1913, Ejnar Hertzsprung attempted to find distances to 13 Cepheids using their motion through the sky. (His results would later require revision.) In 1918, Harlow Shapley used Cepheids to place initial constraints on the size and shape of the Milky Way and of the placement of the Sun within it. In 1924, Edwin Hubble established the distance to classical Cepheid variables in the Andromeda Galaxy, until then known as the &quot;Andromeda Nebula&quot; and showed that those variables were not members of the Milky Way. Hubble&#x27;s finding settled the question raised in the &quot;Great Debate&quot; of whether the Milky Way represented the entire Universe or was merely one of many galaxies in the Universe.

In 1929, Hubble and Milton L. Humason formulated what is now known as Hubble&#x27;s law by combining Cepheid distances to several galaxies with Vesto Slipher&#x27;s measurements of the speed at which those galaxies recede from us. They discovered that the Universe is expanding, confirming the theories of Georges Lemaître.
In the mid 20th century, significant problems with the astronomical distance scale were resolved by dividing the Cepheids into different classes with very different properties. In the 1940s, Walter Baade recognized two separate populations of Cepheids (classical and type II). Classical Cepheids are younger and more massive population I stars, whereas type II Cepheids are older, fainter Population II stars. Classical Cepheids and type II Cepheids follow different period-luminosity relationships. The luminosity of type II Cepheids is, on average, less than classical Cepheids by about 1.5 magnitudes (but still brighter than RR Lyrae stars). Baade&#x27;s seminal discovery led to a twofold increase in the distance to M31, and the extragalactic distance scale. RR Lyrae stars, then known as Cluster Variables, were recognized fairly early as being a separate class of variable, due in part to their short periods.

The mechanics of stellar pulsation as a heat-engine was proposed in 1917 by Arthur Stanley Eddington (who wrote at length on the dynamics of Cepheids), but it was not until 1953 that S. A. Zhevakin identified ionized helium as a likely valve for the engine.

== Classes ==
Cepheid variables are divided into two subclasses which exhibit markedly different masses, ages, and evolutionary histories: classical Cepheids and type II Cepheids. Delta Scuti variables are A-type stars on or near the main sequence at the lower end of the instability strip and were originally referred to as dwarf Cepheids. RR Lyrae variables have short periods and lie on the instability strip where it crosses the horizontal branch. Delta Scuti variables and RR Lyrae variables are not generally treated with Cepheid variables although their pulsations originate with the same helium ionisation kappa mechanism.

=== Classical Cepheids ===
Classical Cepheids (also known as Population I Cepheids, type I Cepheids, or Delta Cepheid variables) undergo pulsations with very regular periods on the order of days to months. Classical Cepheids are Population I variable stars which are 4–20 times more massive than the Sun, and up to 100,000 times more luminous. These Cepheids are yellow bright giants and supergiants of spectral class F6 – K2 and their radii change by (~25% for the longer-period I Carinae) millions of kilometers during a pulsation cycle.

Classical Cepheids are used to determine distances to galaxies within the Local Group and beyond, and are a means by which the Hubble constant can be established. Classical Cepheids have also been used to clarify many characteristics of the Milky Way galaxy, such as the Sun&#x27;s height above the galactic plane and the Galaxy&#x27;s local spiral structure.

A group of classical Cepheids with small amplitudes and sinusoidal light curves are often separated out as Small Amplitude Cepheids or s-Cepheids, many of them pulsating in the first overtone.

=== Type II Cepheids ===
Type II Cepheids (also termed Population II Cepheids) are population II variable stars which pulsate with periods typically between 1 and 50 days. Type II Cepheids are typically metal-poor, old (~10 Gyr), low mass objects (~half the mass of the Sun). Type II Cepheids are divided into several subgroups by period. Stars with periods between 1 and 4 days are of the BL Her subclass, 10–20 days belong to the W Virginis subclass, and stars with periods greater than 20 days belong to the RV Tauri subclass.

Type II Cepheids are used to establish the distance to the Galactic Center, globular clusters, and galaxies.

=== Anomalous Cepheids ===
A group of pulsating stars on the instability strip have periods of less than 2 days, similar to RR Lyrae variables but with higher luminosities. Anomalous Cepheid variables have masses higher than type II Cepheids, RR Lyrae variables, and the Sun. It is unclear whether they are young stars on a &quot;turned-back&quot; horizontal branch, blue stragglers formed through mass transfer in binary systems, or a mix of both.

=== Double-mode Cepheids ===
A small proportion of Cepheid variables have been observed to pulsate in two modes at the same time, usually the fundamental and first overtone, occasionally the second overtone. A very small number pulsate in three modes, or an unusual combination of modes including higher overtones.

== Uncertain distances ==
Chief among the uncertainties tied to the classical and type II Cepheid distance scale are: the nature of the period-luminosity relation in various passbands, the impact of metallicity on both the zero-point and slope of those relations, and the effects of photometric contamination (blending with other stars) and a changing (typically unknown) extinction law on Cepheid distances. All these topics are actively debated in the literature.

These unresolved matters have resulted in cited values for the Hubble constant (established from Classical Cepheids) ranging between 60 km/s/Mpc and 80 km/s/Mpc. Resolving this discrepancy is one of the foremost problems in astronomy since the cosmological parameters of the Universe may be constrained by supplying a precise value of the Hubble constant. Uncertainties have diminished over the years, due in part to discoveries such as RS Puppis.

Delta Cephei is also of particular importance as a calibrator of the Cepheid period-luminosity relation since its distance is among the most precisely established for a Cepheid, partly because it is a member of a star cluster and the availability of precise parallaxes observed by the Hubble, Hipparcos, and Gaia space telescopes. The accuracy of parallax distance measurements to Cepheid variables and other bodies within 7,500 light-years is vastly improved by comparing images from Hubble taken six months apart, from opposite points in the Earth&#x27;s orbit. (Between two such observations 2 AU apart, a star at a distance of 7500 light-years = 2300 parsecs would appear to move an angle of 2/2300 arc-seconds = 2 x 10−7 degrees, the resolution limit of the available telescopes.)

== Pulsation model ==
The accepted explanation for the pulsation of Cepheids is called the Eddington valve, or &quot;κ-mechanism&quot;, where the Greek letter κ (kappa) is the usual symbol for the gas opacity.

Helium is the gas thought to be most active in the process. Doubly ionized helium (helium whose atoms are missing both electrons) is more opaque than singly ionized helium. As helium is heated, its temperature rises until it reaches the point at which double ionisation spontaneously occurs and is sustained throughout the layer in much the same way a fluorescent tube &#x27;strikes&#x27;. At the dimmest part of a Cepheid&#x27;s cycle, this ionized gas in the outer layers of the star is relatively opaque, and so is heated by the star&#x27;s radiation, and due to the increasing temperature, begins to expand. As it expands, it cools, but remains ionised until another threshold is reached at which point double ionization cannot be sustained and the layer becomes singly ionized hence more transparent, which allows radiation to escape. The expansion then stops, and reverses due to the star&#x27;s gravitational attraction. The star&#x27;s states are held to be either expanding or contracting by the hysteresis generated by the doubly ionized helium and indefinitely flip-flops between the two states reversing every time the upper or lower threshold is crossed. This process is rather analogous to the relaxation oscillator found in electronics.

In 1879, August Ritter (1826–1908) demonstrated that the adiabatic radial pulsation period for a homogeneous sphere is related to its surface gravity and radius through the relation:

formula_1

where k is a proportionality constant. Now, since the surface gravity is related to the sphere mass and radius through the relation:

formula_2

one finally obtains:

formula_3

where &quot;Q&quot; is a constant, called the pulsation constant.

== Examples ==

* Classical Cepheids include: Eta Aquilae, Zeta Geminorum, Beta Doradus, RT Aurigae, Polaris, as well as Delta Cephei.
* Type II Cepheids include: W Virginis, Kappa Pavonis and BL Herculis.
* Anomalous Cepheids include: XZ Ceti (overtone pulsation mode) and BL Boötis.

== References ==
== External links ==
*McMaster Cepheid Photometry and Radial Velocity Data Archive
*American Association of Variable Star Observers
* Survey of Warsaw University at Las Campanas Observatory: OGLE-III (Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment) Variable Stars catalog website
*David Dunlap Observatory of Toronto University: Galactic Classical Cepheids database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="2" end="18" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheid variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="35" end="48" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q280157" start="54" end="71" title="Instability strip" label="pulsates radially"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="168" end="174" title="frequency" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q618164" start="266" end="302" title="cosmic distance ladder" label="galactic and extragalactic distances"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424054" start="320" end="332" title="period-luminosity relation" label="relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="374" end="384" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="393" end="409" title="periodic function" label="pulsation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q110181" start="480" end="502" title="Henrietta Swan Leavitt" label="Henrietta Swan Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q50028" start="553" end="570" title="Magellanic Clouds" label="Magellanic Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q116769675" start="821" end="829" title="Parallax in astronomy" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="885" end="892" title="Polaris" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q125993" start="933" end="944" title="Kappa–mechanism" label="κ–mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="1072" end="1078" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300048" start="1112" end="1126" title="Double ionization" label="doubly ionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q13024" start="1688" end="1700" title="Delta Cephei" label="Delta Cephei"/>
<link wikidata="Q10468" start="1722" end="1729" title="Cepheus (constellation)" label="Cepheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q535209" start="1810" end="1823" title="Edward Pigott" label="Edward Pigott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141708" start="1852" end="1863" title="Eta Aquilae" label="Eta Aquilae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13024" start="1984" end="1996" title="Delta Cephei" label="Delta Cephei"/>
<link wikidata="Q375172" start="2031" end="2045" title="John Goodricke" label="John Goodricke"/>
<link wikidata="Q502119" start="2411" end="2422" title="ζ Geminorum" label="ζ Geminorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q110181" start="2523" end="2545" title="Henrietta Swan Leavitt" label="Henrietta Swan Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q50028" start="2604" end="2621" title="Magellanic Clouds" label="Magellanic Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q240105" start="2708" end="2723" title="radial velocity" label="radial velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q978297" start="2863" end="2876" title="binary system" label="binary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q281170" start="2896" end="2910" title="Harlow Shapley" label="Harlow Shapley"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="3048" end="3061" title="spectral type" label="spectral type"/>
<link wikidata="Q295099" start="3101" end="3118" title="Ejnar Hertzsprung" label="Ejnar Hertzsprung"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="3338" end="3347" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="3400" end="3412" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="3476" end="3492" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3534" end="3540" title="Spiral galaxy#Spiral nebula" label="Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q278891" start="3677" end="3689" title="Great Debate (astronomy)" label="Great Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="3779" end="3787" title="Galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q60027" start="3826" end="3843" title="Milton L. Humason" label="Milton L. Humason"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="3876" end="3893" title="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q312248" start="3950" end="3963" title="Vesto Slipher" label="Vesto Slipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="4058" end="4083" title="Metric expansion of space" label="the Universe is expanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q12998" start="4112" end="4128" title="Georges Lemaître" label="Georges Lemaître"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="4321" end="4333" title="Wilhelm Heinrich Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="4723" end="4733" title="Absolute magnitude" label="magnitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q353834" start="5066" end="5083" title="stellar pulsation" label="stellar pulsation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="5125" end="5149" title="Arthur Stanley Eddington" label="Arthur Stanley Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182218" start="5232" end="5246" title="Sergei Alexandrovich Zhevakin" label="S. A. Zhevakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q125993" start="5278" end="5290" title="Kappa–mechanism" label="likely valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q10451997" start="5447" end="5465" title="Classical Cepheid variable" label="classical Cepheids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393939" start="5470" end="5485" title="type II Cepheid" label="type II Cepheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q836976" start="5488" end="5508" title="Delta Scuti variable" label="Delta Scuti variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q280157" start="5580" end="5597" title="instability strip" label="instability strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q726242" start="5649" end="5666" title="RR Lyrae variable" label="RR Lyrae variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q50076" start="5741" end="5758" title="horizontal branch" label="horizontal branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q125993" start="5922" end="5937" title="kappa mechanism" label="kappa mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="6169" end="6181" title="Population I" label="Population I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="6182" end="6195" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="6343" end="6357" title="spectral classification" label="spectral class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715955" start="6420" end="6429" title="HD 84810" label="I Carinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944" start="6555" end="6566" title="Local Group" label="Local Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="6608" end="6623" title="Hubble constant" label="Hubble constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="6898" end="6908" title="sinusoidal" label="sinusoidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="7119" end="7132" title="population II" label="population II"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="7239" end="7244" title="metallicity" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14557003" start="7426" end="7441" title="BL Herculis variable" label="BL Her subclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q936076" start="7468" end="7487" title="W Virginis variable" label="W Virginis subclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q727379" start="7547" end="7564" title="RV Tauri variable" label="RV Tauri subclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="7626" end="7641" title="Galactic Center" label="Galactic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="7643" end="7660" title="globular clusters" label="globular clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="7666" end="7674" title="galaxies" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5848" start="8044" end="8058" title="blue straggler" label="blue straggler"/>
<link wikidata="Q909534" start="8075" end="8088" title="mass transfer" label="mass transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q254758" start="8617" end="8625" title="passband" label="passband"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="8642" end="8653" title="metallicity" label="metallicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q943247" start="8815" end="8825" title="Extinction (astronomy)" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="8973" end="8988" title="Hubble constant" label="Hubble constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066499" start="9347" end="9356" title="RS Puppis" label="RS Puppis"/>
<link wikidata="Q127604164" start="9410" end="9420" title="calibrator star" label="calibrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="9572" end="9584" title="star cluster" label="star cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="9644" end="9650" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q555846" start="9652" end="9661" title="Hipparcos" label="Hipparcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q767805" start="9667" end="9671" title="Gaia (spacecraft)" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="9706" end="9714" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="9956" end="9958" title="Astronomical unit" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="10014" end="10020" title="parsec" label="parsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q740898" start="10098" end="10108" title="Angular resolution" label="resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q125993" start="10263" end="10274" title="κ-mechanism" label="κ-mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="10357" end="10363" title="Helium" label="Helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="10424" end="10431" title="ionization" label="ionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q190837" start="11362" end="11372" title="hysteresis" label="hysteresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421688" start="11565" end="11586" title="relaxation oscillator" label="relaxation oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q71035" start="11619" end="11632" title="August Ritter (civil engineer)" label="August Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758384" start="11744" end="11759" title="surface gravity" label="surface gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141708" start="12096" end="12107" title="Eta Aquilae" label="Eta Aquilae"/>
<link wikidata="Q502119" start="12109" end="12123" title="Zeta Geminorum" label="Zeta Geminorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q830868" start="12125" end="12137" title="Beta Doradus" label="Beta Doradus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608606" start="12139" end="12149" title="RT Aurigae" label="RT Aurigae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="12151" end="12158" title="Polaris" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q13024" start="12171" end="12183" title="Delta Cephei" label="Delta Cephei"/>
<link wikidata="Q966427" start="12213" end="12223" title="W Virginis" label="W Virginis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176589" start="12225" end="12238" title="Kappa Pavonis" label="Kappa Pavonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q56298573" start="12243" end="12254" title="BL Herculis" label="BL Herculis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12286" end="12293" title="XZ Ceti" label="XZ Ceti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510135" start="12324" end="12333" title="BL Boötis" label="BL Boötis"/>
<link wikidata="Q144488" start="12497" end="12514" title="Warsaw University" label="Warsaw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068067" start="12518" end="12542" title="Las Campanas Observatory" label="Las Campanas Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032158" start="12554" end="12594" title="Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment" label="Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158533" wikidata="Q7314384" url="?curid=158533" title="Republic Advisory Committee">
<text>The Republic Advisory Committee was a committee established by the then Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating in April 1993 to examine the constitutional and legal issues that would arise were Australia to become a republic. The committee&#x27;s mandate was to &quot;prepare an options paper describing &#x27;the minimum constitutional changes necessary to achieve a viable Federal Republic of Australia, maintaining the effect of our current conventions and principles of government&#x27;.&quot; The committee was asked to consider issues such as

* a name for a new elected head of state;
* the method of selection for the head of state;
* what powers he or she should possess;
* the constitutional amendments and legal changes required to replace the Queen of Australia and Her Representative, the Governor-General of Australia by an elected head of state.

==Republic Advisory Committee membership==
The Republic Advisory Committee submitted two Volumes (Volume I - The Options and Volume II - the Appendices) to the Australian prime minister in late 1993. Part of Volume II was concerned with the international experience in moving from monarchical to republican headships of state. Six international reports were commissioned from local experts; four of the countries were former Commonwealth monarchies, while two had experienced their own regime change when their own monarchies (the Hohenzollerns in Germany, the Habsburgs in Austria) were replaced by republics.

==Reports commissioned by the Republic Advisory Committee==
The recommendations made by the committee were never voted on by the Australian people. A Constitutional Convention was held in 1998, resulting in a slightly different proposal which was rejected by the Australian electorate in the 1999 referendum.

==Additional information==
Copies of the Reports were published under the following ISBNs

==See also==

*Republicanism in Australia
*Bi-partisan appointment republican model
*Direct election republican model

==References==
==External links==
*Republican History - the Republic Advisory Committee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7314384" start="4" end="31" title="Republic Advisory Committee" label="Republic Advisory Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q242654" start="98" end="110" title="Paul Keating" label="Paul Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="194" end="203" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q669459" start="755" end="773" title="Queen of Australia" label="Queen of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="802" end="831" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1287" end="1299" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="1300" end="1310" title="Commonwealth realm" label="monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="1393" end="1405" title="Hohenzollern" label="Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="1423" end="1431" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164282" start="1624" end="1649" title="Constitutional Convention (Australia)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559142" start="1766" end="1781" title="Australian referendum, 1999 (Establishment of Republic)" label="1999 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201697" start="1890" end="1916" title="Republicanism in Australia" label="Republicanism in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902349" start="1918" end="1958" title="Bi-partisan appointment republican model" label="Bi-partisan appointment republican model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280326" start="1960" end="1992" title="Direct election republican model (Australia)" label="Direct election republican model"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158534" wikidata="Q174361" url="?curid=158534" title="Book of the Dead">
<text>The Book of the Dead is the name given to an ancient Egyptian funerary text generally written on papyrus and used from the beginning of the New Kingdom (around 1550 BC) to around 50 BC. &quot;Book&quot; is the closest term to describe the loose collection of texts consisting of a number of magic spells intended to assist a dead person&#x27;s journey through the &quot;Duat&quot;, or underworld, and into the afterlife and written by many priests over a period of about 1,000 years. In 1842, the Egyptologist Karl Richard Lepsius introduced for these texts the German name &quot;Todtenbuch&quot; (modern spelling &quot;Totenbuch&quot;), translated to English as &#x27;Book of the Dead&#x27;. The original Egyptian name for the text, transliterated , is translated as Spells of Coming Forth by Day.

The &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, which was placed in the coffin or burial chamber of the deceased, was part of a tradition of funerary texts which includes the earlier Pyramid Texts and Coffin Texts, which were painted onto objects, not written on papyrus. Some of the spells included in the book were drawn from these older works and date to the 3rd millennium BC. Other spells were composed later in Egyptian history, dating to the Third Intermediate Period (11th to 7th centuries BC). A number of the spells which make up the Book continued to be separately inscribed on tomb walls and sarcophagi, as the spells from which they originated always had been.

There was no single or canonical &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;. The surviving papyri contain a varying selection of religious and magical texts and vary considerably in their illustration. Some people seem to have commissioned their own copies of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, perhaps choosing the spells they thought most vital in their own progression to the afterlife. The &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was most commonly written in hieroglyphic or hieratic script on a papyrus scroll, and often illustrated with vignettes depicting the deceased and their journey into the afterlife.

The finest extant example of the Egyptian in antiquity is the Papyrus of Ani. Ani was an Egyptian scribe. It was discovered in Luxor in 1888 by Egyptians trading in illegal antiquities. It was acquired by E. A. Wallis Budge, as described in his autobiography &quot;By Nile and Tigris&quot; in 1888 and was taken to the British Museum, where it remains.

==Examples in museums ==
* Papyrus of Ani, British Museum
* Papyrus of Hunefer, British Museum
* Papyrus of Pinedjem II, or &quot;Campbell Papyrus&quot;, British Museum
* Book of the Dead of Kha, Tomb of Kha and Merit, in Museo egizio, Torino, Italy, (Official site) 
* Book of the Dead of Nehem-es-Rataui, Museum August Kestner in Hanover, Germany
*&quot;Book of the Dead of Amen-em-hat&quot;, Royal Ontario Museum
*&quot;Book of the Dead of Qenna&quot;, Rijksmuseum van Oudheden, Leiden, Netherlands
* Book of the Dead (Art Institute of Chicago)
*Joseph Smith Papyri (Books of the Dead of TaSheritMin, Nefer-ir-nebu, and Amenhotep), fragments, many destroyed in modern times

== Development ==

The &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; developed from a tradition of funerary manuscripts dating back to the Egyptian Old Kingdom. The first funerary texts were the Pyramid Texts, first used in the Pyramid of King Unas of the 5th Dynasty, around 2400 BC. These texts were written on the walls of the burial chambers within pyramids, and were exclusively for the use of the pharaoh (and, from the 6th Dynasty, the queen). The Pyramid Texts were written in an unusual hieroglyphic style; many of the hieroglyphs representing humans or animals were left incomplete or drawn mutilated, most likely to prevent them causing any harm to the dead pharaoh. 

The purpose of the Pyramid Texts was to help the dead king take his place amongst the gods, in particular to reunite him with his divine father Ra; at this period the afterlife was seen as being in the sky, rather than the underworld described in the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;. Towards the end of the Old Kingdom, the Pyramid Texts ceased to be an exclusively royal privilege, and were adopted by regional governors and other high-ranking officials.

In the Middle Kingdom, a new funerary text emerged, the Coffin Texts. The Coffin Texts used a newer version of the language, new spells, and included illustrations for the first time. The &quot;Coffin Texts&quot; were most commonly written on the inner surfaces of coffins, though they are occasionally found on tomb walls or on papyri. The Coffin Texts were available to wealthy private individuals, vastly increasing the number of people who could expect to participate in the afterlife; a process which has been described as the &quot;democratization of the afterlife&quot;.

The &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; first developed in Thebes toward the beginning of the Second Intermediate Period, around 1700 BC. The earliest known occurrence of the spells included in the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; is from the coffin of Queen Mentuhotep, of the 16th Dynasty, where the new spells were included amongst older texts known from the Pyramid Texts and Coffin Texts. Some of the spells introduced at this time claim an older provenance; for instance the rubric to spell 30B states that it was discovered by the Prince Hordjedef in the reign of King Menkaure, many hundreds of years before it is attested in the archaeological record.

By the 17th Dynasty, the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; had become widespread not only for members of the royal family, but courtiers and other officials as well. At this stage, the spells were typically inscribed on linen shrouds wrapped around the dead, though occasionally they are found written on coffins or on papyrus.

The New Kingdom saw the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; develop and spread further. The famous Spell 125, the &#x27;Weighing of the Heart&#x27;, is first known from the reign of Hatshepsut and Thutmose III, . From this period onward the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was typically written on a papyrus scroll, and the text illustrated with vignettes. During the 19th Dynasty in particular, the vignettes tended to be lavish, sometimes at the expense of the surrounding text.

In the Third Intermediate Period, the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; started to appear in hieratic script, as well as in the traditional hieroglyphics. The hieratic scrolls were a cheaper version, lacking illustration apart from a single vignette at the beginning, and were produced on smaller papyri. At the same time, many burials used additional funerary texts, for instance the Amduat.

During the 25th and 26th Dynasties, the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was updated, revised and standardized. Spells were ordered and numbered consistently for the first time. This standardized version is known today as the &#x27;Saite recension&#x27;, after the Saite (26th) Dynasty. In the Late period and Ptolemaic period, the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; continued to be based on the Saite recension, though increasingly abbreviated towards the end of the Ptolemaic period. New funerary texts appeared, including the &quot;Book of Breathing&quot; and &quot;Book of Traversing Eternity&quot;. The last use of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was in the 1st century BC, though some artistic motifs drawn from it were still in use in Roman times.

==Spells==


The &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; is made up of a number of individual texts and their accompanying illustrations. Most sub-texts begin with the word &quot;r(ꜣ)&quot;, which can mean &quot;mouth&quot;, &quot;speech&quot;, &quot;spell&quot;, &quot;utterance&quot;, &quot;incantation&quot;, or &quot;chapter of a book&quot;. This ambiguity reflects the similarity in Egyptian thought between ritual speech and magical power. In the context of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, it is typically translated as either &quot;chapter&quot; or &quot;spell&quot;. In this article, the word &quot;spell&quot; is used.

At present, some 192 spells are known, though no single manuscript contains them all. They served a range of purposes. Some are intended to give the deceased mystical knowledge in the afterlife, or perhaps to identify them with the gods: for instance, Spell 17 is an obscure and lengthy description of the god Atum. Others are incantations to ensure the different elements of the dead person&#x27;s being were preserved and reunited, and to give the deceased control over the world around him. Still others protect the deceased from various hostile forces or guide him through the underworld past various obstacles. Famously, two spells also deal with the judgment of the deceased in the Weighing of the Heart ritual.

Such spells as 26–30, and sometimes spells 6 and 126, relate to the heart and were inscribed on scarabs.

The texts and images of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; were magical as well as religious. Magic was as legitimate an activity as praying to the gods, even when the magic was aimed at controlling the gods themselves. Indeed, there was little distinction for the Ancient Egyptians between magical and religious practice. The concept of magic (&quot;heka&quot;) was also intimately linked with the spoken and written word. The act of speaking a ritual formula was an act of creation; there is a sense in which action and speech were one and the same thing. The magical power of words extended to the written word. Hieroglyphic script was held to have been invented by the god Thoth, and the hieroglyphs themselves were powerful. Written words conveyed the full force of a spell. This was even true when the text was abbreviated or omitted, as often occurred in later &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; scrolls, particularly if the accompanying images were present. The Egyptians also believed that knowing the name of something gave power over it; thus, the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; equips its owner with the mystical names of many of the entities he would encounter in the afterlife, giving him power over them.
The spells of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; made use of several magical techniques which can also be seen in other areas of Egyptian life. A number of spells are for magical amulets, which would protect the deceased from harm. In addition to being represented on a &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; papyrus, these spells appeared on amulets wound into the wrappings of a mummy. Everyday magic made use of amulets in huge numbers. Other items in direct contact with the body in the tomb, such as headrests, were also considered to have amuletic value. A number of spells also refer to Egyptian beliefs about the magical healing power of saliva.

===Organization===

Almost every &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was unique, containing a different mixture of spells drawn from the corpus of texts available. For most of the history of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; there was no defined order or structure. In fact, until Paul Barguet&#x27;s 1967 &quot;pioneering study&quot; of common themes between texts, Egyptologists concluded there was no internal structure at all. It is only from the Saite period (26th Dynasty) onwards that there is a defined order.

The Books of the Dead from the Saite period tend to organize the Chapters into four sections:
*Chapters 1–16: The deceased enters the tomb and descends to the underworld, and the body regains its powers of movement and speech.
*Chapters 17–63: Explanation of the mythic origin of the gods and places. The deceased is made to live again so that he may arise, reborn, with the morning sun.
*Chapters 64–129: The deceased travels across the sky in the sun barque as one of the blessed dead. In the evening, the deceased travels to the underworld to appear before Osiris.
*Chapters 130–189: Having been vindicated, the deceased assumes power in the universe as one of the gods. This section also includes assorted chapters on protective amulets, provision of food, and important places.

==Egyptian concepts of death and afterlife==

The spells in the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; depict Egyptian beliefs about the nature of death and the afterlife. The &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; is a vital source of information about Egyptian beliefs in this area.

===Preservation===
One aspect of death was the disintegration of the various &quot;kheperu&quot;, or modes of existence. Funerary rituals served to re-integrate these different aspects of being. Mummification served to preserve and transform the physical body into &quot;sah&quot;, an idealized form with divine aspects; the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; contained spells aimed at preserving the body of the deceased, which may have been recited during the process of mummification. The heart, which was regarded as the aspect of being which included intelligence and memory, was also protected with spells, and in case anything happened to the physical heart, it was common to bury jeweled heart scarabs with a body to provide a replacement. The &quot;ka&quot;, or life-force, remained in the tomb with the dead body, and required sustenance from offerings of food, water and incense. In case priests or relatives failed to provide these offerings, Spell 105 ensured the &quot;ka&quot; was satisfied. The name of the dead person, which constituted their individuality and was required for their continued existence, was written in many places throughout the &quot;Book&quot;, and spell 25 ensured the deceased would remember their own name. The &quot;ba&quot; was a free-ranging spirit aspect of the deceased. It was the &quot;ba&quot;, depicted as a human-headed bird, which could &quot;go forth by day&quot; from the tomb into the world; spells 61 and 89 acted to preserve it. Finally, the &quot;shut&quot;, or shadow of the deceased, was preserved by spells 91, 92 and 188. If all these aspects of the person could be variously preserved, remembered, and satiated, then the dead person would live on in the form of an &quot;akh&quot;. An &quot;akh&quot; was a blessed spirit with magical powers who would dwell among the gods.

===Afterlife===

The nature of the afterlife which the dead people enjoyed is difficult to define, because of the differing traditions within Ancient Egyptian religion. In the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, the dead were taken into the presence of the god Osiris, who was confined to the subterranean Duat. There are also spells to enable the &quot;ba&quot; or &quot;akh&quot; of the dead to join Ra as he travelled the sky in his sun-barque, and help him fight off Apep. As well as joining the gods, the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; also depicts the dead living on in the &#x27;Field of Reeds&#x27;, a paradisiac likeness of the real world. The Field of Reeds is depicted as a lush, plentiful version of the Egyptian way of living. There are fields, crops, oxen, people and waterways. The deceased person is shown encountering the Great Ennead, a group of gods, as well as his or her own parents. While the depiction of the Field of Reeds is pleasant and plentiful, it is also clear that manual labour is required. For this reason burials included a number of statuettes named &quot;shabti&quot;, or later &quot;ushebti&quot;. These statuettes were inscribed with a spell, also included in the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, requiring them to undertake any manual labour that might be the owner&#x27;s duty in the afterlife. It is also clear that the dead not only went to a place where the gods lived, but that they acquired divine characteristics themselves. In many occasions, the deceased is mentioned as &quot;The Osiris – [&quot;Name&quot;]&quot; in the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;.

The path to the afterlife as laid out in the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was a difficult one. The deceased was required to pass a series of gates, caverns and mounds guarded by supernatural creatures. These terrifying entities were armed with enormous knives and are illustrated in grotesque forms, typically as human figures with the heads of animals or combinations of different ferocious beasts. Their names—for instance, &quot;He who lives on snakes&quot; or &quot;He who dances in blood&quot;—are equally grotesque. These creatures had to be pacified by reciting the appropriate spells included in the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;; once pacified they posed no further threat, and could even extend their protection to the dead person. Another breed of supernatural creatures was &#x27;slaughterers&#x27; who killed the unrighteous on behalf of Osiris; the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; equipped its owner to escape their attentions. As well as these supernatural entities, there were also threats from natural or supernatural animals, including crocodiles, snakes, and beetles.

===Judgment===

The deceased&#x27;s first task was to correctly address each of the forty-two Assessors of Maat by name, while reciting the sins they did not commit during their lifetime. This process allowed the dead to demonstrate that they knew each of the judges&#x27; names or Ren and established that they were pure, and free of sin.

If all the obstacles of the &quot;Duat&quot; could be negotiated, the deceased would be judged in the &quot;Weighing of the Heart&quot; ritual, depicted in Spell 125. The deceased was led by the god Anubis into the presence of Osiris. There, the dead person swore that he had not committed any sin from a list of 42 sins, reciting a text known as the &quot;Negative Confession&quot;. Then the dead person&#x27;s heart was weighed on a pair of scales, against the goddess Maat, who embodied truth and justice. Maat was often represented by an ostrich feather, the hieroglyphic sign for her name. At this point, there was a risk that the deceased&#x27;s heart would bear witness, owning up to sins committed in life; Spell 30B guarded against this eventuality. If the scales balanced, this meant the deceased had led a good life. Anubis would take them to Osiris and they would find their place in the afterlife, becoming &quot;maa-kheru&quot;, meaning &quot;vindicated&quot; or &quot;true of voice&quot;. If the heart was out of balance with Maat, then another fearsome beast called &quot;Ammit&quot;, the Devourer, stood ready to eat it and put the dead person&#x27;s afterlife to an early and rather unpleasant end.

This scene is remarkable not only for its vividness but as one of the few parts of the Book of the Dead with any explicit moral content. The judgment of the dead and the Negative Confession were a representation of the conventional moral code which governed Egyptian society. For every &quot;I have not...&quot; in the Negative Confession, it is possible to read an unexpressed &quot;Thou shalt not&quot;. While the Ten Commandments of Jewish and Christian ethics are rules of conduct laid down by a perceived divine revelation, the Negative Confession is more a divine enforcement of everyday morality. Views differ among Egyptologists about how far the Negative Confession represents a moral absolute, with ethical purity being necessary for progress to the Afterlife. John Taylor points out the wording of Spells 30B and 125 suggests a pragmatic approach to morality; by preventing the heart from contradicting him with any inconvenient truths, it seems that the deceased could enter the afterlife even if their life had not been entirely pure. Ogden Goelet says &quot;without an exemplary and moral existence, there was no hope for a successful afterlife&quot;, while Geraldine Pinch suggests that the Negative Confession is essentially similar to the spells protecting from demons, and that the success of the Weighing of the Heart depended on the mystical knowledge of the true names of the judges rather than on the deceased&#x27;s moral behavior.

==Producing a &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;==
A &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was produced to order by scribes. They were commissioned by people in preparation for their own funerals, or by the relatives of someone recently deceased. They were expensive items; one source gives the price of a &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; scroll as one &quot;deben&quot; of silver, perhaps half the annual pay of a laborer. Papyrus itself was evidently costly, as there are many instances of its re-use in everyday documents, creating palimpsests. In one case, a &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was written on second-hand papyrus.

Most owners of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; were evidently part of the social elite; they were initially reserved for the royal family, but later papyri are found in the tombs of scribes, priests and officials. Most owners were men, and generally the vignettes included the owner&#x27;s wife as well. Towards the beginning of the history of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, there are roughly ten copies belonging to men for every one for a woman. However, during the Third Intermediate Period, two were for women for every one for a man; and women owned roughly a third of the hieratic papyri from the Late and Ptolemaic Periods.

The dimensions of a &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; could vary widely; the longest is 40 m long while some are as short as 1 m. They are composed of sheets of papyrus joined together, the individual papyri varying in width from 15 cm to 45 cm. The scribes working on &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; papyri took more care over their work than those working on more mundane texts; care was taken to frame the text within margins, and to avoid writing on the joints between sheets. The words &quot;peret em heru&quot;, or &quot;coming forth by day&quot; sometimes appear on the reverse of the outer margin, perhaps acting as a label.

Books were often prefabricated in funerary workshops, with spaces being left for the name of the deceased to be written in later. For instance, in the &quot;Papyrus of Ani&quot;, the name &quot;Ani&quot; appears at the top or bottom of a column, or immediately following a rubric introducing him as the speaker of a block of text; the name appears in a different handwriting to the rest of the manuscript, and in some places is mis-spelt or omitted entirely.

The text of a New Kingdom &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was typically written in cursive hieroglyphs, most often from left to right, but also sometimes from right to left. The hieroglyphs were in columns, which were separated by black lines – a similar arrangement to that used when hieroglyphs were carved on tomb walls or monuments. Illustrations were put in frames above, below, or between the columns of text. The largest illustrations took up a full page of papyrus.

From the 21st Dynasty onward, more copies of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; are found in hieratic script. The calligraphy is similar to that of other hieratic manuscripts of the New Kingdom; the text is written in horizontal lines across wide columns (often the column size corresponds to the size of the papyrus sheets of which a scroll is made up). Occasionally a hieratic &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; contains captions in hieroglyphic.

The text of a &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was written in both black and red ink, regardless of whether it was in hieroglyphic or hieratic script. Most of the text was in black, with red ink used for the titles of spells, opening and closing sections of spells, the instructions to perform spells correctly in rituals, and also for the names of dangerous creatures such as the demon Apep. The black ink used was based on carbon, and the red ink on ochre, in both cases mixed with water.

The style and nature of the vignettes used to illustrate a &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; varies widely. Some contain lavish color illustrations, even making use of gold leaf. Others contain only line drawings, or one simple illustration at the opening.

&quot;Book of the Dead&quot; papyri were often the work of several different scribes and artists whose work was literally pasted together. It is usually possible to identify the style of more than one scribe used on a given manuscript, even when the manuscript is a shorter one. The text and illustrations were produced by different scribes; there are a number of &quot;Books&quot; where the text was completed but the illustrations were left empty.

==Discovery, translation, interpretation and preservation==
The existence of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was known as early as the Middle Ages, well before its contents could be understood. Since it was found in tombs, it was evidently a document of a religious nature, and this led to the widespread but mistaken belief that the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; was the equivalent of a Bible or Qur&#x27;an.

In 1842 Karl Richard Lepsius published a translation of a manuscript dated to the Ptolemaic era and coined the name &quot;Book of The Dead&quot; (&quot;das Todtenbuch&quot;). He also introduced the spell numbering system which is still in use, identifying 165 different spells. Lepsius promoted the idea of a comparative edition of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, drawing on all relevant manuscripts. This project was undertaken by Édouard Naville, starting in 1875 and completed in 1886, producing a three-volume work including a selection of vignettes for every one of the 186 spells he worked with, the more significant variations of the text for every spell, and commentary. In 1867 Samuel Birch of the British Museum published the first extensive English translation. In 1876 he published a photographic copy of the Papyrus of Nebseny.

The work of E. A. Wallis Budge, Birch&#x27;s successor at the British Museum, is still in wide circulation – including both his hieroglyphic editions and his English translations of the Papyrus of Ani, though the latter are now considered inaccurate and out-of-date. More recent translations in English have been published by Thomas George Allen (1974) and Raymond O. Faulkner (1972). As more work has been done on the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, more spells have been identified, and the total now stands at 192.

In the 1970s, Ursula Rößler-Köhler at the University of Bonn began a working group to develop the history of &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; texts. This later received sponsorship from the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia and the German Research Foundation, in 2004 coming under the auspices of the German Academies of Sciences and Arts. Today the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; Project, as it is called, maintains a database of documentation and photography covering 80% of extant copies and fragments from the corpus of Book of the Dead texts, and provides current services to Egyptologists. It is housed at the University of Bonn, with much material available online. Affiliated scholars are authoring a series of monograph studies, the &quot;Studien zum Altägyptischen Totenbuch&quot;, alongside a series that publishes the manuscripts themselves, &quot;Handschriften des Altägyptischen Totenbuches&quot;. Both are in print by Harrassowitz Verlag. Orientverlag has released another series of related monographs, &quot;Totenbuchtexte&quot;, focused on analysis, synoptic comparison, and textual criticism.

Research work on the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; has always posed technical difficulties thanks to the need to copy very long hieroglyphic texts. Initially, these were copied out by hand, with the assistance either of tracing paper or a camera lucida. In the mid-19th century, hieroglyphic fonts became available and made lithographic reproduction of manuscripts more feasible. In the present day, hieroglyphics can be rendered in desktop publishing software and this, combined with digital print technology, means that the costs of publishing a &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; may be considerably reduced. However, a very large amount of the source material in museums around the world remains unpublished.

In 2023, the Ministry of Antiquities announced the finding of sections of the Book of the Dead on a 16-meter papyrus in a coffin near the Step Pyramid of Djoser. This scroll is now known as the Waziri Papyrus I, after Mostafa Waziri.

===Chronology===
* c. 3150 BC – First preserved hieroglyphs, on small labels in the tomb of a king buried (in tomb U-j) at Abydos
* c. 3000 BC – The beginning of the numbered dynasties of kings of ancient Egypt
* c. 2345 BC – First royal pyramid, of King Unas, to contain the &quot;Pyramid Texts&quot;, carved precursors to the funerary literature from which the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; ultimately developed
* c. 2100 BC – First &quot;Coffin Texts&quot;, developed from the &quot;Pyramid Texts&quot; and for a time painted on the coffins of commoners. Many spells of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; are closely derived from them
* c. 1600 BC – Earliest spells of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, on the coffin of Queen Menthuhotep, an ancestor of kings from the New Kingdom
* c. 1550 BC – From this time onward to the beginning of the New Kingdom, papyrus copies of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; are used instead of inscribing spells on the walls of the tombs
* c. 600 BC – Approximately when the order of the spells became standard
* 42–553 AD – Christianity spreads to Egypt, gradually replacing the native religion as successive emperors alternately tolerate or suppress them, culminating in the last temple at Philae (also site of the last known religious inscription in demotic, dating from 452) being closed by order of Emperor Justinian in 533
* 2nd century AD – Possibly the last copies of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; were produced, but it is a poorly documented era of history
* 1798 AD – Napoleon&#x27;s invasion of Egypt encourages European interests in ancient Egypt; 1799, Vivant Denon was handed a copy of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;
* 1805 AD – Jean-Marcel Cadet makes the first publication, on 18 plates, of a &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, &quot;Copie figurée d&#x27;un rouleau de papyrus trouvé à Thèbes, dans un tombeau des rois&quot;
* 1822 AD – Jean-François Champollion announces the key to the decipherment of ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic writing, subsequently developed in his later publications, the most extensive after his death in 1832
* 1842 AD – Lepsius publishes the first major study of the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, begins the numbering of the spells or chapters, and brings the name &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; into general circulation

==See also==
*&quot;Garuda Purana&quot; 
*&quot;Bardo Thodol&quot; (Tibetan book of the dead)
*List of papyri from ancient Egypt
*Ghosts in ancient Egyptian culture
*Medjed
*Qenna

==References==
===Citations===
===Works cited===
*Allen, James P., &quot;Middle Egyptian – An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs&quot;, first edition, Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
*Faulkner, Raymond O (translator); von Dassow, Eva (editor), &quot;The Egyptian Book of the Dead, The Book of Going forth by Day. The First Authentic Presentation of the Complete Papyrus of Ani&quot;. Chronicle Books, San Francisco, 1994.
*Hornung, Erik; Lorton, D (translator), &quot;The Ancient Egyptian books of the Afterlife&quot;. Cornell University Press, 1999. 
*Müller-Roth, Marcus, &quot;The Book of the Dead Project: Past, present and future.&quot; &quot;British Museum Studies in Ancient Egypt and Sudan&quot; 15 (2010): 189–200.
*Pinch, Geraldine, &quot;Magic in Ancient Egypt&quot;. British Museum Press, London, 1994. 
*Taylor, John H. (Editor), &quot;Ancient Egyptian Book of the Dead: Journey through the afterlife&quot;. British Museum Press, London, 2010. 

==Further reading==
*Allen, Thomas George, &quot;The Egyptian Book of the Dead: Documents in the Oriental Institute Museum at the University of Chicago&quot;. University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1960.
*Allen, Thomas George, &quot;The Book of the Dead or Going Forth by Day. Ideas of the Ancient Egyptians Concerning the Hereafter as Expressed in Their Own Terms,&quot; SAOC vol. 37; University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1974.
*Assmann, Jan (2005) [2001]. &quot;Death and Salvation in Ancient Egypt&quot;. Translated by David Lorton. Cornell University Press. 
*D&#x27;Auria, S (&quot;et al.&quot;) &quot;Mummies and Magic: the Funerary Arts of Ancient Egypt&quot;. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 1989. 
*Faulkner, Raymond O; Andrews, Carol (editor), &quot;The Ancient Egyptian Book of the Dead&quot;. University of Texas Press, Austin, 1972.
*Lapp, G, &quot;The Papyrus of Nu (Catalogue of Books of the Dead in the British Museum)&quot;. British Museum Press, London, 1997.
*, &quot;Studies on the Illustrated Theban Funerary Papyri of the 11th and 10th Centuries B.C.&quot;. OBO vol. 86; Universitätsverlag, Freiburg, 1989.

==External links==

*The Mummy Chamber Brooklyn Museum Exhibit
* Das altägyptische Totenbuch - ein digitales Textzeugenarchiv Complete digital archive of all witnesses for the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; (with descriptions of the (c. 3000) objects and (c. 20,000) images)
* Online Readable Text, with several images and reproductions of Egyptian papyri
* Papyrus of Hunefer, with many scenes and their formula English translations, from the copy now in the British Museum
* Video: British Museum curator introduces the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2986441" start="45" end="75" title="Ancient Egyptian funerary texts" label="ancient Egyptian funerary text"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="140" end="151" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q871389" start="370" end="374" title="Duat" label="Duat"/>
<link wikidata="Q77231" start="510" end="530" title="Karl Richard Lepsius" label="Karl Richard Lepsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q645882" start="969" end="982" title="Pyramid Texts" label="Pyramid Texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q532105" start="987" end="999" title="Coffin Texts" label="Coffin Texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q212728" start="1235" end="1260" title="Third Intermediate Period" label="Third Intermediate Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="1390" end="1400" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="1484" end="1493" title="Archetype" label="canonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="1898" end="1910" title="Egyptian hieroglyphics" label="hieroglyphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208111" start="1914" end="1922" title="hieratic" label="hieratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="1935" end="1942" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656062" start="1978" end="1986" title="vignette (literature)" label="vignette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018575" start="2112" end="2126" title="Papyrus of Ani" label="Papyrus of Ani"/>
<link wikidata="Q130514" start="2177" end="2182" title="Luxor" label="Luxor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316289" start="2255" end="2273" title="E. A. Wallis Budge" label="E. A. Wallis Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="2369" end="2383" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018575" start="2431" end="2445" title="Papyrus of Ani" label="Papyrus of Ani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026912" start="2475" end="2482" title="Hunefer" label="Hunefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q258452" start="2512" end="2523" title="Pinedjem II" label="Pinedjem II"/>
<link wikidata="Q744424" start="2600" end="2621" title="Tomb of Kha and Merit" label="Tomb of Kha and Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877" start="2626" end="2638" title="Museo Egizio" label="Museo egizio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14541222" start="2674" end="2709" title="Book of the Dead of Nehem-es-Rataui" label="Book of the Dead of Nehem-es-Rataui"/>
<link wikidata="Q457671" start="2711" end="2732" title="Museum August Kestner" label="Museum August Kestner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="2736" end="2743" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209283" start="2760" end="2791" title="Book of the Dead of Amen-em-hat" label="Book of the Dead of Amen-em-hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q649250" start="2799" end="2819" title="Royal Ontario Museum" label="Royal Ontario Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q113533889" start="2827" end="2852" title="Book of the Dead of Qenna" label="Book of the Dead of Qenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="2886" end="2892" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23640876" start="2908" end="2951" title="Book of the Dead (Art Institute of Chicago)" label="Book of the Dead (Art Institute of Chicago)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287070" start="2953" end="2972" title="Joseph Smith Papyri" label="Joseph Smith Papyri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2995" end="3006" title="Joseph Smith Papyri#Book of Joseph Scroll or Book of the Dead for TaSheritMin" label="TaSheritMin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3008" end="3021" title="Joseph Smith Papyri#Book of the Dead for Nefer-ir-nebu" label="Nefer-ir-nebu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3027" end="3036" title="Joseph Smith Papyri#Book of the Dead for Amenhotep" label="Amenhotep"/>
<link wikidata="Q177819" start="3213" end="3224" title="Old Kingdom" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q645882" start="3260" end="3273" title="Pyramid Texts" label="Pyramid Texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q244985" start="3309" end="3313" title="Unas" label="Unas"/>
<link wikidata="Q269237" start="3321" end="3332" title="5th Dynasty" label="5th Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q269979" start="3491" end="3502" title="6th Dynasty" label="6th Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="3561" end="3571" title="hieroglyph" label="hieroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q146083" start="3831" end="3835" title="ancient Egyptian deities" label="gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="3889" end="3891" title="Ra" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="4206" end="4220" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q532105" start="4255" end="4267" title="Coffin Texts" label="Coffin Texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="4830" end="4836" title="Thebes, Egypt" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q206715" start="4865" end="4891" title="Second Intermediate Period" label="Second Intermediate Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q536310" start="5026" end="5036" title="Mentuhotep (queen)" label="Mentuhotep"/>
<link wikidata="Q737695" start="5045" end="5057" title="Sixteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="16th Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q542742" start="5305" end="5321" title="Djedefhor" label="Prince Hordjedef"/>
<link wikidata="Q200986" start="5343" end="5351" title="Menkaure" label="Menkaure"/>
<link wikidata="Q642301" start="5436" end="5448" title="17th dynasty of Egypt" label="17th Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="5757" end="5768" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687413" start="5866" end="5887" title="Weighing of the Heart" label="Weighing of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q129234" start="5928" end="5938" title="Hatshepsut" label="Hatshepsut"/>
<link wikidata="Q157899" start="5943" end="5955" title="Thutmose III" label="Thutmose III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327260" start="6089" end="6097" title="vignette (graphic design)" label="vignette"/>
<link wikidata="Q157956" start="6111" end="6123" title="19th Dynasty" label="19th Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q212728" start="6232" end="6257" title="Third Intermediate Period" label="Third Intermediate Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q208111" start="6313" end="6321" title="hieratic" label="hieratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q460509" start="6605" end="6611" title="Amduat" label="Amduat"/>
<link wikidata="Q737648" start="6625" end="6629" title="25th dynasty" label="25th"/>
<link wikidata="Q662410" start="6634" end="6648" title="26th dynasty" label="26th Dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q621917" start="6904" end="6915" title="Late Period of ancient Egypt" label="Late period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="6920" end="6936" title="Ptolemaic period" label="Ptolemaic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131955" start="7139" end="7156" title="Book of Breathing" label="Book of Breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943093" start="7173" end="7200" title="Book of Traversing Eternity" label="Book of Traversing Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170569" start="8291" end="8295" title="Atum" label="Atum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687413" start="8669" end="8690" title="Weighing of the Heart" label="Weighing of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q846113" start="9155" end="9159" title="Heka (god)" label="heka"/>
<link wikidata="Q146921" start="9481" end="9486" title="Thoth" label="Thoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="10193" end="10199" title="amulet" label="amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q662410" start="11116" end="11128" title="26th Dynasty" label="26th Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q636041" start="11619" end="11629" title="Solar barque" label="sun barque"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="12415" end="12428" title="Mummification" label="Mummification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12491" end="12494" title="Ancient Egyptian conception of the soul#Sah (spiritual body)" label="sah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442735" start="12910" end="12922" title="Scarab (artifact)" label="heart scarab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12972" end="12974" title="Ancient Egyptian conception of the soul#Ka (vital essence)" label="ka"/>
<link wikidata="Q853611" start="13471" end="13473" title="Ba (Egyptian soul)" label="ba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13718" end="13722" title="Ancient Egyptian conception of the soul#Shut (shadow)" label="shut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13947" end="13950" title="Ancient Egyptian conception of the soul#Akh (intellect)" label="akh"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="14306" end="14312" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q871389" start="14351" end="14355" title="Duat" label="Duat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="14447" end="14449" title="Ra" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q190511" start="14516" end="14520" title="Apep" label="Apep"/>
<link wikidata="Q618140" start="14629" end="14643" title="Aaru" label="Field of Reeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q233458" start="14882" end="14894" title="Ennead" label="Great Ennead"/>
<link wikidata="Q726826" start="15163" end="15170" title="ushabti" label="ushebti"/>
<link wikidata="Q9133532" start="16819" end="16836" title="Assessors of Maat" label="Assessors of Maat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687413" start="17174" end="17195" title="Weighing of the Heart" label="Weighing of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q47534" start="17265" end="17271" title="Anubis" label="Anubis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17371" end="17386" title="Maat#42 Negative Confessions (Papyrus of Ani)" label="list of 42 sins"/>
<link wikidata="Q170471" start="17537" end="17541" title="Maat" label="Maat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131483" start="18154" end="18159" title="Ammit" label="Ammit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="18700" end="18716" title="Ten Commandments" label="Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="18720" end="18726" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="18731" end="18740" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952782" start="19456" end="19471" title="Geraldine Pinch" label="Geraldine Pinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181471" start="20080" end="20085" title="deben (unit)" label="deben"/>
<link wikidata="Q274076" start="20256" end="20266" title="palimpsest" label="palimpsest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018575" start="21769" end="21783" title="Papyrus of Ani" label="Papyrus of Ani"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="22086" end="22097" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138753" start="22152" end="22171" title="cursive hieroglyphs" label="cursive hieroglyphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q748151" start="22553" end="22565" title="21st Dynasty" label="21st Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q208111" start="22635" end="22643" title="hieratic" label="hieratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335351" start="23169" end="23176" title="rubric" label="red ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q190511" start="23369" end="23373" title="Apep" label="Apep"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="23407" end="23413" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q194191" start="23434" end="23439" title="ochre" label="ochre"/>
<link wikidata="Q929186" start="23637" end="23646" title="gold leaf" label="gold leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="24314" end="24325" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="24566" end="24571" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="24575" end="24586" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q77231" start="24597" end="24617" title="Karl Richard Lepsius" label="Karl Richard Lepsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="24671" end="24680" title="History of Ptolemaic Egypt" label="Ptolemaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q115746" start="25023" end="25038" title="Édouard Naville" label="Édouard Naville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742058" start="25278" end="25290" title="Samuel Birch (Egyptologist)" label="Samuel Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="25298" end="25312" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316289" start="25445" end="25463" title="E. A. Wallis Budge" label="E. A. Wallis Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018575" start="25619" end="25633" title="Papyrus of Ani" label="Papyrus of Ani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421077" start="25790" end="25809" title="Raymond O. Faulkner" label="Raymond O. Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143474" start="27280" end="27293" title="tracing paper" label="tracing paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q740662" start="27299" end="27312" title="camera lucida" label="camera lucida"/>
<link wikidata="Q192418" start="27906" end="27928" title="Step Pyramid of Djoser" label="Step Pyramid of Djoser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27962" end="27978" title="Waziri Papyrus I" label="Waziri Papyrus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q59782416" start="27986" end="28000" title="Mostafa Waziri" label="Mostafa Waziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q192268" start="28126" end="28132" title="Abydos, Egypt" label="Abydos"/>
<link wikidata="Q536310" start="28729" end="28740" title="Mentuhotep (queen)" label="Menthuhotep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503673" start="29227" end="29233" title="Philae" label="Philae"/>
<link wikidata="Q468618" start="29604" end="29616" title="Vivant Denon" label="Vivant Denon"/>
<link wikidata="Q260" start="29888" end="29913" title="Jean-François Champollion" label="Jean-François Champollion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385243" start="30319" end="30332" title="Garuda Purana" label="Garuda Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q597697" start="30347" end="30359" title="Bardo Thodol" label="Bardo Thodol"/>
<link wikidata="Q638887" start="30394" end="30427" title="List of papyri from ancient Egypt" label="List of papyri from ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q853611" start="30429" end="30463" title="Ghosts in ancient Egyptian culture" label="Ghosts in ancient Egyptian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203206" start="30465" end="30471" title="Medjed" label="Medjed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267388" start="30473" end="30478" title="Qenna" label="Qenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547701" start="30530" end="30545" title="James Peter Allen" label="Allen, James P."/>
<link wikidata="Q117212" start="30927" end="30940" title="Erik Hornung" label="Hornung, Erik"/>
<link wikidata="Q61247" start="31892" end="31904" title="Jan Assmann" label="Assmann, Jan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421077" start="32167" end="32186" title="Raymond O. Faulkner" label="Faulkner, Raymond O"/>
<link wikidata="Q632682" start="32628" end="32643" title="Brooklyn Museum" label="Brooklyn Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158535" wikidata="Q928070" url="?curid=158535" title="Melange (Dune)">
<text>Melange (), often referred to as &quot;the spice&quot;, is the fictional psychedelic drug central to the &quot;Dune&quot; series of science fiction novels by Frank Herbert and derivative works.

In the series, the most essential and valuable commodity in the universe is melange, a drug that gives the user a longer life span, greater vitality, and heightened awareness. In some humans, the spice can also unlock prescience, a form of precognition based in genetics but made possible by use of the drug in larger dosages. By far the most important of prescience’s functions is that it makes safe and accurate interstellar travel possible. However, melange is also highly addictive, and withdrawal is fatal. Harvesting melange is also hazardous in the extreme, as its only known source is the harsh desert planet Arrakis, where its deposits are guarded by giant sandworms.

==Description==
===Properties===
Melange is a drug that prolongs life and bestows heightened vitality and awareness, and in some humans unlocks prescience, a form of precognition based in genetics but made possible by use of the spice. In the story, the Spacing Guild uses humans mutated by excessive consumption of melange, and thereby endowed with limited prescience, to safely navigate heighliner starships through folded space. In larger quantities, the spice possesses intense psychotropic effects and is used as a powerful entheogen by both the Bene Gesserit and the Fremen people of Arrakis to initiate clairvoyant and precognitive trances, access genetic memory, and heighten other abilities. The Fremen also use the spice to make, among other things, paper, plastics, and chemical explosives, and the existence of &quot;spice-cloth&quot; and &quot;spice-fiber&quot; rugs are noted in &quot;Dune Messiah&quot; (1969) and &quot;Children of Dune&quot; (1976). Melange can be mixed with food, and it is used to make beverages such as spice coffee, spice beer, and spice liquor.

By the events of &quot;Dune&quot;, the spice is used all over the universe and is a sign of wealth. Duke Leto Atreides notes that of every valuable commodity known to mankind, &quot;all fades before melange. A handful of spice will buy a home on Tupile.&quot; Jon Michaud of &quot;The New Yorker&quot; wrote: &quot;Imagine a substance with the combined worldwide value of cocaine and petroleum and you will have some idea of the power of melange.&quot; Due to the rarity and value of melange and its necessity as a catalyst for interstellar travel, the Padishah Emperor&#x27;s power at the outset of &quot;Dune&quot; is secured by his control of Arrakis, which puts him on equal footing with both the assembly of noble families called the Landsraad and the Spacing Guild, which monopolizes interstellar travel. Seizing control of the planet, Paul Atreides intensifies this form of hydraulic despotism by asserting control over both the Landsraad and Spacing Guild, as well as other factions in the universe. Paul&#x27;s sister Alia says in &quot;Children of Dune&quot;, &quot;The spice often called &#x27;the secret coinage&#x27;. Without melange, the Spacing Guild&#x27;s heighliners could not move ... Without melange and its amplification of the human immunogenic system, life expectancy for the very rich degenerated by a factor of at least four. Even the vast middle class of the Imperium ate diluted melange in small sprinklings with at least one meal a day.&quot;

===Physiological side effects===
Extensive use of the drug tints the sclera, cornea, and iris of the user to a dark shade of blue, called &quot;blue-in-blue&quot; or &quot;the Eyes of Ibad&quot;, which is something of a source of pride among the Fremen and a symbol of their tribal bond. In &quot;Dune&quot;, Paul initially has green eyes, but after several years on Arrakis they begin to take on the deep, uniform blue of the Fremen. On other planets, the addicted often use tinted contact lenses to hide this discoloration. In &quot;Dune&quot;, Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV notes of two Guildsmen:
Melange is also highly addictive, and withdrawal means certain death. Paul Atreides notes in &quot;Dune&quot; that the spice is &quot;[a] poison—so subtle, so insidious... so irreversible. It won&#x27;t even kill you unless you stop taking it.&quot; When aerosolized and used as an inhalant in extremely high dosages—the standard practice for Guild Navigators—the drug alters the physiology of its user. In the first chapter of &quot;Dune Messiah&quot;, Guild Navigator Edric is described in his tank of spice gas as &quot;an elongated figure, vaguely humanoid with finned feet and hugely fanned membranous hands—a fish in a strange sea.&quot;

In &quot;Children of Dune&quot;, the term &quot;spice trance&quot; is used to describe the effects of an overdose of spice. Alia had previously subjected herself to such an overdose late in &quot;Dune Messiah&quot;, hoping to enhance her prescient visions. She achieves some success, but in &quot;Children of Dune&quot;, Leto II and Ghanima blame the trance for Alia&#x27;s descent into Abomination. Fearful of the same fate, they resist Alia&#x27;s urgings to undergo the spice trance themselves. The trial is later forced upon Leto at Jacurutu when it is suspected that he too is an Abomination. Leto survives the challenge and escapes, but is left changed. Unlike Alia, however, he remains in control, and the spice trance opens his eyes to the Golden Path that will ultimately save humanity.

===Appearance===
Herbert is vague in describing the appearance of the spice. He hints at its color in &quot;Dune Messiah&quot; when he notes that Guild Navigator Edric &quot;swam in a container of orange gas ... His tank&#x27;s vents emitted a pale orange cloud rich with the smell of the geriatric spice, melange.&quot; Later in &quot;Heretics of Dune&quot; (1984), a discovered hoard of melange appears as &quot;mounds of dark reddish brown&quot;. Herbert also indicates fluorescence in &quot;God Emperor of Dune&quot; (1981) when the character Moneo notes: &quot;Great bins of melange lay all around in a gigantic room cut from native rock and illuminated by glowglobes ... The spice had glowed radiant blue in the dim silver light. And the smell—bitter cinnamon, unmistakable.&quot; Herbert writes repeatedly, starting in &quot;Dune&quot; (1965), that melange smells like cinnamon. In &quot;Dune&quot;, Lady Jessica notes that her first taste of spice &quot;tasted like cinnamon&quot;. Dr. Yueh adds that the flavor is &quot;never twice the same ... It&#x27;s like life—it presents a different face each time you take it. Some hold that the spice produces a learned-flavor reaction. The body, learning a thing is good for it, interprets the flavor as pleasurable—slightly euphoric. And, like life, never to be truly synthesized.&quot;

===Sources===
In &quot;Dune&quot;, there is only one source of melange: the sands of the planet Arrakis, colloquially known as Dune, and millennia later called simply &quot;Rakis&quot;. Herbert notes in &quot;Dune&quot; that a pre-spice mass is &quot;the stage of fungusoid wild growth achieved when water is flooded into the excretions of Little Makers&quot;, the &quot;half-plant–half-animal deep-sand vector of the Arrakis sandworm&quot;. Gases are produced which result in &quot;a characteristic &#x27;blow&#x27;, exchanging the material from deep underground for the matter on the surface above it.&quot; This blow is explosive in nature, erupting with enough force to kill anyone in the vicinity of it. Frank Herbert describes such a spice blow in the following passage from &quot;Dune&quot;:

Herbert writes that the pre-spice mass, &quot;after exposure to sun and air, becomes melange&quot;. He later indicates its color in &quot;Children of Dune&quot;, when Leto II passes &quot;the leprous blotches of violet sand where a spiceblow had erupted&quot;.

Collecting the melange is hazardous in the extreme, since rhythmic activity on the desert surface of Arrakis attracts the worms, which can be up to 400 meters (1,300 feet) in length and are capable of swallowing a mining crawler whole. Thus, the mining operation essentially consists of vacuuming it from the surface with a vehicle called a harvester until a worm comes, at which time an aircraft known as a carryall lifts the mining vehicle to safety. The Fremen, who have learned to co-exist with the sandworms in the desert, harvest the spice manually for their own use and for smuggling off-planet.

Within the 1500 years between the events of &quot;God Emperor of Dune&quot; (1981) and &quot;Heretics of Dune&quot; (1984), the Tleilaxu discover an artificial method of producing the spice in their axlotl tanks, previously used only to create gholas. It is noted in &quot;Heretics of Dune&quot; that &quot;[f]or every milligram of melange produced on Rakis, the Bene Tleilax tanks produced long tons&quot;. The technology &quot;had broken the Rakian monopoly on the spice&quot; but is not fully successful in pushing natural melange out of the marketplace.

==Prequels and sequels==
===Project Amal=== 
In the &quot;Prelude to Dune&quot; prequel trilogy by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson (1999–2001), Project Amal is an early attempt by the Bene Tleilax to create synthetic melange in order to eliminate dependence upon Arrakis. Upon presenting their idea to the Padishah Emperor Elrood Corrino IX, in 10,154 A.G. the Tleilaxu are granted the right to occupy the planet Ix by force (with the help of Elrood&#x27;s Sardaukar army) and remake it into a laboratory station for the project. The old Emperor wants to remove the spice monopoly by making sure that he has the only access to it, thus controlling the Spacing Guild. The Tleilaxu subsequently rename Ix &quot;Xuttuh&quot; after their founder. In the year 10,156 A.G., Elrood IX is assassinated by Count Hasimir Fenring at the behest of Crown Prince Shaddam. Shaddam, now under the name of Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV, gives Fenring the title of Imperial Spice Minister and orders him to supervise the project.

Although Tleilaxu Master Hidar Fen Ajidica manages to create an artificial melange (called &quot;ajidamal&quot;, or &quot;amal&quot;) that seems to have the original&#x27;s properties, it does not work properly. Test-sandtrout explode when exposed to it, and Fenring&#x27;s test of its use by Guild Navigators ends in catastrophe as one heighliner and its passengers are destroyed and the Navigator of a second heighliner dies. When Duke Leto Atreides invades Xuttuh in 10,175 A.G. and reestablishes Prince Rhombur of House Vernius as ruler of Ix, all the records of Project Amal are destroyed by Fenring. When the news hits the Landsraad, Shaddam denies all participation, claiming never to have heard of it. He maintains that it had probably been something his senile father Elrood had done in his last days. The Tleilaxu Masters involved are ultimately executed. Ajidica himself dies from the side effects of ajidamal: his body literally falls apart as the synthetic melange eats its way from the inside out.

===Ultraspice=== 
In &quot;Sandworms of Dune&quot;, Brian Herbert and Anderson&#x27;s 2007 conclusion to the original series, the Spacing Guild is manipulated into replacing its Navigators with Ixian navigation devices and cutting off the Navigators&#x27; supply of melange. Sure to die should they be without the spice, a group of Navigators commission Waff, an imperfectly awakened Tleilaxu ghola, to create &quot;advanced&quot; sandworms able to produce the melange they so desperately require. He accomplishes this by altering the DNA of the worm&#x27;s sandtrout stage and creating an aquatic form of the worms, which are then released into the oceans of Buzzell. Adapting to their new environment, these &quot;seaworms&quot; quickly flourish, eventually producing a highly concentrated form of spice, dubbed ultraspice. This new form of spice is so powerful that a relatively small dose causes a potential Kwisatz Haderach to descend into a complete and unbreakable coma through perfect prescience.

==Analysis==
In &quot;Mycelium Running&quot;, mycologist Paul Stamets argues without sources, that Herbert&#x27;s creation of melange was related in part to his own personal experiences with psilocybin mushrooms. Carol Hart analyzes the concept of the drug in the essay &quot;Melange&quot; in &quot;The Science of Dune&quot; (2008). Also in &quot;Science of Dune&quot;, 
Csilla Csori analyzes the concept of prescience in the essay &quot;Prescience and Prophecy&quot;.

==See also==
* Nootropics
* Synthetic cannabinoids, a real-life class of drugs sometimes called &quot;spice&quot;
* Psilocybin mushrooms
* Psilocybin
* Soma, fictional drug from the 1932 novel &quot;Brave New World&quot; by Aldous Huxley

==References and notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="0" end="7" title="Melange (Dune)" label="Melange"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="39" end="48" title="Melange (Dune)" label="the spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="73" end="89" title="psychedelic drug" label="psychedelic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="105" end="128" title="Dune (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Dune&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="132" end="147" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="158" end="171" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="413" end="423" title="Melange (Dune)" label="prescience"/>
<link wikidata="Q520667" start="435" end="447" title="precognition" label="precognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037127" start="798" end="811" title="desert planet" label="desert planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="812" end="819" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038225" start="861" end="870" title="sandworm (Dune)" label="sandworms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617763" start="1127" end="1140" title="Spacing Guild" label="Spacing Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="1262" end="1272" title="heighliner" label="heighliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003852" start="1273" end="1281" title="starship" label="starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="1291" end="1303" title="folded space" label="folded space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="1355" end="1367" title="Psychoactive drug" label="psychotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="1402" end="1411" title="entheogen" label="entheogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="1424" end="1437" title="Bene Gesserit" label="Bene Gesserit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003839" start="1446" end="1452" title="Fremen" label="Fremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="1463" end="1470" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975244" start="1483" end="1494" title="clairvoyant" label="clairvoyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q520667" start="1499" end="1511" title="precognitive" label="precognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333051" start="1528" end="1542" title="genetic memory (psychology)" label="genetic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q437383" start="1772" end="1784" title="Dune Messiah" label="Dune Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q437365" start="1808" end="1824" title="Children of Dune" label="Children of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="2062" end="2075" title="Leto I Atreides" label="Leto Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="2238" end="2252" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="2510" end="2526" title="Padishah Emperor" label="Padishah Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="2696" end="2705" title="Landsraad" label="Landsraad"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="2735" end="2746" title="monopoly" label="monopolizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="2799" end="2812" title="Paul Atreides" label="Paul Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366407" start="2838" end="2857" title="Hydraulic empire" label="hydraulic despotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706099" start="2984" end="2988" title="Alia Atreides" label="Alia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193107" start="3498" end="3504" title="sclera" label="sclera"/>
<link wikidata="Q168291" start="3506" end="3512" title="cornea" label="cornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q178748" start="3518" end="3522" title="iris (anatomy)" label="iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q23797" start="3912" end="3924" title="contact lens" label="contact lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="3976" end="3992" title="Padishah Emperor" label="Padishah Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="3993" end="4003" title="Shaddam IV" label="Shaddam IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="4098" end="4111" title="Paul Atreides" label="Paul Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q900521" start="4310" end="4318" title="inhalant" label="inhalant"/>
<link wikidata="Q304741" start="4994" end="5001" title="Leto II Atreides" label="Leto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="5006" end="5013" title="Ghanima Atreides" label="Ghanima"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="5060" end="5071" title="Abomination (Dune)" label="Abomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q304741" start="5421" end="5432" title="Golden Path (Dune)" label="Golden Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="5632" end="5637" title="Edric (Dune)" label="Edric"/>
<link wikidata="Q437353" start="5806" end="5822" title="Heretics of Dune" label="Heretics of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="5943" end="5955" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q401619" start="5965" end="5984" title="God Emperor of Dune" label="God Emperor of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="6017" end="6022" title="Moneo Atreides" label="Moneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="6302" end="6306" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724114" start="6377" end="6389" title="Lady Jessica" label="Lady Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="6460" end="6468" title="Wellington Yueh" label="Dr. Yueh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038225" start="7150" end="7163" title="Little Makers" label="Little Makers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038225" start="7236" end="7244" title="sandworm (Dune)" label="sandworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="8213" end="8222" title="Harvester (Dune)" label="harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="8280" end="8288" title="Carryall (Dune)" label="carryall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="8604" end="8612" title="Bene Tleilax" label="Tleilaxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="8675" end="8686" title="axlotl tank" label="axlotl tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="8720" end="8725" title="ghola" label="ghola"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011036" start="9093" end="9108" title="Prelude to Dune" label="Prelude to Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="9115" end="9122" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q149010" start="9123" end="9130" title="trilogy" label="trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q711137" start="9134" end="9147" title="Brian Herbert" label="Brian Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q339577" start="9152" end="9169" title="Kevin J. Anderson" label="Kevin J. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="9345" end="9361" title="Padishah Emperor" label="Padishah Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="9362" end="9379" title="Elrood IX" label="Elrood Corrino IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="9452" end="9454" title="Ix (Dune)" label="Ix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="9496" end="9505" title="Sardaukar" label="Sardaukar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="9748" end="9754" title="Xuttuh" label="Xuttuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279377" start="9836" end="9857" title="Count Fenring" label="Count Hasimir Fenring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="9875" end="9895" title="Shaddam IV" label="Crown Prince Shaddam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038225" start="10267" end="10276" title="sandtrout" label="sandtrout"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="10387" end="10397" title="heighliner" label="heighliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="10483" end="10501" title="Leto I Atreides" label="Duke Leto Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011036" start="10550" end="10564" title="Rhombur Vernius" label="Prince Rhombur"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011036" start="10568" end="10581" title="House Vernius" label="House Vernius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="10679" end="10688" title="Landsraad" label="Landsraad"/>
<link wikidata="Q437349" start="11090" end="11107" title="Sandworms of Dune" label="Sandworms of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="11257" end="11262" title="Ix (Dune)" label="Ixian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="11417" end="11421" title="Tylwyth Waff" label="Waff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="11598" end="11601" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q437349" start="11723" end="11730" title="Buzzell (Dune)" label="Buzzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038225" start="11779" end="11786" title="seaworm" label="seaworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="11975" end="11991" title="Kwisatz Haderach" label="Kwisatz Haderach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946852" start="12091" end="12107" title="Mycelium Running" label="Mycelium Running"/>
<link wikidata="Q783942" start="12126" end="12138" title="Paul Stamets" label="Paul Stamets"/>
<link wikidata="Q336358" start="12260" end="12279" title="psilocybin mushroom" label="psilocybin mushroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q121144358" start="12368" end="12387" title="The Science of Dune" label="The Science of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q742487" start="12554" end="12563" title="Nootropic" label="Nootropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904200" start="12567" end="12589" title="Synthetic cannabinoids" label="Synthetic cannabinoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q336358" start="12655" end="12675" title="Psilocybin mushrooms" label="Psilocybin mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q208118" start="12678" end="12688" title="Psilocybin" label="Psilocybin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130640658" start="12691" end="12695" title="Soma (Brave New World)" label="Soma"/>
<link wikidata="Q191949" start="12738" end="12753" title="Brave New World" label="Brave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="12763" end="12776" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158536" wikidata="Q460509" url="?curid=158536" title="Amduat">
<text>The Amduat (, () is an important ancient Egyptian funerary text of the New Kingdom of Egypt. Similar to previous funerary texts, such as the Old Kingdom&#x27;s Pyramid Texts, or the First Intermediate Period&#x27;s Coffin Texts, the &quot;Amduat&quot; was found carved on the internal walls of a pharaoh&#x27;s tomb. Unlike other funerary texts, however, it was reserved almost exclusively for pharaohs until the Twenty-first Dynasty, or very select nobility.

The &quot;Amduat&quot; tells the story of Ra, the Egyptian sun god who makes a daily journey through the underworld, from the time when the sun sets in the west till it rises again in the east. This is associated with imagery of continual death and rebirth, as the sun &#x27;dies&#x27; when it sets, and through the trials of rebirth in the underworld, it is once again &#x27;reborn&#x27; at the beginning of a new day. It is said that the deceased Pharaoh will take this same journey through the underworld, ultimately to be reborn and become one with Ra, residing with him forever. Many gods, goddesses, and deities help both Ra and the deceased soul on this journey in a variety of ways, Khepri, Isis, and Osiris being some of the main ones. This is alongside many unnamed or unknown deities, which are often given reference to within the text of the &quot;Amduat&quot; itself.

As well as enumerating and naming the inhabitants of the Duat (Egyptian word for the underworld), both good and bad, the illustrations of the work show clearly the topography of the underworld. Early fragments of the &quot;Amduat&quot; can be found in the tombs of Hatshepsut &amp; Thutmose I (KV20), as well as Thutmose I (KV38) and Thutmose II (Wadi C-4), but the earliest complete version is found in KV34, the tomb of Thutmose III in the Valley of the Kings.

== Content of the &quot;Amduat&quot; ==
The underworld is divided into twelve hours of the night, each representing different allies and enemies for the Pharaoh/sun god to encounter. The &quot;Amduat&quot; names all of these gods and monsters, such as the serpent of Mehen or the &#x27;World Encircler&#x27; which play a variety of roles to either help or harm Ra and the deceased soul. The main purpose of the &quot;Amduat&quot; is to give information about the geography of the underworld, as well as the names and descriptions of these gods and monsters to the Ba (or soul) of the dead Pharaoh, so he can call upon them for help or use their name to defeat them. 

The &quot;Amduat&quot; is represented in two forms within tombs: a shorter version of the text that simply covers the journey of Ra, and a much longer version that is both textually and pictorially represented. The long version typically contains the shorter version at the very end of the journey, as well as the directions for how the &quot;Amduat&quot; should be shown depicted on the walls of the tomb.

Visually, the &quot;Amduat&quot; is typically broken into 3 continuous horizontal registers, with vertical registers of text separating each of the 12 hours. Each of the vertical textual registers contain information about the title of the hour, name of the gateway (either a pylon, door, or gate that is guarded by a deity) that connects them, as well as the name of the region of the underworld in order to distinguish the progression of Ra&#x27;s daily journey. The 12 hours follow along through 12 distinct regions of the Duat, while the 3 registers represent some of the physical locations within these regions. Additionally, at the end of each hour is a textual explanation of what happened within that region of the underworld.

Each of the top middle registers contains creatures and items typical of the Egyptian underworld, while the bottom registers contain additional information or details represented pictorially regarding the specific hour. The middle horizontal register traditionally starts with Ra on his solar barque (a type of boat), entering a new realm or ‘hour’ of the underworld.

Throughout the text of the &quot;Amduat&quot;, Ra is depicted as being &quot;ram-headed&quot; as he descends into the underworld and becomes separated from his body, being left only with his &#x27;Ba&#x27; as he seeks to reunite with his body, which is now in the form of Osiris, in the ensuing hours. The hieroglyph for Ba is the same as the one for a ram in Ancient Egyptian, suggesting that his appearance is a visual pun.

The Egyptian underworld is often depicted as being the place of death, but also renewal for many deities and the souls that pass through. As such, it is often known as a &#x27;place of opposites,&#x27; which is best represented in hour 5 with the waters of Nun (the river that in the underworld is called the &#x27;Wernes&#x27;, but is the Nile in the land of the living) intermingling with the desert sands of Sokar. Here, it can be seen that life and death are meeting within the underworld, creating a chaos that only the influence of Maat can control. Maat is the deity of truth, order, and most importantly control, so she is often seen alongside the deceased pharaoh or Ra as they continue the normal order of the suns path daily, depicted most often as her signature feather.

Maat is also an important goddess for the pharaoh due to her representing order, as it was expected for the pharaoh to invoke Maat to keep order over the kingdom of Egypt, thereby also pushing away chaos and disorder. Her inclusion on the journey of the sun&#x27;s setting and eventual rebirth once more may suggest that this is the order of the world and that is therefore overseen by her.

Additionally, the depiction of the &quot;Amduat&quot; is not just tied to the wall carvings within a tomb, as the tombs themselves are often a part of representing the &quot;Amduat&quot; in its entirety. Thutmose III&#x27;s tomb is a very well preserved example of how the &quot;Amduat&quot; should be physically and pictorially represented, setting the example for the pharaohs that came after him.

== The hours ==
Hour 1: The sun god enters from the western horizon (akhet) which is a transition between day and night. Just below the image of Ra in his solar barque is the alternate depiction of the sun god as a scarab in a smaller barque. This is the god Khepri, who Ra turns into once the sun rises once more and is likely depicted in hour 1 as the sun begins to set for the night. The upper and lower registers contain a labeled list of the common and/or important creatures and beings found within the underworld. Two depictions of the goddess Maat are present leading Ra&#x27;s barque, possibly showing how her order is still present even in the chaos of the underworld. 

Hour 2: This is when Ra officially enters the underworld on his barque along with four other boats beside him, leaving the transition between life &amp; death or between day &amp; night. This region of the underworld is categorized by its representation of the primeval waters of Nun as a body of water called &#x27;Wernes&#x27;. Maat is once more depicted, though now only as her symbol of a curved feather on one of the boats, and is supported by an unnamed being. This hour stresses fertility, represented both by the waters of Nun and the unnamed gods of the lower register who are all associated with images of agriculture and farming.

Hour 3: In this region, the waters of Nun are now transformed into the &#x27;Waters of Osiris,&#x27; and is marked by Osiris being visually represented on the lower register. Ancient Egyptians believed that the Nile was sourced from the underworld, and so Osiris&#x27;s inclusion at this point of the journey makes sense when considering he is the god of the afterlife, as well as fertility and agriculture. There are still four boats just as there were in the second hour, but there is no clear depiction of the god Ra on any of them, with the text of the &quot;Amduat&quot; stating that Ra was split between them.

Hour 4: Ra reaches Imhet, the barren desert land of Sokar, the underworld hawk deity. At this point, the sungod has reached deep enough into the underworld and away from his own light that he cannot see, having to rely on his own voice as a way to guide himself and his crew out of the darkness. Without any water to traverse, the solar barque turns into a double-headed, fire-breathing serpent as Ra&#x27;s only means to traverse this pitch-black and sandy region. This hour is particularly notable for the visual break it takes from the other hours in that it has a giant sand path &#x27;zig-zag&#x27; through all three registers, uniting them all, but making it hard for Ra to traverse on account of the various doors in the way.

Hour 5: The land of Sokar continues into this hour, as does the serpent-barque. This is the region of opposites, seen in the waters of Nun uniting with the desert lands of Sokar. Osiris&#x27;s burial mound is seen on the top register with Khepri crawling out, representing the eventual rebirth of Ra that begins with recovering the body of Osiris. There is a narrow passage-way that it is attempting to get through, resulting in all of the friendly beings of this regions (including the scarab representation of Khepri) helping to pull the boat. An oval representing the &#x27;Cavern of Sokar&#x27; is present on the bottom register with the god himself being contained by a lake of fire surrounding the cavern.

Hour 6: This is when the most significant event in the underworld occurs. The body of the sungod (or possibly the body of Osiris no longer mummiform) is seen with Khepri&#x27;s scarab form, being protected by the serpent of Mehen as he regenerates. The Mehen serpent at this point joins the journey, staying with him through the rest of the hours. Once again, Ra&#x27;s solar barque travels the waters of Nun as regenerative power flows, helping to revitalize the Ba of Ra as it is reunited with his body in the form of Osiris. This renews the light of the sun in this hour, represented as a sun-disc crown appearing on Ra&#x27;s head. Additionally, representations of the kings of lower and upper Egypt are found here as the recently deceased king must face his predecessors before being reborn himself.

Hour 7: Regenerating the light of Ra is a very dangerous moment in the journey, as it attracts the forces of evil present in the underworld. In this hour, Apep swallows all of the waters of Nun in an attempt to stop the barque and kill Osiris through Ra once more, preventing the daily cycle of the sun. The goddess Isis places a magic spell upon the barque in order to allow it to continue traveling through the regions without the need for water. On the upper register, the enemies of Osiris are punished for their intent to cause him harm, and the lower register contains humanized depictions of the stars following Ra&#x27;s path to the end of the underworld.

Hour 8: Ra has been fully regenerated and the powers of evil have been avoided through the help of the gods. Now, Ra comes across 5 doors that he must command open with his voice, adding to the hardships on this journey. The unnamed gods on the upper and lower registers are seen creating new clothing, again associated with ideas of rebirth and renewal. The solar barque is pulled along by 8 unnamed gods to help Ra reach the surface once more. 

Hour 9: Ra&#x27;s solar barque is pulled by 12 oarsmen in this hour, helping to pull him towards the light of the living world. The three idols present in front of the men are there to help the gods carrying stalks of grain disperse bread and beer to the dead in the underworld. No further explanation is offered in the text as to why this is done, but is likely tied to the ideas of the deceased &#x27;living&#x27; in the underworld, and therefore still require sustenance.

Hour 10: Ra continues his journey, being protected by his 12 oarsmen who now carry weapons to protect against any enemies, but especially against Apep. On the lower register is an image of those who drowned in water being pulled to shore by Horus, the god of the sky (in addition to many other things). This is a comforting image as it was believed in Ancient Egypt that those who did not receive a proper burial could never reach the underworld or eternal life, and so this hour of the &quot;Amduat&quot; shows that this isn&#x27;t the case however, and not all hope is lost for these lost souls.

Hour 11: The eyes of Ra are fully healed as a symbol of his health and rejuvenation. On the lower register, a giant serpent known as the &#x27;World-Encircler&quot; is brought in by a row of 12 unnamed deities. A bright red sun-disk protected by a serpent (similar to how Mehen protects Ra) has appeared on the prow of the boat at this point, showing that the time of Ra&#x27;s journey through the underworld is coming to an end. Horus calls upon a monstrous serpent with the unquenchable fire to destroy the enemies of his father, Osiris, by burning their corpses and cooking their souls.

Hour 12: Finally, the sungod is at the end of the underworld and the end of his journey, having been reborn once again. He takes on the form of Khepri as the morning sun crests on the horizon. He is led out of the underworld by many deities and gods, the giant serpent &#x27;World-Encircler&#x27; joining the parade as well.

Once the deceased finished their journey through the underworld, they arrived at the Hall of Maat. Here they would undergo the Weighing of the Heart ceremony where their purity would be the determining factor in whether they would be allowed to enter the Kingdom of Osiris.

== &quot;Amduat&quot; Tombs ==

Understanding &quot;Amduat&quot; tombs can be just as important as understanding the hours of the &quot;Amduat&quot; as there are instructions at the end of the &quot;Amduat&quot; text on how it should be presented within a tomb. This implies that the physical representation of it is just as important as the pictorial representation in guiding the deceased to the afterlife alongside Ra.

&quot;Amduat&quot; tombs are associated with the beginning of the New Kingdom of Egypt, and became popular with the construction of the Tomb of Thutmose III, who ruled halfway through the Eighteenth Dynasty. Being found in the Valley of the Kings, his tomb follows the architectural tradition of being a subterranean monument, shaped in what Egyptologist Josh Roberson calls a “curved and bent axe” style. Following that style, it can be seen in the corresponding image that Thutmose III&#x27;s tomb contained his burial chamber which was connected to four storage rooms, an antechamber, a well shaft, and three connected corridors leading out to the entrance.

There are many possible reasons for this style growing in popularity, likely tied to the various symbolic interpretations of the rooms found within the tomb. There are no agreed upon descriptions for the purposes of these rooms and what was contained inside of them, with historians like Erik Hornung and Friedrich Abitz attempting to explain them in their respective academic pursuits.

=== The Tomb of Thutmose III ===
As discussed by Historians Catherine Roehrig and Barbara Richter, the architecture of Thutmose III&#x27;s tomb is likely meant to mirror the structure of the underworld as the &quot;Amduat&quot; displays it. Found within the burial chamber of the pharaoh, the &quot;Amduat&quot; was a guide for him to follow through the underworld, as well as a way to achieve rebirth for himself after death. This may be why the structure of the tomb itself slopes downwards and winds around, to form that bent shape, as historians theorize that it may reflect the confusing and labyrinthian structure of the underworld itself. 

It begins by starting on the west side of the room, and ending to the east side of the room in order to mirror the cycle of the sun. The &quot;Amduat&quot; ending on the east side of the room lines up with the sun rising in the east, representing the rebirth and renewal that the pharaoh hoped to achieve at the end of his journey. The hours are out of order on the walls however, with hours 5 and 6 being placed between hours 1 and 12. This may be a representation of a spiral design, as someone who views the &quot;Amduat&quot; in numerical order will have to complete an irregular circle throughout the room, again being associated with ideas of a continual cycle.

Additionally, the rounded corners of the room create an oval shape which has many interpretations: it may represent the continual, circular life cycle of the sun&#x27;s journey, or may line up with the rounded corner edge of the actual illustrated &quot;Amduat&quot; present on the walls. Connections to the oval (or cartouche-shaped) cavern of Sokar in the 6th hour may also be present in the oval burial chamber and sarcophagus of Thutmose III and connect to ideas of rebirth or renewal that the pharaoh wished to achieve for himself. His sarcophagus, found in the center of the burial chamber, is similarly oval-shaped as well, including his name which is within a royal cartouche. 

=== Other Examples of &quot;Amduat&quot; Tombs ===
The vizier to Thutmose III, Useramun, was a rare example of someone not of royal-birth having their tomb in the &quot;Amduat&quot; style. This may be due to many reasons, but shows how exclusive royal tombs were to the pharaoh and his immediate family. It is notable that Useramun&#x27;s tomb only contained the images of hours 3 and 4, not the whole journey of the sun which only adds to the exclusivity of the &quot;Amduat&quot; to royalty in Ancient Egyptian funerary traditions.

Amenhotep II (KV 35) and Amenhotep III (KV 22) both have examples of completed &quot;Amduat&quot; texts within their burial tombs as well, following many of the conventions that Thutmose III began within his tomb.

Later Eighteenth Dynasty tombs strayed away from this approach to follow a more linear design style, being arranged by a single long corridor and straightening out the previously ‘bent axe’ style of earlier pharaohs. The &quot;Amduat&quot; was still present in these tombs, though was not only reserved for the burial chambers, as it was depicted throughout the various parts of the tomb. Additionally, with the rise of the Ramesside Period in the Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt, the &quot;Amduat&quot; began to appear alongside other funerary texts like &quot;The Book of Gates&quot; and &quot;The Book of Caverns&quot; as expansions of the mythos of the Egyptian Underworld.

At the end of the New Kingdom, the &quot;Amduat&quot; seems to have lost its exclusivity, appearing on both coffins and papyri for deceased people of a lower class than royalty or nobility. 

== Gallery ==
==Notes==
==References==
* Forman, Werner and Stephen Quirke. (1996). &quot;Hieroglyphs and the Afterlife in Ancient Egypt&quot;. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. .
* Hornung, Erik; Abt, Theodor (editors): &quot;The Egyptian Amduat. The Book of the Hidden Chamber.&quot; English translation by David Warburton, revised and edited by Erik Hornung and Theodor Abt. Living Human Heritage Publications, Zurich 2007. (Images, hieroglyphs, transcription and English translation).
* &quot;Knowledge for the Afterlife - the Egyptian Amduat - a quest for immortality&quot; (1963), Theodore Abt and Erik Hornung, Living Human Heritage.

==External links==
* The Book of Am-Tuat by Wallis Budge
* The Book of the Hidden Chamber
* list of deities in the &quot;Book of What is in the Netherworld&quot;
* amduat-achilles.de </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2986441" start="33" end="63" title="Ancient Egyptian funerary texts" label="ancient Egyptian funerary text"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="71" end="91" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177819" start="141" end="152" title="Old Kingdom of Egypt" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q645882" start="160" end="173" title="Pyramid Texts" label="Pyramid Texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q232211" start="182" end="207" title="First Intermediate Period of Egypt" label="First Intermediate Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q532105" start="215" end="227" title="Coffin Texts" label="Coffin Texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="394" end="402" title="Pharaoh" label="pharaohs"/>
<link wikidata="Q748151" start="413" end="433" title="Twenty-first Dynasty of Egypt" label="Twenty-first Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="450" end="458" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="503" end="505" title="Ra" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q215940" start="1152" end="1158" title="Khepri" label="Khepri"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="1160" end="1164" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="1170" end="1176" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q871389" start="1400" end="1404" title="Duat" label="Duat"/>
<link wikidata="Q129234" start="1608" end="1618" title="Hatshepsut" label="Hatshepsut"/>
<link wikidata="Q157962" start="1625" end="1635" title="Thutmose I" label="Thutmose I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477526" start="1637" end="1641" title="KV20" label="KV20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2771864" start="1667" end="1671" title="KV38" label="KV38"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533474" start="1690" end="1698" title="Wadi C-4" label="Wadi C-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719144" start="1747" end="1751" title="KV34" label="KV34"/>
<link wikidata="Q157899" start="1765" end="1777" title="Thutmose III" label="Thutmose III"/>
<link wikidata="Q133423" start="1785" end="1804" title="Valley of the Kings" label="Valley of the Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q853611" start="2371" end="2373" title="Egyptian soul" label="Ba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309352" start="2965" end="2974" title="Register (art)" label="registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803736" start="3188" end="3206" title="Gate deities of the underworld" label="guarded by a deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q636041" start="3906" end="3918" title="solar barque" label="solar barque"/>
<link wikidata="Q276563" start="4672" end="4675" title="Nu (mythology)" label="Nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="4755" end="4759" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q170471" start="4953" end="4957" title="Maat" label="Maat"/>
<link wikidata="Q552228" start="6061" end="6066" title="Akhet (hieroglyph and season)" label="akhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442735" start="6207" end="6213" title="scarab (artifact)" label="scarab"/>
<link wikidata="Q319989" start="7951" end="7956" title="Seker" label="Imhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q319989" start="7984" end="7989" title="Seker" label="Sokar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="9518" end="9527" title="Mummy" label="mummiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500615" start="9603" end="9608" title="Mehen" label="Mehen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190511" start="10340" end="10344" title="Apep" label="Apep"/>
<link wikidata="Q84122" start="12015" end="12020" title="Horus" label="Horus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13417" end="13447" title="Ancient Egyptian afterlife beliefs#Judgment of the dead" label="Weighing of the Heart ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q146055" start="14176" end="14194" title="Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Eighteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q117212" start="14938" end="14950" title="Erik Hornung" label="Erik Hornung"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="16896" end="16907" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q224104" start="17023" end="17038" title="Cartouche" label="royal cartouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="17097" end="17103" title="vizier" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q481668" start="17121" end="17129" title="Useramen" label="Useramun"/>
<link wikidata="Q158052" start="17577" end="17589" title="Amenhotep II" label="Amenhotep II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633253" start="17591" end="17596" title="KV35" label="KV 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q42606" start="17602" end="17615" title="Amenhotep III" label="Amenhotep III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480865" start="17617" end="17622" title="WV22" label="KV 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q583501" start="18216" end="18232" title="Ramesside Period" label="Ramesside Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q32137" start="18349" end="18366" title="Book of Gates" label="The Book of Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q853296" start="18387" end="18402" title="Book of Caverns" label="Book of Caverns"/>
<link wikidata="Q117212" start="18844" end="18857" title="Erik Hornung" label="Hornung, Erik"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158538" wikidata="Q313451" url="?curid=158538" title="Evander Holyfield">
<text>Evander Holyfield (born October 19, 1962) is an American former professional boxer who competed between 1984 and 2011. He reigned as the undisputed champion in the cruiserweight division in the late 1980s and at heavyweight in the early 1990s, and was the only boxer in history to win the undisputed championship in two weight classes in the &quot;three-belt era&quot;, a feat later surpassed by Terence Crawford, Naoya Inoue and Oleksandr Usyk, who became two-weight undisputed champions in the four-belt era. Nicknamed &quot;the Real Deal&quot;, Holyfield is the only four-time world heavyweight champion, having held the unified World Boxing Association (WBA), World Boxing Council (WBC), and International Boxing Federation (IBF) titles from 1990 to 1992, the WBA and IBF titles again from 1993 to 1994, the WBA title a third time from 1996 to 1999; the IBF title a third time from 1997 to 1999 and the WBA title for a fourth time from 2000 to 2001.

As an amateur, Holyfield represented the United States at the 1984 Summer Olympics, winning the light heavyweight bronze medal. He turned professional at the age of 21, moving up to cruiserweight in 1985 and winning his first world championship the following year, defeating Dwight Muhammad Qawi for the WBA title. Holyfield then went on to defeat Ricky Parkey and Carlos de León to win the WBC and IBF titles, thus becoming the undisputed cruiserweight champion. He moved up to heavyweight in 1988, later defeating Buster Douglas in 1990 to claim the unified WBA, WBC and IBF heavyweight titles and the undisputed heavyweight championship.

He successfully defended his titles three times, scoring victories over former champions George Foreman and Larry Holmes, before suffering his first professional loss to Riddick Bowe in 1992. Holyfield regained the crown in a rematch one year later, defeating Bowe for the WBA and IBF titles (Bowe having relinquished the WBC title beforehand). Holyfield later lost these titles in an upset against Michael Moorer in 1994.

Holyfield was forced to retire in 1994 upon medical advice, only to return a year later with a clean bill of health. In 1996 he defeated Mike Tyson and reclaimed the WBA title, in what was named by &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine as the Fight of the Year and Upset of the Year. This made Holyfield the first boxer since Muhammad Ali to win a world heavyweight title three times. Holyfield won a 1997 rematch against Tyson, which saw the latter disqualified in round three for biting off part of Holyfield&#x27;s ears. During this reign as champion, he also avenged his loss to Michael Moorer and reclaimed the IBF title.

In 1999 he faced Lennox Lewis in a unification fight for the undisputed WBA, WBC, and IBF titles, which ended in a controversial split draw. Holyfield was defeated in a rematch eight months later. The following year, he defeated John Ruiz for the vacant WBA title, becoming the first boxer in history to win a version of the heavyweight title four times. Holyfield lost a rematch against Ruiz seven months later and faced him for the third time in a draw.

Holyfield retired in 2014, and is ranked number 77 on &quot;The Ring&quot;″s list of 100 greatest punchers of all time and in 2002 named him the 22nd greatest fighter of the past 80 years. He currently ranks No.91 in BoxRec&#x27;s ranking of the greatest pound for pound boxers of all time. &quot;BoxingScene&quot; ranked him the greatest cruiserweight of all time. He is also the first boxer to hold world titles in three different decades, in the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s. In 2015, he was inducted into the International Sports Hall of Fame.

==Early life==
Evander Holyfield was born on October 19, 1962, in the mill town of Atmore, Alabama. The youngest of nine children, he was much younger than his other siblings and was born from a different father. His family later moved to Atlanta, Georgia, where he was raised in the crime-ridden Bowen Homes Housing Projects.

Holyfield describes himself as a physical &quot;late bloomer&quot;: upon graduating from Fulton High School in 1980, he was only tall and weighed only . By age 21, he had grown to and weighed . He grew an additional in his early 20s, finally reaching his adult height of .

==Amateur career==
He began boxing at age seven and won the Boys Club boxing tournament. At 13, he qualified to compete in his first Junior Olympics. By age 15, Holyfield became the Southeastern Regional Champion, winning this tournament and the Best Boxer Award. By 1984 he had a record of 160 wins and 14 losses, with 76 by knockout.

When he was 20 years old, Holyfield represented the U.S. in the 1983 Pan American Games in Caracas, Venezuela, where he won a silver medal after losing to Cuban world champion Pablo Romero. The following year, he was the National Golden Gloves Champion, and won a bronze medal in the 1984 Summer Olympic Games in Los Angeles, California, after a controversial disqualification in the second round of the semi-final against New Zealand&#x27;s Kevin Barry.

==Professional career==
===Light heavyweight===
Holyfield started out professionally as a light heavyweight with a televised win in six rounds over Lionel Byarm at Madison Square Garden on November 15, 1984. On January 20, 1985, he won another six-round decision over Eric Winbush in Atlantic City, New Jersey. On March 13, he knocked out Fred Brown in the first round in Norfolk, Virginia, and on April 20, he knocked out Mark Rivera in two rounds in Corpus Christi, Texas.

===Cruiserweight===

Both he and his next opponent, Tyrone Booze, moved up to the cruiserweight division for their fight on July 20, 1985, in Norfolk, Virginia. Holyfield won an eight-round decision over Booze. He then went on to knock out Rick Myers in the first round on August 29 in his hometown of Atlanta. On October 30 in Atlantic City Holyfield knocked out opponent Jeff Meachem in five rounds, and his last fight for 1985 was against Anthony Davis on December 21 in Virginia Beach, Virginia. He won by knocking out Davis in the fourth round.

He began 1986 with a knockout in three rounds over former world cruiserweight challenger Chisanda Mutti, and proceeded to beat Jessy Shelby and Terry Mims before being given a world title try by the WBA Cruiserweight Champion Dwight Muhammad Qawi. In what was called by The Ring as &quot;the best cruiserweight bout of the 1980s&quot;, Holyfield became world champion by defeating Qawi by a narrow 15 round split decision. He culminated 1986 with a trip to Paris, France, where he beat Mike Brothers by a knockout in three, in a non-title bout.

In 1987, he defended his title against former Olympic teammate and Gold medal winner Henry Tillman, who had beaten Mike Tyson twice as an amateur. He retained his belt, winning by seventh-round knockout, and then went on to unify his WBA belt with the IBF belt held by Ricky Parkey, knocking Parkey out in three rounds. For his next bout, he returned to France, where he retained the title with an eleven-round knockout against former world champion Ossie Ocasio. In his last fight of 1987, he offered Muhammad Qawi a rematch and, this time, he beat Qawi by a knockout in only four rounds.

1988 was another productive year for Holyfield; he started by becoming the first universally recognized World Cruiserweight Champion after defeating the Lineal &amp; WBC Champion Carlos De León at Las Vegas. The fight was stopped after eight rounds.

===Heavyweight===

After that fight, he announced he was moving up in weight to pursue the World Heavyweight Championship held by Tyson. His first fight as a Heavyweight took place on July 16, when he beat former Tyson rival James &quot;Quick&quot; Tillis by a knockout in five, in Lake Tahoe, Nevada (Tillis had gone the distance with Tyson). For his third and final bout of 1988, he beat former Heavyweight Champion Pinklon Thomas, also by knockout, in seven rounds.

Holyfield began 1989 meeting another former Heavyweight Champion, Michael Dokes. This fight was named one of the best fights of the 1980s by Ring magazine, as &quot;best heavyweight bout of the 1980s&quot;. Holyfield won by a knockout in the 10th round, and then he met Brazilian Champion Adilson Rodrigues, who lasted two rounds. His last fight of the 1980s was against Alex Stewart, a hard punching fringe contender. Stewart shocked Holyfield early, with quick, hard punches, but eventually fell in eight.

In 1990, Holyfield beat Seamus McDonagh, knocking him out in four rounds. By this time, Holyfield had been Ring Magazine&#x27;s number-one contender for two years and had yet to receive a shot at Tyson&#x27;s Heavyweight title.

===Undisputed heavyweight champion===

Holyfield had been promised a title shot against Tyson in 1990. Before that fight could occur, in what many consider to be the biggest upset in boxing history, relatively unknown boxer, 29-year-old, 231 lb. Buster Douglas defeated the 23-year-old, 218 lb. Mike Tyson in 10 rounds in Tokyo to become the new undisputed heavyweight champion. Instead of fighting Tyson, Holyfield was Douglas&#x27;s first title defense.

They met on October 25, 1990. Douglas came into the fight at 246 lb. and offered little in the fight against Holyfield, who was in ideal shape at 208 lb. In the third round Douglas tried to start a combination with a big right uppercut. Holyfield countered with a straight right hand and Douglas went down for the count. Holyfield was the new undefeated, undisputed heavyweight champion of the World. At the time of the knockout, Holyfield was ahead on all three judges&#x27; scorecards, all seeing it 20–18 for Holyfield.

In his first defense, he beat former and future world champion George Foreman by unanimous decision. The fight was billed as a &quot;Battle for the Ages&quot;, a reference to the age difference between the young undefeated champion (28 years old) and the much older George Foreman (42 years old). Holyfield weighed in at 208 pounds and Foreman weighed in at 257 pounds. Foreman lost the fight by a unanimous decision, but surprised many by lasting the whole 12 rounds against a much younger opponent, even staggering Holyfield a few times and knocking him off balance in the seventh round.

Then a deal was signed for him to defend his crown against Mike Tyson in November 1991. Tyson delayed the fight, claiming he was injured in training, but was then convicted for the rape of Desiree Washington and sentenced to six years in prison, so the fight did not happen at that time. They fought in 1996 (Holyfield won by a TKO in 11) and a rematch in 1997 (Holyfield won by disqualification in three, after Tyson bit both of his ears).

Holyfield made his next defense in Atlanta against late replacement in Bert Cooper over Francesco Damiani who suffered a foot injury in training days before the fight, Cooper surprised Holyfield with a very good effort. Holyfield scored the first knockdown of the fight against Cooper with a powerful shot to the body, but Cooper returned the favor with a good right hand that sent Holyfield against the ropes; while not an actual knockdown, referee Mills Lane gave Holyfield a standing eight-count. Having suffered the first technical knockdown of his professional career, Holyfield regained his composure quickly and administered a beating that left Cooper still on his feet, but unable to defend himself. Holyfield landed brutal power shots, culminated by repeated vicious uppercuts that snapped Cooper&#x27;s head back. Referee Mills Lane stopped the bout in the seventh.

In his first fight of 1992, he faced 42 year old former world heavyweight champion Larry Holmes, and had just pulled off an upset against Ray Mercer. During the bout, Holyfield suffered the first scar of his career with a gash opening up over his eye, the result of Holmes&#x27; elbow. The fight ended with a unanimous decision in favor of Holyfield.

===Holyfield–Bowe rivalry===

In the beginning of a trilogy of bouts with the 25-year-old Riddick Bowe, who had won a silver medal in the 1988 Olympics, in the super heavyweight division, he suffered his first defeat when Bowe won the undisputed title by a 12-round unanimous decision in Las Vegas. Round ten of that bout was named the &quot;Round of the Year&quot; by &quot;The Ring&quot;. Holyfield was knocked down in round 11. He made the mistake of getting into a slugfest with the younger, bigger and stronger Bowe, leading to his defeat.

He began 1993 by beating Alex Stewart in a rematch, but this time over the 12-round unanimous distance.

Then came the rematch with Bowe on November 6, 1993. In what is considered by many sporting historians as one of the most bizarre moments in boxing&#x27;s history, during round seven the crowd got off their feet and many people started to run for cover and yell. Holyfield took his eyes off Bowe for one moment and then told Bowe to look up to the skies. What they saw was a man in a parachute flying dangerously close to them. The man almost entered the ring, but his parachute had gotten entangled in the lights and he landed on the ropes and apron of the ring, and he was then pulled into the crowd, where he was beaten by members of Bowe&#x27;s entourage. Bowe&#x27;s pregnant wife, Judy, fainted and had to be taken to the hospital from the arena. Twenty minutes later, calm was restored and Holyfield went on to recover his world heavyweight titles with a close 12 round majority decision. The man who parachuted down to the middle of the ring became known as The Fan Man and the fight itself became known as the Fan Man Fight. His victory over Bowe that year helped Holyfield being named as ABC&#x27;s Wide World of Sports Athlete of the Year for 1993.

===Holyfield vs. Moorer, Holyfield vs. Bowe III===

His next fight, April 1994, he met former WBO light heavyweight Michael Moorer, who was attempting to become the first southpaw to become the universally recognised world heavyweight champion. He dropped Moorer in round two, but lost a twelve-round majority decision. When he went to the hospital to have his shoulder checked, he was diagnosed with a heart condition and had to announce his retirement from boxing. It later surfaced that the chairman of the medical advisory board for the Nevada State Athletic Commission believed his condition to be consistent with HGH use.

However, watching a television show hosted by preacher Benny Hinn, Holyfield says he felt his heart heal. He and Hinn subsequently became friends and he became a frequent visitor to Hinn&#x27;s crusades. In fact, during this time, Holyfield went to a Benny Hinn crusade in Philadelphia, had Hinn lay hands on him and gave Hinn a check for $265,000 after he was told he was healed. He then passed his next examination by the boxing commission. Holyfield later stated that his heart was misdiagnosed due to the morphine pumped into his body.

In 1995, Holyfield returned to the ring with a ten-round decision win versus former Olympic gold medalist, Ray Mercer. He was the first man to knock down Mercer.

Holyfield and Bowe then had their rubber match. Holyfield knocked Bowe down with a single left hook but Bowe prevailed by a knockout in eight. Holyfield later claimed that he contracted hepatitis before the fight.

===Holyfield–Tyson rivalry===
====Holyfield vs. Tyson====

In 1996, Holyfield met former world champion Bobby Czyz, beating him by a knockout in six. Afterwards, he and Mike Tyson met.

Tyson had recovered the WBC and WBA Heavyweight Championship and, after being stripped of the WBC title for not facing Lennox Lewis, defended the WBA title against Holyfield on November 9 of that year. Tyson was heavily favored to win, but Holyfield made history by defeating Tyson in an 11th round TKO. This was the third occasion on which Holyfield won the WBA Heavyweight title. However, the fight was not recognized as being for the lineal championship, which was held by George Foreman at the time.

====Holyfield vs. Tyson II: The Bite Fight====
Holyfield&#x27;s rematch with Tyson took place on June 28, 1997. Known as &quot;The Bite Fight&quot;, it went into the annals of boxing as one of the most bizarre fights in history. The infamous incident occurred in the third round, when Tyson bit Holyfield on one of his ears and had two points deducted. Referee Mills Lane decided to disqualify Tyson initially, but after Holyfield and the ringside doctor intervened and said Holyfield could continue, he relented and allowed the fight to go on. Tyson bit Holyfield again, this time on the other ear. Tyson&#x27;s teeth tore off a small section of the top of his opponent&#x27;s ear, known as the helix, and spat that bit of flesh out onto the canvas.

The immediate aftermath of the incident was bedlam. Tyson was disqualified and a melee ensued. Tyson claimed his bites were a retaliation to Holyfield&#x27;s unchecked headbutts, which had cut him in both fights. Others argued that Tyson, knowing he was on his way to another knockout loss, was looking for a way out of the fight. Teddy Atlas, who had briefly trained Tyson seventeen years earlier, predicted that Tyson would get himself disqualified, calling Tyson &quot;a very weak and flawed person&quot;.

===Holyfield vs. Moorer II, Bean===

Next came another rematch, this time against Michael Moorer, who had recovered the IBF&#x27;s world title. Holyfield knocked Moorer to the canvas five times and referee Mitch Halpern stopped the fight between the eighth and ninth rounds under the advice of physician Flip Homansky. Holyfield once again unified his WBA belt with the IBF belt by avenging his defeat by Moorer.

In 1998 Holyfield had only one fight, making a mandatory defense against Vaughn Bean, who was defeated by decision at the Georgia Dome in the champion&#x27;s hometown. For the first time, Holyfield&#x27;s performance called into question whether age was diminishing his ability to continue as a championship fighter.

===Holyfield–Lewis rivalry===
====Holyfield vs. Lewis====
By 1999, the public was clamoring for a unification bout versus the WBC World Champion, Lennox Lewis of the United Kingdom. That bout happened in March of that year. The bout was declared a controversial draw after twelve rounds, where it appeared to most that Lewis dominated the fight. Holyfield claimed his performance was hindered by stomach and leg cramps. Holyfield and Lewis were ordered by the three leading organizations of which they were champions to have an immediate rematch.

====Holyfield vs. Lewis II====
The second time around, in November of that year, Lewis became the Undisputed Champion by beating Holyfield via unanimous decision by three American judges. &quot;I haven&#x27;t felt this good after a fight since I was a cruiserweight,&quot; Holyfield said; &quot;It makes me think I should have fought a little harder against Lennox. Maybe I&#x27;d be sore and sick, but I&#x27;d have the victory.&quot;

===Holyfield–John Ruiz trilogy===

In 2000, Lewis was stripped of the WBA belt for failing to meet lightly regarded Don King fighter John Ruiz, having fought Ruiz&#x27;s conqueror David Tua, and the WBA ordered Holyfield and Ruiz to meet for that organization&#x27;s world title belt. Holyfield and Ruiz began their trilogy in August of that year, with Holyfield making history by winning on a controversial, but unanimous 12-round decision to become the first boxer in history to be the World Heavyweight Champion four times. Holyfield blamed his lackluster performance on a perforated (broken) eardrum.

Seven months later, in March 2001, it was Ruiz&#x27;s turn to make history at Holyfield&#x27;s expense when he surprisingly managed to knock Holyfield down and beat him by a 12-round decision to become the first Hispanic ever to win a Heavyweight title. On December 15 of that year, Holyfield challenged Ruiz for the title, in an attempt to become champion again. The fight was declared a draw and John Ruiz maintained the WBA Championship title.

===Holyfield vs. Byrd===

2002 began as a promising year for Holyfield: in June, he met former World Heavyweight Champion Hasim Rahman, to determine who would face Lewis next. Holyfield was leading on two of the three scorecards when the fight was stopped in the eighth round due to a severe hematoma on Rahman&#x27;s forehead above his left eye that was caused by a headbutt earlier in the fight. Holyfield was ahead, so he was declared the winner by a technical decision.

The IBF decided to strip Lewis of his belt after he didn&#x27;t want to fight Don King-promoted fighter Chris Byrd, instead going after Tyson, and declared that the winner of the fight between Holyfield and former WBO Heavyweight Champion Byrd would be recognized as their Heavyweight Champion. On December 14, 2002, Holyfield once again tried to become the first man ever to be Heavyweight Champion five times when he and Byrd met, but Byrd came out as the winner by a 12-round unanimous decision.

===Consecutive losses, New York suspension===

On October 4, 2003, Holyfield lost to James Toney by TKO when his corner threw in the towel in the ninth round. At age 42, Holyfield returned to the ring to face Larry Donald on November 13, 2004. He lost his third consecutive match in a twelve-round unanimous decision.

In August 2005 it had been reported that the New York State Athletic Commission had banned Evander Holyfield from boxing in New York due to &quot;diminishing skills&quot; despite the fact that Holyfield had passed a battery of medical tests.

===Comeback===

Holyfield was initially criticized for his ongoing comeback; but he was adamant that his losses to Toney and Donald were the result of a shoulder injury, not of old age. Holyfield had looked better in his first four fights since Donald and appeared to have answered the critics who say that he lacked the cutting edge and ability to follow up on crucial openings that he had in his youth.

Holyfield defeated Jeremy Bates by TKO on August 18, 2006, in a 10-round bout at American Airlines Center in Dallas, Texas. Holyfield dominated the fight which was stopped in the second round after he landed roughly twenty consecutive punches on Bates.

Holyfield defeated Fres Oquendo by unanimous decision on November 10, 2006, in San Antonio, Texas. Holyfield knocked Oquendo down in the first minute of the first round and continued to be the aggressor throughout the fight, winning a unanimous decision by scores of 116–111 and 114–113 twice.

On March 17, 2007, Holyfield defeated Vinny Maddalone by TKO when Maddalone&#x27;s corner threw in the towel to save their man from serious injury in the ring.

On June 30, 2007, Holyfield defeated Lou Savarese, knocking the bigger and heavier Savarese down in the fourth and again in the ninth round, en route to a unanimous decision win. This was Holyfield&#x27;s fourth win in ten months, two of them by KO. This victory finally set the stage for Holyfield&#x27;s title fight against Sultan Ibragimov, for the WBO Heavyweight title.

====Holyfield vs. Ibragimov====

On October 13, 2007, Holyfield was defeated by Sultan Ibragimov. Although unable to defy his critics by winning a fifth Heavyweight title, Holyfield refused to be backed up by the young champion and even rattled him in the closing part of the 12th round. The fight was mostly uneventful, however, with neither fighter being truly staggered or knocked down. In most exchanges, Sultan was able to land two punches to Holyfield&#x27;s one. The result was a unanimous decision for Ibragimov, with scores of 118–110 and 117–111 twice.

====Holyfield vs. Valuev====

He told BBC Scotland&#x27;s Sports Weekly &quot;I&#x27;m gonna fight, be the heavyweight champion of the world one more time. Then I&#x27;m gonna write another book and tell everybody how I did it.&quot; On December 20, 2008, he fought, at the Hallenstadion in Zürich, Switzerland, the WBA Heavyweight Champion Nikolai Valuev for a paycheck of $600,000, the lowest amount he has ever received for a championship fight. At the weigh-in, he weighed 214 pounds, Valuev weighed a career low of 310 pounds.

Valuev defeated Holyfield by a highly controversial majority decision after a relatively uneventful bout. One judge scored the bout a draw 114–114, while the others had Valuev winning 116–112 and 115–114. Many analysts were outraged at the decision, thinking Holyfield had clearly won. There was talk of a rematch in 2009.

The WBA did their own investigation into the controversial decision; &quot;As the World Boxing Association (WBA) always cares about and respects the fans&#x27; and the media&#x27;s opinion, the Championship Committee has ordered a panel of judges to review the tape of the fight between Nikolai Valuev and Evander Holyfield, for the WBA heavyweight title&quot; read a statement from the WBA. The organization also expressed that they &quot;will give a decision accordingly in the following weeks.&quot; Many speculated that an immediate rematch would be the most likely scenario, but this never materialised. Valuev lost the WBA title in his next fight against British boxer David Haye.

===Holyfield vs. Botha===
After the loss to Valuev, Holyfield took a period of inactivity. He reportedly agreed to fight South African boxer Francois Botha on January 16, 2010; it was agreed that the venue for the fight would be the Nelson Mandela Memorial Stadium in Kampala, Uganda. A few weeks before the fight, it was revealed that the bout would be postponed to February 20, 2010. The match was put in jeopardy due to economic disagreements but was later confirmed to be on April 10, 2010, at the Thomas &amp; Mack Center in Las Vegas. When asked about his upcoming bout, the four-time world heavyweight champion said: &quot;I&#x27;ve been hearing for a while that I can&#x27;t do it. All it does is light a fire under me to prove people wrong.&quot; He added: &quot;I can still fight. I don&#x27;t want to leave until I&#x27;ve become the undisputed heavyweight champion one more time. That&#x27;s been my goal the entire time.&quot; The American boxer scored an eighth-round knockout of Botha to win the vacant World Boxing Federation (WBF) Heavyweight title.

Holyfield started slowly as usual in the early going. Botha held and hit Holyfield, and took the control of the fight for the first three rounds. However, the South African could not slow down Holyfield, though he did hurt him, and the American boxer slowly began to punch him more to take control of the bout in the later rounds. In the seventh round Holyfield stunned Botha and knocked him down in the eighth round. Though he beat the count, Holyfield cornered him and landed many punches that forced the referee Russell Mora to stop the bout. At the time of the stoppage, Holyfield was behind on two judges&#x27; cards, 67–66, while the third judge had it 69–64 for the American boxer. Only 3,127 attended the fight.

===Holyfield vs. Williams===
After the Botha fight, Holyfield said he was interested in fighting either Vitali Klitschko, the current WBC champion, or his younger brother Wladimir Klitschko. Holyfield&#x27;s next bout against Sherman &quot;The Tank&quot; Williams on November 5, 2010, at Joe Louis Arena in Detroit, Michigan, was then postponed twice before finally being rescheduled to January 22, 2011, and moved to The Greenbrier in White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia. Holyfield started the bout slowly and in the second round, he was cut in the left eye following an accidental clash of heads. In round three as he took several combinations. After the end of the round, Holyfield told his corner that he was unable to see due to the cut. Consequently, the bout was ruled a no contest.

The WBC had allegedly agreed to match Holyfield up with Vitali Klitschko after fights with Williams and Nielsen.

===Holyfield vs. Nielsen===
A fight with Brian Nielsen, the most popular Danish heavyweight in that country&#x27;s history, was scheduled for March 5, 2011, in Denmark, but needed to be postponed to May 7, 2011, due to a cut Holyfield received in the Williams fight.

The official weigh-in was held on Friday night in Denmark, with Holyfield at 225 pounds, while his opponent Nielsen, with his shorts on, weighed 238 pounds. Nielsen had never been this light in his career. Nielsen had said that although it would be mighty difficult for him to beat Holyfield, he promised it would not be a one sided affair. Holyfield said that if he won he would move to next level and challenge for major titles.

Holyfield started the fight aggressively, pressing the 46-year-old Nielsen into the ropes and landing several hard jabs and hooks, knocking him down in the 3rd round. Despite getting a swollen eye in the 4th round, Nielsen kept on clowning to provoke Holyfield throughout the bout, prompting his trainer, Paul Duvill, to beg him to stop fooling around and focus on Holyfield. In round 10, Nielsen pushed a tired-looking Holyfield into the ropes with a series of combinations, before Holyfield turned it around. Holyfield pushed Nielsen into a corner and battered him with combinations until the referee stopped the contest.

===Retirement===
After the Nielsen fight, Holyfield attempted to land a shot at a world heavyweight title (all major belts were held by Wladimir and Vitali Klitschko, at that time). However, after more than a year of trying to land this fight, Yahoo News reported his intention to retire in 2012, with Holyfield stating, &quot;The game&#x27;s been good to me and I hope I&#x27;ve been good to the game. ... I&#x27;m 50 years old (on Friday) and I&#x27;ve pretty much did everything that I wanted to do in boxing.&quot; Later that same month, however, Holyfield seemed to change his mind, saying that he still considers himself a &quot;serious contender.&quot; Unable to secure a title shot, his career went into limbo for several months. However, In June 2014, after not fighting in over three years, Holyfield announced his final retirement. He is currently a boxing adviser to heavyweight prospect Zhang Zhilei.

==Exhibition bouts==

In 2015, Evander Holyfield and Mitt Romney participated in a friendly exhibition bout for charity; the event took place in Utah to help the organization CharityVision.

===Holyfield vs. Belfort===

On April 16, 2021, it was announced that Holyfield would return to the ring on June 5, 2021, to face Kevin McBride (most widely known for defeating former undisputed heavyweight champion Mike Tyson) in an exhibition bout on the undercard of Teófimo López vs. George Kambosos Jr. However, after the López vs. Kambosos card was postponed multiple times, the fight against McBride ultimately did not materialize, leading Holyfield to file a demand for arbitration against Triller.

On September 3, 2021, it was reported that Oscar De La Hoya, who had been slated to headline a Triller PPV show against Vitor Belfort on September 11, had been hospitalized with COVID-19, and that Holyfield would be stepping in for De La Hoya. The event was originally scheduled to take place in California, however, the California State Athletic Commission refused to sanction a bout with Holyfield in any capacity–exhibition or professional. The bout was subsequently moved to Florida after the Florida State Athletic Commission agreed to sanction the bout as an exhibition. Holyfield lost via first-round technical knockout.

==Personal life==

Holyfield is the younger brother of actor and dancer, Bernard Holyfield, and currently lives and trains in Fayette County, Georgia.

One of his sons, Evan, followed in his father&#x27;s footsteps and became a professional boxer. Another son, Elijah, played football for the Cincinnati Bengals.

He is a born-again Christian.

He founded Real Deal Records which signed the briefly successful group Exhale.

In late 2007 and early 2008, Holyfield was among a number of celebrities to be doing television ads for the restaurant chain Zaxby&#x27;s.

In 2017, a statue of Evander Holyfield designed by sculptor Brian Hanlon was commissioned by the city of Atlanta for installation in Downtown Atlanta.

===Advertising===
By 1992, Holyfield was already a household name, endorsing multiple products on television, such as Coca-Cola and Diet Coke. He also had a video game released for the Genesis and Game Gear: &quot;Evander Holyfield&#x27;s Real Deal Boxing&quot;.

In 1996 Holyfield was given the opportunity to carry the Olympic torch when it was on its way to his hometown of Atlanta for that year&#x27;s Olympics.

On September 22, 2007, Holyfield released the Real Deal Grill cooking appliance via TV infomercials. The Real Deal Grill is manufactured by Cirtran Corp.

===Celebrity appearances===
Holyfield&#x27;s popularity has led to numerous television appearances for the boxer. His first television show appearance was the Christmas special of the &quot;Fresh Prince of Bel-Air&quot; in 1990, playing himself. Other television appearances over the years included &quot;Home Improvement&quot;, &quot;Living Single&quot;, &quot;New York Undercover&quot;, and &quot;&quot;.

Holyfield had minor roles in three movies during the 1990s, &quot;Blood Salvage&quot; (1990, which he also produced), &quot;Necessary Roughness&quot; (1991), and &quot;Summer of Sam&quot; (1999). He made a guest appearance on Nickelodeon&#x27;s game show &quot;Nickelodeon Guts&quot; during its third season in 1994.

He appeared once in an episode of children animated series &quot;Phineas and Ferb&quot;. In the episode, he is an animated character but the producers wanted to make the most of Holyfield&#x27;s ear, so his animated character was only given half an ear.

In 2005, Holyfield came in fifth place on ABC&#x27;s &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot; with his partner Edyta Sliwinska. He also made an appearance on the original BBC Strictly Come Dancing &quot;Champion of Champions&quot; showdown, which featured the final four teams from the 2005 edition of the British series, plus two celebrities from spinoff versions, paired with British professional dancers, one featuring Holyfield paired with Karen Hardy, and Rachel Hunter paired with Brendan Cole.

On August 13, 2007, Holyfield was confirmed to participate in a boxing match at World Wrestling Entertainment&#x27;s &quot;Saturday Night&#x27;s Main Event XXXV&quot; against Matt Hardy. He replaced Montel Vontavious Porter, who had to pull out after being legitimately diagnosed with a heart condition that was not part of a storyline.

Holyfield appeared as himself in the 2011 remake of &quot;Arthur&quot;.

On January 3, 2014, Holyfield became the 12th housemate to enter the 13th series of &quot;Celebrity Big Brother (UK)&quot;. On January 6, 2014, he was reprimanded by the show after saying in a conversation with another housemate that gayness is abnormal and can be fixed. On January 10, 2014, he became the first housemate to be evicted.

In May 2016, Holyfield entered the Argentine dancing reality show &quot;Bailando 2016&quot;.

In 2019, Holyfield appeared as part of the Carolina Hurricanes NHL team&#x27;s &quot;Storm Surge&quot; celebration, in which he pretended to knock out Hurricanes player Jordan Martinook at center ice. Recordings of Holyfield supporting the Hurricanes occasionally appeared on the team&#x27;s scoreboard for the remainder of that season and in subsequent years.

===Financial difficulties===
In June 2008 a legal notice was placed by Washington Mutual Bank stating that Holyfield&#x27;s $10 million, , 109-room, 17-bathroom suburban Atlanta estate would be auctioned off on July 1, 2008, due to foreclosure, shortly before that bank&#x27;s insolvency. Rapper Rick Ross ended up acquiring the house. Adding to his financial problems, Toi Irvin, mother of his then 10-year-old son, filed suit for non-payment of two months child support (he was paying $3,000 per month for this child). A Utah landscaping firm also went to court seeking $550,000 in unpaid debt for services. His fortune was drained by frivolous spending, multiple failed business ventures, constant child support payments, and his three divorces, among other things.

In 2012 &quot;The Independent&quot; described Holyfield as &quot;flat broke and bankrupt&quot; despite having earned £350 million (US$513 million) over his boxing career.

As of 2019, Holyfield was earning about $1.2 million a year, mostly through personal appearances.

===Allegations of steroid and HGH use===
On February 28, 2007, Holyfield was anonymously linked to Applied Pharmacy Services, a pharmacy in Alabama that was under investigation for supplying athletes with illegal steroids and human growth hormone (HGH). He denied ever using performance enhancers.

Holyfield&#x27;s name does not appear in the law enforcement documents reviewed. However, a patient by the name of &quot;Evan Fields&quot; caught investigators&#x27; attention. &quot;Fields&quot; shares the same birth date as Holyfield, October 19, 1962. The listed address for &quot;Fields&quot; was 794 Evander, Fairfield, Ga. 30213. Holyfield has a very similar address. When the phone number that, according to the documents, was associated with the &quot;Fields&quot; prescription, was dialed, Holyfield answered.

On March 10, 2007, Holyfield made a public announcement that he would be pursuing his own investigation into the steroid claims in order to clear his name.

Holyfield was again linked to HGH in September 2007, when his name came up following a raid of Signature Pharmacy in Orlando, Florida.
Signature Pharmacy was under investigation for illegally supplying several professional athletes with steroids and HGH.

==Professional boxing record==

==Exhibition boxing record==

==Titles in boxing==
===Major titles===
* WBA cruiserweight champion (200 lbs)
* WBC cruiserweight champion (200 lbs)
* IBF cruiserweight champion (200 lbs)
* WBA heavyweight champion (200+ lbs) (4×)
* WBC heavyweight champion (200+ lbs)
* IBF heavyweight champion (200+ lbs) (3×)

===Minor titles===
* WBF heavyweight champion (200+ lbs)

===Regional/International titles===
*WBC Continental Americas heavyweight champion (200+ lbs)
* USBA heavyweight champion (200+ lbs)

==Pay-per-view bouts==
==See also==
*List of cruiserweight boxing champions
*List of heavyweight boxing champions
*List of WBA world champions
*List of WBC world champions
*List of IBF world champions
*List of undisputed boxing champions

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*
*Evander Holyfield profile at Cyber Boxing Zone
*Boxing Hall of Fame
*ESPN.com
*
*Article about Holyfield vs. Ibragimov at Yahoo Sports</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q313451" start="0" end="17" title="Evander Holyfield" label="Evander Holyfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="64" end="82" title="professional boxer" label="professional boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918606" start="137" end="156" title="undisputed championship (boxing)" label="undisputed champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q867600" start="164" end="177" title="cruiserweight (boxing)" label="cruiserweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q281678" start="212" end="223" title="heavyweight" label="heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326107" start="320" end="334" title="weight class (boxing)" label="weight classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701880" start="396" end="412" title="Terence Crawford" label="Terence Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372978" start="414" end="425" title="Naoya Inoue" label="Naoya Inoue"/>
<link wikidata="Q938027" start="430" end="444" title="Oleksandr Usyk" label="Oleksandr Usyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q313451" start="527" end="540" title="Evander Holyfield" label="the Real Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918606" start="624" end="631" title="unified championship (boxing)" label="unified"/>
<link wikidata="Q725676" start="632" end="656" title="World Boxing Association" label="World Boxing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="664" end="684" title="World Boxing Council" label="World Boxing Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q742944" start="696" end="727" title="International Boxing Federation" label="International Boxing Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573533" start="961" end="968" title="amateur boxing" label="amateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q252167" start="1017" end="1037" title="Boxing at the 1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004748" start="1051" end="1068" title="light heavyweight" label="light heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268500" start="1230" end="1250" title="Dwight Muhammad Qawi" label="Dwight Muhammad Qawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979934" start="1303" end="1315" title="Ricky Parkey" label="Ricky Parkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042851" start="1320" end="1334" title="Carlos de León" label="Carlos de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q536007" start="1471" end="1485" title="Buster Douglas" label="Buster Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q213919" start="1686" end="1700" title="George Foreman" label="George Foreman"/>
<link wikidata="Q370932" start="1705" end="1717" title="Larry Holmes" label="Larry Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q708185" start="1767" end="1779" title="Riddick Bowe" label="Riddick Bowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q732013" start="1996" end="2010" title="Michael Moorer" label="Michael Moorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861808" start="2149" end="2157" title="Mike Tyson vs. Evander Holyfield" label="defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="2158" end="2168" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="2225" end="2233" title="The Ring (magazine)" label="The Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q864793" start="2256" end="2273" title="The Ring magazine Fight of the Year" label="Fight of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394649" start="2278" end="2295" title="The Ring magazine Upset of the Year" label="Upset of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="2339" end="2351" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887012" start="2414" end="2440" title="Evander Holyfield vs. Mike Tyson II" label="1997 rematch against Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q295328" start="2658" end="2670" title="Lennox Lewis" label="Lennox Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q738706" start="2870" end="2879" title="John Ruiz" label="John Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q895505" start="3315" end="3321" title="BoxRec" label="BoxRec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636859" start="3353" end="3368" title="pound for pound" label="pound for pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064012" start="3605" end="3638" title="International Sports Hall of Fame" label="International Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q79683" start="3724" end="3739" title="Atmore, Alabama" label="Atmore, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="3880" end="3896" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566058" start="4058" end="4076" title="South Atlanta High School" label="Fulton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922958" start="4644" end="4667" title="Boxing at the 1983 Pan American Games" label="1983 Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="4671" end="4689" title="Caracas, Venezuela" label="Caracas, Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922958" start="4706" end="4718" title="Boxing at the 1983 Pan American Games" label="silver medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227648" start="4756" end="4768" title="Pablo Romero" label="Pablo Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="4869" end="4889" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="4893" end="4916" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740080" start="5022" end="5033" title="Kevin Barry (boxer)" label="Kevin Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004748" start="5126" end="5143" title="light heavyweight" label="light heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979960" start="5564" end="5576" title="Tyrone Booze" label="Tyrone Booze"/>
<link wikidata="Q867600" start="5594" end="5607" title="Cruiserweight (boxing)" label="cruiserweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="5654" end="5671" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="5814" end="5821" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="5840" end="5853" title="Atlantic City" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="5986" end="6010" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="6084" end="6092" title="knockout" label="knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q725676" start="6262" end="6265" title="World Boxing Association" label="WBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268500" start="6289" end="6309" title="Dwight Muhammad Qawi" label="Dwight Muhammad Qawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="6333" end="6341" title="The Ring (magazine)" label="The Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="6520" end="6533" title="Paris, France" label="Paris, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607318" start="6694" end="6707" title="Henry Tillman" label="Henry Tillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="6724" end="6734" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q742944" start="6861" end="6864" title="International Boxing Federation" label="IBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979934" start="6878" end="6890" title="Ricky Parkey" label="Ricky Parkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357357" start="7059" end="7071" title="Ossie Ocasio" label="Ossie Ocasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q886814" start="7353" end="7359" title="Lineal championship" label="Lineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="7366" end="7369" title="World Boxing Council" label="WBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042851" start="7379" end="7393" title="Carlos De León" label="Carlos De León"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="7397" end="7406" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q331059" start="7676" end="7706" title="James &amp;quot;Quick&amp;quot; Tillis" label="James &amp;quot;Quick&amp;quot; Tillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q169962" start="7733" end="7751" title="Lake Tahoe, Nevada" label="Lake Tahoe, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425707" start="7869" end="7883" title="Pinklon Thomas" label="Pinklon Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q961948" start="7987" end="8000" title="Michael Dokes" label="Michael Dokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q873625" start="8191" end="8200" title="Brazilians" label="Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154987" start="8210" end="8227" title="Adilson Rodrigues" label="Adilson Rodrigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631862" start="8292" end="8304" title="Alex Stewart (boxer)" label="Alex Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440765" start="8454" end="8469" title="Seamus McDonagh (boxer)" label="Seamus McDonagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q536007" start="8905" end="8919" title="Buster Douglas" label="Buster Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="8954" end="8964" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861804" start="8968" end="8986" title="Mike Tyson vs. Buster Douglas" label="10 rounds in Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213919" start="9703" end="9717" title="George Foreman" label="George Foreman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="10290" end="10300" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="10420" end="10438" title="Desiree Washington" label="Desiree Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q344959" start="10744" end="10755" title="Bert Cooper" label="Bert Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q517835" start="10761" end="10778" title="Francesco Damiani" label="Francesco Damiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q370932" start="11633" end="11645" title="Larry Holmes" label="Larry Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q532540" start="11688" end="11698" title="Ray Mercer" label="Ray Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q708185" start="11992" end="12004" title="Riddick Bowe" label="Riddick Bowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139782" start="12926" end="12946" title="James Miller (parachutist)" label="a man in a parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139782" start="13519" end="13530" title="Fan Man" label="The Fan Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="13651" end="13654" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567942" start="13662" end="13682" title="Wide World of Sports (U.S. TV series)" label="Wide World of Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q830940" start="13808" end="13811" title="World Boxing Organization" label="WBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q732013" start="13830" end="13844" title="Michael Moorer" label="Michael Moorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11325525" start="14255" end="14287" title="Nevada State Athletic Commission" label="Nevada State Athletic Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="14333" end="14336" title="HGH" label="HGH"/>
<link wikidata="Q377841" start="14398" end="14408" title="Benny Hinn" label="Benny Hinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q532540" start="14991" end="15001" title="Ray Mercer" label="Ray Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="15233" end="15242" title="hepatitis" label="hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q727228" start="15366" end="15376" title="Bobby Czyz" label="Bobby Czyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="15431" end="15441" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q295328" start="15567" end="15579" title="Lennox Lewis" label="Lennox Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861808" start="15714" end="15729" title="Tyson-Holyfield I" label="defeating Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="15747" end="15750" title="technical knockout" label="TKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q886814" start="15885" end="15904" title="lineal championship" label="lineal championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q213919" start="15924" end="15938" title="George Foreman" label="George Foreman"/>
<link wikidata="Q282532" start="16649" end="16654" title="Helix (ear)" label="helix"/>
<link wikidata="Q370150" start="16873" end="16881" title="headbutt" label="headbutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q980488" start="17036" end="17047" title="Teddy Atlas" label="Teddy Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q96391787" start="17676" end="17693" title="mandatory challenger" label="mandatory defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511473" start="17702" end="17713" title="Vaughn Bean" label="Vaughn Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058931" start="17751" end="17763" title="Georgia Dome" label="Georgia Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q295328" start="18093" end="18105" title="Lennox Lewis" label="Lennox Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="18113" end="18127" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q738706" start="19065" end="19074" title="John Ruiz" label="John Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q708558" start="19112" end="19121" title="David Tua" label="David Tua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="19750" end="19758" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q503972" start="20108" end="20120" title="Hasim Rahman" label="Hasim Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q468787" start="20278" end="20286" title="hematoma" label="hematoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q963043" start="20565" end="20575" title="Chris Byrd" label="Chris Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q535572" start="21046" end="21057" title="James Toney" label="James Toney"/>
<link wikidata="Q324396" start="21170" end="21182" title="Larry Donald" label="Larry Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992437" start="21325" end="21359" title="New York State Athletic Commission" label="New York State Athletic Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="21404" end="21412" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11724251" start="21948" end="21960" title="Jeremy Bates (boxer)" label="Jeremy Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q463345" start="22010" end="22034" title="American Airlines Center" label="American Airlines Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="22038" end="22044" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="22046" end="22051" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q327443" start="22202" end="22214" title="Fres Oquendo" label="Fres Oquendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="22262" end="22280" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274270" start="22516" end="22531" title="Vinny Maddalone" label="Vinny Maddalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q707139" start="22676" end="22688" title="Lou Savarese" label="Lou Savarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q534393" start="22965" end="22981" title="Sultan Ibragimov" label="Sultan Ibragimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q681822" start="23617" end="23629" title="BBC Scotland" label="BBC Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q666984" start="23853" end="23866" title="Hallenstadion" label="Hallenstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="23870" end="23876" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="23878" end="23889" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q508929" start="23920" end="23934" title="Nikolai Valuev" label="Nikolai Valuev"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="25097" end="25104" title="Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q312649" start="25111" end="25121" title="David Haye" label="David Haye"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25245" end="25258" title="Sport in South Africa#Boxing" label="South African"/>
<link wikidata="Q725194" start="25265" end="25279" title="Francois Botha" label="Francois Botha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118193" start="25357" end="25388" title="National Stadium (Uganda)" label="Nelson Mandela Memorial Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894" start="25392" end="25399" title="Kampala" label="Kampala"/>
<link wikidata="Q686525" start="25626" end="25650" title="Thomas &amp;amp; Mack Center" label="Thomas &amp;amp; Mack Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="25654" end="25663" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q31919" start="27017" end="27033" title="Vitali Klitschko" label="Vitali Klitschko"/>
<link wikidata="Q18797" start="27084" end="27102" title="Wladimir Klitschko" label="Wladimir Klitschko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278421" start="27139" end="27176" title="Sherman Williams (boxer)" label="Sherman &amp;quot;The Tank&amp;quot; Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q168579" start="27201" end="27216" title="Joe Louis Arena" label="Joe Louis Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="27220" end="27227" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142376" start="27692" end="27702" title="No contest (boxing)" label="no contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="27709" end="27712" title="World Boxing Council" label="WBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q31919" start="27761" end="27777" title="Vitali Klitschko" label="Vitali Klitschko"/>
<link wikidata="Q912867" start="27860" end="27873" title="Brian Nielsen (boxer)" label="Brian Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q197346" start="30044" end="30056" title="Zhang Zhilei" label="Zhang Zhilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="30112" end="30123" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q780104" start="30380" end="30393" title="Kevin McBride" label="Kevin McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="30466" end="30476" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q106688198" start="30520" end="30557" title="Teófimo López vs. George Kambosos Jr." label="Teófimo López vs. George Kambosos Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q207946" start="30728" end="30739" title="arbitration" label="arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q98382038" start="30748" end="30755" title="Triller (app)" label="Triller"/>
<link wikidata="Q293534" start="30801" end="30817" title="Oscar De La Hoya" label="Oscar De La Hoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q458716" start="30878" end="30891" title="Vitor Belfort" label="Vitor Belfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="30936" end="30944" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021008" start="31079" end="31115" title="California State Athletic Commission" label="California State Athletic Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q501115" start="31513" end="31527" title="Fayette County, Georgia" label="Fayette County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="31529" end="31536" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106823779" start="31556" end="31560" title="Evan Holyfield" label="Evan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60675850" start="31648" end="31654" title="Elijah Holyfield" label="Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q223511" start="31680" end="31698" title="Cincinnati Bengals" label="Cincinnati Bengals"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="31709" end="31729" title="Born again Christianity" label="born-again Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300884" start="31743" end="31760" title="Real Deal Records" label="Real Deal Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067525" start="31937" end="31949" title="Zaxby&amp;#x27;s" label="Zaxby&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q104632244" start="31963" end="31990" title="statue of Evander Holyfield" label="statue of Evander Holyfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729617" start="32012" end="32024" title="Brian Hanlon" label="Brian Hanlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303356" start="32085" end="32101" title="Downtown Atlanta" label="Downtown Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="32222" end="32231" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815345" start="32236" end="32245" title="Diet Coke" label="Diet Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="32261" end="32271" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="32289" end="32296" title="Sega Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="32301" end="32310" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061334" start="32318" end="32359" title="Evander Holyfield&amp;#x27;s Real Deal Boxing" label="Evander Holyfield&amp;#x27;s Real Deal Boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170320" start="32425" end="32438" title="Olympic torch" label="Olympic torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q309063" start="32866" end="32889" title="Fresh Prince of Bel-Air" label="Fresh Prince of Bel-Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337212" start="32981" end="32997" title="Home Improvement (TV series)" label="Home Improvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835569" start="33011" end="33024" title="Living Single" label="Living Single"/>
<link wikidata="Q39719" start="33038" end="33057" title="New York Undercover" label="New York Undercover"/>
<link wikidata="Q676500" start="33208" end="33227" title="Necessary Roughness (film)" label="Necessary Roughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150713" start="33252" end="33265" title="Summer of Sam" label="Summer of Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="33310" end="33321" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="33329" end="33338" title="game show" label="game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028377" start="33345" end="33361" title="Nickelodeon Guts" label="Nickelodeon Guts"/>
<link wikidata="Q217679" start="33467" end="33483" title="Phineas and Ferb" label="Phineas and Ferb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674710" start="33716" end="33738" title="Dancing with the Stars (U.S. TV series)" label="Dancing with the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346982" start="33762" end="33777" title="Edyta Sliwinska" label="Edyta Sliwinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="33826" end="33847" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="34233" end="34262" title="World Wrestling Entertainment" label="World Wrestling Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783207" start="34276" end="34313" title="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event XXXV" label="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event XXXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q26621" start="34328" end="34338" title="Matt Hardy" label="Matt Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44638" start="34352" end="34376" title="Montel Vontavious Porter" label="Montel Vontavious Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q708306" start="34533" end="34539" title="Arthur (2011 film)" label="remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q627438" start="34549" end="34555" title="Arthur (1981 film)" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956260" start="34633" end="34644" title="Celebrity Big Brother (British series 13)" label="13th series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057679" start="34654" end="34680" title="Celebrity Big Brother (British TV series)" label="Celebrity Big Brother (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24276544" start="34975" end="34988" title="Bailando 2016" label="Bailando 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="35040" end="35059" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="35060" end="35063" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229653" start="35166" end="35182" title="Jordan Martinook" label="Jordan Martinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q926203" start="35430" end="35452" title="Washington Mutual Bank" label="Washington Mutual Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q231710" start="35591" end="35602" title="foreclosure" label="foreclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q297831" start="35655" end="35664" title="Rick Ross" label="Rick Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="36143" end="36158" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="36626" end="36646" title="Growth hormone" label="human growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37736" end="37762" title="list of WBA world champions#Cruiserweight" label="WBA cruiserweight champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37775" end="37801" title="list of WBC world champions#Cruiserweight" label="WBC cruiserweight champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37814" end="37840" title="list of IBF world champions#Cruiserweight" label="IBF cruiserweight champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37853" end="37877" title="list of WBA world champions#Heavyweight" label="WBA heavyweight champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37896" end="37920" title="list of WBC world champions#Heavyweight" label="WBC heavyweight champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37934" end="37958" title="list of IBF world champions#Heavyweight" label="IBF heavyweight champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23902199" start="37997" end="38000" title="World Boxing Federation (organization)" label="WBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q281678" start="38001" end="38012" title="heavyweight" label="heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="38071" end="38074" title="World Boxing Council" label="WBC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38130" end="38134" title="International Boxing Federation#History" label="USBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980548" start="38205" end="38243" title="List of cruiserweight boxing champions" label="List of cruiserweight boxing champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570736" start="38245" end="38281" title="List of heavyweight boxing champions" label="List of heavyweight boxing champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837705" start="38283" end="38310" title="List of WBA world champions" label="List of WBA world champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837719" start="38312" end="38339" title="List of WBC world champions" label="List of WBC world champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717439" start="38341" end="38368" title="List of IBF world champions" label="List of IBF world champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354610" start="38370" end="38405" title="List of undisputed boxing champions" label="List of undisputed boxing champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151959" start="38576" end="38588" title="Yahoo Sports" label="Yahoo Sports"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158539" wikidata="Q1003839" url="?curid=158539" title="Fremen">
<text>The Fremen are a group of people in the fictional &quot;Dune&quot; universe created by Frank Herbert. First appearing in the 1965 novel &quot;Dune&quot;, the Fremen inhabit the desert planet Arrakis (also known as Dune), which is the sole known source in the universe of the all-important drug melange. Long overlooked by the rest of the Imperium and considered backward savages, they are an extremely hardy people and exist in large numbers. The Fremen had come to the planet thousands of years before the events of the novel as the Zensunni Wanderers, a religious sect in retreat. As humans &quot;in extremis&quot;, over time they adapted their culture and way of life to survive and thrive in the incredibly harsh conditions of Arrakis. The Fremen are distinguished by their fierce fighting abilities and adeptness at survival in these conditions. With water being a rare commodity on the planet, their culture revolves around its preservation and conservation. Herbert based Fremen culture, in part, on the desert-dwelling Bedouin and San People.

==Origins==
&quot;Dune&quot; was inspired by Herbert&#x27;s research for a potential article about the United States Department of Agriculture&#x27;s attempt to use poverty grasses to stabilize the Oregon Dunes in Florence, Oregon. Herbert learned that the moving dunes could &quot;swallow whole cities, lakes, rivers, highways.&quot; He said that in studying sand dunes, we must analyze the &quot;black foot (people) of the Kalahari and how they utilize every drop of water. You can&#x27;t just stop with the people who are living in this type of environment: you have to go on to how the environment works on the people and how they work on their environment.&quot; Herbert based Fremen culture, in part, on the desert-dwelling Bedouin and San People.

In an early, alternate &quot;Dune&quot; outline by Frank Herbert called &quot;Spice Planet&quot;, the Fremen are called the &quot;Free Men&quot;. The Free Men were convicts who had been transported to &quot;Duneworld&quot; to work for the spice operation of the &quot;Hoskanners&quot; in exchange for a reduction in their sentence.

==Plot==
In &quot;Dune&quot;, Duke Leto Atreides, his Bene Gesserit concubine Lady Jessica, and their son Paul arrive on Arrakis to take control of melange mining operations there. The mysterious Fremen housekeeper at the palace of Arrakeen is known as the Shadout Mapes, and when Paul saves her life from a deadly hunter-seeker intended to kill him, Mapes warns of a traitor in the Atreides household. She is killed by that same traitor, Suk doctor Wellington Yueh, as the Harkonnens attack. Leto is killed, and Paul and Jessica flee into the deep desert and find shelter with the Fremen of Sietch Tabr. Paul is immediately challenged by the Fremen warrior Jamis, and when he kills Jamis in a ritual fight to the death, Paul is faced with the Fremen custom of taking responsibility for Jamis&#x27;s wife Harah and her children. A key to Fremen survival in the harsh conditions of Arrakis is their ritualistic conservation of water. Paul rises as a leader among the Fremen, learning their ways while he and Jessica train them in the Bene Gesserit weirding way fighting discipline. Paul also becomes close to Chani, the daughter of Imperial Planetologist Liet-Kynes and his Fremen wife. Harah tries to explain to the superstitious and wary Fremen the unique nature of Paul&#x27;s younger sister Alia, who was changed in the womb as Jessica underwent a Fremen/Bene Gesserit ritual to replace the Fremen Reverend Mother Ramallo. Paul leads the Fremen to take back Arrakis from the Harkonnens and Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV, placing himself on the throne.

In &quot;Dune Messiah&quot; (1969), a religion has arisen around Paul, and a jihad is being fought in his name across the universe. Korba, one of the Fedaykin death commandos in &quot;Dune&quot;, has become one of the chief priests of the religion of Muad&#x27;Dib. Another Fedaykin, Farok, is one of many Fremen disillusioned by the changes Paul&#x27;s regime brings to their culture, and he joins the conspiracy to unseat Paul initiated by the Spacing Guild, Tleilaxu, and Bene Gesserit. Lichna, the daughter of Paul&#x27;s trusted Fedaykin Otheym, is killed and impersonated by the Tleilaxu Face Dancer Scytale as a means to infiltrate Paul&#x27;s household, which ultimately fails. Chani dies giving birth to Paul&#x27;s twin heirs, Leto II and Ghanima, and a blinded Paul follows Fremen tradition and walks into the desert to die.

As regent for Leto II and Ghanima, Alia struggles to control Paul&#x27;s virtually uncontrollable religion in &quot;Children of Dune&quot; (1976). She succumbs to possession by the persona of her grandfather, Baron Vladimir Harkonnen, and Sietch Tabr leader Stilgar, his wife Harah, and Princess Irulan flee with Leto II and Ghanima to escape Alia&#x27;s worsening tyranny. Though married to Duncan Idaho, Alia takes Fremen warrior Buer Agarves as a lover, promising him leadership of Sietch Tabr in return for killing Stilgar. In the clandestine Sietch Fondak, Gurney Halleck follows what he believes are Jessica&#x27;s orders, and with the help of Fremen Namri administers an overdose of melange to Leto II as a test of his resistance to the danger of Abomination that has taken Alia. Alia, however, is actually behind the plan, and Namri has secretly been instructed by her to kill Leto no matter the result. Leto recognizes a potential mate in the Fondak woman Sabiha, but recognizes this as an alternate path he should not take. A blind preacher emerges from the desert, guided by teenage Assan Tariq, son of Muriz from a cast out tribe of Fremen.

By &quot;God Emperor of Dune&quot; (1981), taking place 3,500 years after &quot;Children of Dune&quot;, Arrakis has become terraformed into a wet, lush planet. Desert is now limited to the area surrounding Leto II&#x27;s fortress, and all sandworms other than the God Emperor have died off, thus altering the Fremen culture drastically. Traditions and rituals held by ancient Fremen are maintained and performed by &quot;Museum Fremen&quot;, though they have lost their meaning and value. In &quot;Heretics of Dune&quot; (1984), 1,500 years after the events of &quot;God Emperor of Dune&quot;, Arrakis (now called Rakis) is destroyed by the Honored Matres. This act killed the overwhelming majority of Fremen, apart from Sheeana and a few Fremen living on other planets.

==Characteristics==
In the series, the &quot;native&quot; Fremen of Arrakis live in communities called sietches, each with its own leader, called a naib, who has ascended to the position by challenging his predecessor and proving himself the strongest in the tribe. The Fremen system of justice relies primarily on trial by combat, and individuals may challenge each other hand-to-hand duels to the death over matters of etiquette, law, or honor. The victor of these challenges becomes responsible for the wife, children, and certain possessions of the defeated. The Fremen pay enormous spice bribes to the Spacing Guild to keep orbital space above Arrakis free of spy satellites, and they have a long-term plan to terraform the planet.

Each sietch also has a Sayyadina, a wise woman trained in the spiritual traditions of her people who can serve as a spiritual leader or as an acolyte to a holy woman who is the Fremen version of a Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother. A significant part of the Fremen mythology has been created by the Bene Gesserit Missionaria Protectiva, an arm of the matriarchy which practices &quot;religious engineering&quot; by introducing contrived myths, prophecies and superstition among the populations of the Empire with the intent to later exploit them to the advantage of an individual Bene Gesserit or the entire order. In the case of the Fremen, a messiah legend has been put in place that is utilized in &quot;Dune&quot; by Paul Atreides to secure the safety of himself and his mother Jessica. The Fremen have a language unique to them, but also use Chakobsa for ritual purposes.

The Fremen worship the giant sandworms of Arrakis as manifestations of the earth deity they call Shai&#x27;Hulud. Though they cross the desert on foot in a specifically nonrhythmic pattern to avoid vibrations that would attract the deadly and destructive creatures, the Fremen are also able to ride the worms by &quot;calling&quot; and mounting them in a ritualized, controlled manner. As part of the sandworm life cycle, the spice drug melange is everywhere on Arrakis, and the Fremen diet is rich with it. Such a level of exposure to the spice tints the sclera, cornea and iris of the user to a dark shade of blue, called &quot;blue-in-blue&quot; or &quot;the Eyes of Ibad&quot;.

===Water conservation===
Herbert illustrates that living in the desert with no natural sources of water has spurred the Fremen to ritualize and build their society around the collection, storage, and conservative use of all moisture. They conserve the water distilled from their dead, consider spitting a sign of respect, and put a great cultural reverence on tears. Water is collected from the atmosphere in windtraps that condense the humidity and add it to underground water stores in each sietch. Water can also be collected from dead people and animals using a deathstill to remove the water from a corpse for addition to the sietch water store. Personal ownership of moisture is designated by &quot;water rings&quot;, which are used as a form of currency. When outside of their sietch, Fremen wear a stillsuit, a special body-enclosing suit designed to collect and recycle all the moisture the body releases through perspiration, urine, feces, and even the exhalation of water vapor in the breath. The special fabric is a micro-sandwich designed to dissipate heat and filter wastes while reclaiming moisture. The water is then held in catchpockets and made available to drink through a tube. A Fremen in a well-kept suit can survive weeks in the desert without any other source of water. Herbert even suggests in &quot;Dune&quot; that the Fremen have adapted to the environment physiologically, with their blood able to clot almost instantly in order to prevent water loss.

===Combat===

The dangerous conditions of Arrakis, which ensure that only the strongest survive, have also forged the Fremen into superior hand-to-hand combatants. In &quot;Dune&quot;, Paul trains his Fremen forces in the use of the &quot;weirding way&quot;, the Fremen name for the specialized Bene Gesserit martial arts that he learned from his mother. The Mentat assassin Thufir Hawat is later shocked to learn that Fremen have not only overcome some of Shaddam IV&#x27;s fierce and previously unstoppable Sardaukar soldiers, but have done the impossible and captured some as well. Herbert also writes that &quot;Paul recalled the stories of the Fremen—that their children fought as ferociously as the adults.&quot; In the novel Shaddam notes, &quot;I only sent in five troop carriers with a light attack force to pick up prisoners for questioning. We barely got away with three prisoners and one carrier. Mind you, Baron, my Sardaukar were almost overwhelmed by a force composed mostly of women, children, and old men.&quot;

In Herbert&#x27;s fictional universe, personal body shields have made all forms of projectile weapons semi-obsolete. Only a slow-moving weapon can penetrate a shield, putting knives and similar weapons in common use. The beam of energy weapons called lasguns react violently with a shield, creating an unpredictable explosion comparable to sub-atomic fusion which can kill the attacker, shield wearer, and surrounding individuals. Fremen do not use shields because they also attract the native giant sandworms of Arrakis and drive them into a killing frenzy. As a result, the Fremen have the advantage of not being trained to slow their knives when attacking, as those battling a shielded opponent do. Fremen use different archaic weapons such as maula pistols, lances and crossbows to great effect, but the most deadly and prized possession of a Fremen warrior is the crysknife. A crysknife is a personally-tuned blade ground from the crystal tooth of a sandworm, and is the formal and sacred weapon of the Fremen. It is a milk-white, double-edged curved knife, the blade about long. The crysknife comes in two forms, fixed and unfixed. Unfixed knives need to be stored in proximity to an electrical field produced by the human body or they will disintegrate after a period of time. Fixed crysknives are put through chemical processes to keep them permanently intact. In &quot;Children of Dune&quot;, Leto II notes that &quot;The crysknife dissolves at the death of its owner.&quot; All young Fremen must go through a ritual confirming their adulthood, which is sealed with the gift of a crysknife to the adolescent warrior. According to the religious beliefs of the Fremen, a drawn crysknife must not be sheathed until it draws blood. The Fremen also forbid outsiders from possessing crysknives, and in &quot;Dune&quot; the Lady Jessica refers to &quot;the fabled crysknife of Arrakis, the blade that had never been taken off the planet, and was known only by rumor and wild gossip.&quot; When the Shadout Mapes gives one to Jessica, the Fremen woman warns, &quot;Who sees that knife must be cleansed or slain!&quot;

==In the &quot;Dune&quot; games==
The Fremen have been featured in the &quot;Dune&quot; series of games, playing a vital role in the plots of nearly all of them. The first &quot;Dune&quot; game (1992) and &quot;Frank Herbert&#x27;s Dune&quot; (2001) are tied closely to the original book by Frank Herbert, retelling Paul Muad&#x27;Dib&#x27;s rise to becoming the Fremen&#x27;s Messiah, and leading them against the Harkonnens and the Padishah Emperor under the Atreides banner. In &quot;Dune II&quot; (1992) and &quot;Dune 2000&quot; (1998), the Fremen are special Atreides units, native elite guerillas invoked from the Palace. In &quot;&quot; (2001) they are one of the five sub-factions.

==References==
==External links==
* Arabic and Islamic Themes in &quot;Dune&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1003839" start="4" end="10" title="Fremen" label="Fremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="50" end="75" title="Dune (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Dune&amp;quot; universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="87" end="100" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="142" end="146" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037127" start="177" end="190" title="desert planet" label="desert planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="191" end="198" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="294" end="301" title="Melange (fictional drug)" label="melange"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="534" end="542" title="Zensunni" label="Zensunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="1027" end="1034" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="1039" end="1049" title="San People" label="San People"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="1155" end="1194" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235843" start="1217" end="1232" title="poverty grass (disambiguation)" label="poverty grasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701071" start="1250" end="1262" title="Oregon Dunes National Recreation Area" label="Oregon Dunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q862740" start="1266" end="1282" title="Florence, Oregon" label="Florence, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="1477" end="1485" title="Kalahari" label="Kalahari"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="1782" end="1789" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="1794" end="1804" title="San People" label="San People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212482" start="1885" end="1897" title="Spice Planet" label="Spice Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="2158" end="2162" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="2175" end="2188" title="Leto I Atreides" label="Leto Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="2194" end="2207" title="Bene Gesserit" label="Bene Gesserit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724114" start="2218" end="2230" title="Lady Jessica" label="Lady Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="2246" end="2250" title="Paul Atreides" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="2288" end="2295" title="melange (fictional drug)" label="melange"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="2372" end="2380" title="Arrakeen" label="Arrakeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="2455" end="2468" title="hunter-seeker" label="hunter-seeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="2523" end="2531" title="House Atreides" label="Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="2579" end="2589" title="Suk doctor" label="Suk doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="2590" end="2605" title="Wellington Yueh" label="Wellington Yueh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="2614" end="2624" title="House Harkonnen" label="Harkonnens"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="2732" end="2743" title="Sietch Tabr" label="Sietch Tabr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="2798" end="2803" title="Jamis (Dune)" label="Jamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="2945" end="2950" title="Harah" label="Harah"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="3187" end="3199" title="weirding way" label="weirding way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724142" start="3248" end="3253" title="Chani (character)" label="Chani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="3294" end="3304" title="Liet-Kynes" label="Liet-Kynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706099" start="3434" end="3438" title="Alia Atreides" label="Alia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="3541" end="3564" title="Reverend Mother Ramallo" label="Reverend Mother Ramallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="3633" end="3649" title="Padishah Emperor" label="Padishah Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="3650" end="3660" title="Shaddam IV" label="Shaddam IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q437383" start="3703" end="3715" title="Dune Messiah" label="Dune Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="3826" end="3831" title="Korba (Dune)" label="Korba"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="3844" end="3852" title="Fedaykin" label="Fedaykin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="3859" end="3867" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="3978" end="3983" title="Farok" label="Farok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617763" start="4140" end="4153" title="Spacing Guild" label="Spacing Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="4155" end="4163" title="Bene Tleilax" label="Tleilaxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="4184" end="4190" title="Lichna" label="Lichna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="4237" end="4243" title="Otheym" label="Otheym"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="4288" end="4299" title="Face Dancer" label="Face Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="4300" end="4307" title="Scytale (Dune)" label="Scytale"/>
<link wikidata="Q304741" start="4431" end="4438" title="Leto II Atreides" label="Leto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="4443" end="4450" title="Ghanima Atreides" label="Ghanima"/>
<link wikidata="Q437365" start="4647" end="4663" title="Children of Dune" label="Children of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="4740" end="4764" title="Baron Vladimir Harkonnen" label="Baron Vladimir Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="4789" end="4796" title="Stilgar" label="Stilgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407875" start="4818" end="4833" title="Princess Irulan" label="Princess Irulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q911563" start="4923" end="4935" title="Duncan Idaho" label="Duncan Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="4963" end="4975" title="Buer Agarves" label="Buer Agarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q384546" start="5093" end="5107" title="Gurney Halleck" label="Gurney Halleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="5188" end="5193" title="Namri (Dune)" label="Namri"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="5285" end="5296" title="Abomination (Dune)" label="Abomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="5496" end="5502" title="Sabiha (Dune)" label="Sabiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="5625" end="5636" title="Assan Tariq" label="Assan Tariq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="5645" end="5650" title="Muriz" label="Muriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q401619" start="5694" end="5713" title="God Emperor of Dune" label="God Emperor of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q437353" start="6183" end="6199" title="Heretics of Dune" label="Heretics of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="6326" end="6340" title="Honored Matres" label="Honored Matres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="6406" end="6413" title="Sheeana" label="Sheeana"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="6560" end="6566" title="sietch" label="sietch"/>
<link wikidata="Q788874" start="6772" end="6787" title="trial by combat" label="trial by combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q204520" start="7172" end="7181" title="terraforming" label="terraform"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="7406" end="7421" title="Reverend Mother (Dune)" label="Reverend Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="7504" end="7526" title="Missionaria Protectiva" label="Missionaria Protectiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="7835" end="7842" title="messiah" label="messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="8038" end="8046" title="Chakobsa (Dune)" label="Chakobsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038225" start="8098" end="8107" title="Sandworm (Dune)" label="sandworms"/>
<link wikidata="Q193107" start="8625" end="8631" title="sclera" label="sclera"/>
<link wikidata="Q168291" start="8633" end="8639" title="cornea" label="cornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q178748" start="8644" end="8648" title="iris (anatomy)" label="iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="9161" end="9169" title="windtrap" label="windtrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="9318" end="9328" title="deathstill" label="deathstill"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="9558" end="9567" title="stillsuit" label="stillsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="9729" end="9740" title="water vapor" label="water vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="10542" end="10554" title="martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="10592" end="10598" title="Mentat" label="Mentat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="10608" end="10620" title="Thufir Hawat" label="Thufir Hawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="10742" end="10751" title="Sardaukar" label="Sardaukar"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="11301" end="11322" title="Holtzman shield" label="personal body shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="11514" end="11520" title="lasgun" label="lasgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="11614" end="11620" title="nuclear fusion" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="12010" end="12022" title="maula pistol" label="maula pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q681737" start="12782" end="12815" title="Coming of age" label="ritual confirming their adulthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041291" start="13454" end="13486" title="Dune computer and video games" label="&amp;quot;Dune&amp;quot; series of games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265597" start="13561" end="13565" title="Dune (video game)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031625" start="13594" end="13619" title="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Dune (video game)" label="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="13699" end="13717" title="Paul Muad&amp;#x27;Dib" label="Paul Muad&amp;#x27;Dib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="13798" end="13808" title="House Harkonnen" label="Harkonnens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="13817" end="13833" title="Padishah Emperor" label="Padishah Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="13844" end="13852" title="House Atreides" label="Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q596631" start="13870" end="13877" title="Dune II" label="Dune II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153468" start="13901" end="13910" title="Dune 2000" label="Dune 2000"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158542" wikidata="Q967433" url="?curid=158542" title="Cyclic nucleotide">
<text>A cyclic nucleotide (cNMP) is a single-phosphate nucleotide with a cyclic bond arrangement between the sugar and phosphate groups. Like other nucleotides, cyclic nucleotides are composed of three functional groups: a sugar, a nitrogenous base, and a single phosphate group. As can be seen in the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) images, the &#x27;cyclic&#x27; portion consists of two bonds between the phosphate group and the 3&#x27; and 5&#x27; hydroxyl groups of the sugar, very often a ribose.

Their biological significance includes a broad range of protein-ligand interactions. They have been identified as secondary messengers in both hormone and ion-channel signalling in eukaryotic cells, as well as allosteric effector compounds of DNA binding proteins in prokaryotic cells. cAMP and cGMP are currently the most well documented cyclic nucleotides, however there is evidence that cCMP (with cytosine) is also involved in eukaryotic cellular messaging. The role of cyclic uridine monophosphate (cUMP) is even less well known.

Discovery of cyclic nucleotides has contributed greatly to the understanding of kinase and phosphatase mechanisms, as well as protein regulation in general. Although more than 50 years have passed since their initial discovery, interest in cyclic nucleotides and their biochemical and physiological significance continues.

==History==
The understanding of the concept of second messengers, and in particular the role of cyclic nucleotides and their ability to relay physiological signals to a cell, has its origins in the research of glycogen metabolism by Carl and Gerty Cori, for which they were awarded a Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1947. A number of incremental but important discoveries through the 1950s added to their research, primarily focusing on the activity of glycogen phosphorylase in dog liver. Glycogen phosphorylase catalyzes the first step in glycogenolysis, the process of breaking glycogen into its substituent glucose parts. Earl Sutherland investigated the effect of the hormones adrenaline and glucagon on glycogen phosphorylase, earning him the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1971.

In 1956 Edwin Krebs and Edmond Fischer discovered that adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is required for the conversion of glycogen phosphorylase b to glycogen phosphorylase a. While investigating the action of adrenaline on glycogenolysis the next year, Sutherland and Walter Wosilait reported that inorganic phosphate is released when the enzyme liver phosphorylase is inactivated; but when it is activated, it incorporates a phosphate. The “active factor” that the hormones produced was finally purified in 1958, and then identified as containing a ribose, a phosphate, and an adenine in equal ratios. Further, it was proved that this factor reverted to 5’-AMP when it was inactivated.

Evgeny Fesenko, Stanislav Kolesnikov, and Arkady Lyubarsky discovered in 1985 that cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) can initiate the photoresponse in rods. Soon after, the role of cNMP in gated ion channels of chemosensitive cilia of olfactory sensory neurons was reported by Tadashi Nakamura and Geoffrey Gold. In 1992 Lawrence Haynes and King-Wai Yau uncovered cNMP’s role in the light-dependent cyclic-nucleotide-gated channel of cone photoreceptors. By the end of the decade, the presence of two types of intramembrane receptors was understood: Rs (which stimulates cyclase) and Ri (which inhibits cyclase). Wei-Jen Tang and James Hurley reported in 1998 that adenylyl cyclase, which synthesizes cAMP, is regulated not only by hormones and neurotransmitters, but also by phosphorylation, calcium, forskolin, and guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins).

==Chemistry of cNMPs==

===Structure===

The two most well-studied cyclic nucleotides are cyclic AMP (cAMP) and cyclic GMP (cGMP), while cyclic CMP (cCMP) and cyclic UMP (cUMP) are less understood. cAMP is 3’5’-cyclic adenosine monophosphate, cGMP is 3’5’-cyclic guanosine monophosphate, cCMP is cytidine 3&#x27;,5&#x27;-monophosphate, and cUMP is uridine 3&#x27;,5&#x27;-cyclic phosphate.

Each cyclic nucleotide has three components. It contains a nitrogenous base (meaning it contains nitrogen): for example, adenine in cAMP and guanine in cGMP. It also contains a sugar, specifically the five-carbon ribose. And finally, a cyclic nucleotide contains a phosphate. A double-ring purine is the nitrogenous base for cAMP and cGMP, while cytosine, thymine, and uracil each have a single-ring nitrogenous base (pyrimidine).

These three components are connected so that the nitrogenous base is attached to the first carbon of ribose (1’ carbon), and the phosphate group is attached to the 5’ carbon of ribose. While all nucleotides have this structure, the phosphate group makes a second connection to the ribose ring at the 3’ carbon in cyclic nucleotides. Because the phosphate group has two separate bonds to the ribose sugar, it forms a cyclic ring.

The atom numbering convention is used to identify the carbons and nitrogens within a cyclic nucleotide. In the pentose, the carbon closest to the carbonyl group is labeled C-1. When a pentose is connected to a nitrogenous base, carbon atom numbering is distinguished with a prime (&#x27;) notation, which differentiates these carbons from the atom numbering of the nitrogenous base.

Therefore, for cAMP, 3’5’-cyclic adenosine monophosphate indicates that a single phosphate group forms a cyclic structure with the ribose group at its 3’ and 5’ carbons, while the ribose group is also attached to adenosine (this bond is understood to be at the 1’ position of the ribose).

==Biochemistry==
Cyclic nucleotides are found in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Control of intracellular concentrations is maintained through a series of enzymatic reactions involving several families of proteins. In higher order mammals, cNMPs are present in many types of tissue.

===Synthesis and Degradation===

Cyclic nucleotides are produced from the generic reaction NTP → cNMP + PPi, where N represents a nitrogenous base. The reaction is catalyzed by specific nucleotidyl cyclases, such that production of cAMP is catalyzed by adenylyl cyclase and production of cGMP is catalyzed by guanylyl cyclase. Adenylyl cyclase has been found in both a transmembrane and cytosolic form, representing distinct protein classes and different sources of cAMP.

Both cAMP and cGMP are degraded by hydrolysis of the 3&#x27; phosphodiester bond, resulting in a 5&#x27;NMP. Degradation is carried out primarily by a class of enzymes known as phosphodiesterases (PDEs). In mammalian cells, there are 11 known PDE families with varying isoforms of each protein expressed based on the cell&#x27;s regulatory needs. Some phosphodiesterases are cNMP-specific, while others can hydrolyze non-specifically. However, the cAMP and cGMP degradation pathways are much more understood than those for either cCMP or cUMP. The identification of specific PDEs for cCMP and cUMP has not been as thoroughly established.

===Target Binding===
Cyclic nucleotides can be found in many different types of eukaryotic cells, including photo-receptor rods and cones, smooth muscle cells and liver cells. Cellular concentrations of cyclic nucleotides can be very low, in the 10−7M range, because metabolism and function are often localized in particular parts of the cell. A highly conserved cyclic nucleotide-binding domain (CNB) is present in all proteins that bind cNMPs, regardless of their biological function. The domain consists of a beta sandwich architecture, with the cyclic nucleotide binding pocket between the beta sheets. The binding of cNMP causes a conformational change that affects the protein&#x27;s activity. There is also data to support a synergistic binding effect amongst multiple cyclic nucleotides, with cCMP lowering the effective concentration (EC50) of cAMP for activation of protein kinase A (PKA).

==Biology==
Cyclic nucleotides are integral to a communication system that acts within cells. They act as &quot;second messengers&quot; by relaying the signals of many first messengers, such as hormones and neurotransmitters, to their physiological destinations. Cyclic nucleotides participate in many physiological responses, including receptor-effector coupling, down-regulation of drug responsiveness, protein-kinase cascades, and transmembrane signal transduction.

Cyclic nucleotides act as second messengers when first messengers, which cannot enter the cell, instead bind to receptors in the cellular membrane. The receptor changes conformation and transmits a signal that activates an enzyme in the cell membrane interior called adenylyl cyclase. This releases cAMP into the cell interior, where it stimulates a protein kinase called cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase. By phosphorylating proteins, cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase alters protein activity. cAMP&#x27;s role in this process terminates upon hydrolysis to AMP by phosphodiesterase.

Cyclic nucleotides are well-suited to act as second messengers for several reasons. Their synthesis is energetically favorable, and they are derived from common metabolic components (ATP and GTP). When they break down into AMP/GMP and inorganic phosphate, these components are non-toxic. Finally, cyclic nucleotides can be distinguished from non-cyclic nucleotides because they are smaller and less polar.

===Biological significance===
The involvement of cyclic nucleotides on biological functions is varied, while an understanding of their role continues to grow. There are several examples of their biological influence. They are associated with long-term and short-term memory. They also work in the liver to coordinate various enzymes that control blood glucose and other nutrients. In bacteria, cyclic nucleotides bind to catabolite gene activator protein (CAP), which acts to increase metabolic enzymatic activity by increasing the rate of DNA transcription. They also facilitate relaxation of smooth muscle cells in vascular tissue, and activate cyclic CNG channels in retinal photoreceptors and olfactory sensory neurons. In addition, they potentially activate cyclic CNG channels in: pineal gland light sensitivity, sensory neurons of the vomeronasal organ (which is involved in the detection of pheromones), taste receptor cells, cellular signaling in sperm, airway epithelial cells, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)-secreting neuronal cell line, and renal inner medullary collecting duct.

===Pathway mutations and related diseases===
Examples of disruptions of cNMP pathways include: mutations in CNG channel genes are associated with degeneration of the retina and with color blindness; and overexpression of cytosolic or soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC) has been linked to human prostate carcinoma. Inhibition of sAC, or knockdown by RNA interference (RNAi) transfection has been shown to prevent the proliferation of the prostate carcinoma cells. The regulatory pathway appears to be part of the EPAC pathway and not the PKA pathway.

Phosphodiesterases, principle regulators of cNMP degradation, are often targets for therapeutics. Caffeine is a known PDE inhibitor, while drugs used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction like sildenafil and tadalafil also act through inhibiting the activity of phosphodiesterases.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q967433" start="2" end="19" title="Cyclic nucleotide" label="cyclic nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="39" end="48" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="49" end="59" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="103" end="108" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q422960" start="226" end="242" title="nitrogenous base" label="nitrogenous base"/>
<link wikidata="Q210041" start="296" end="326" title="cyclic adenosine monophosphate" label="cyclic adenosine monophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422511" start="338" end="368" title="cyclic guanosine monophosphate" label="cyclic guanosine monophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="493" end="501" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59817493" start="536" end="542" title="ribose" label="ribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="601" end="608" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q899107" start="609" end="615" title="ligand (biochemistry)" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q899814" start="659" end="678" title="secondary messenger" label="secondary messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="688" end="695" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q62536" start="700" end="711" title="ion channel" label="ion-channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="726" end="736" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627568" start="755" end="774" title="allosteric effector" label="allosteric effector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="788" end="791" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="812" end="823" title="prokaryote" label="prokaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="935" end="939" title="Cyclic CMP" label="cCMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="946" end="954" title="cytosine" label="cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421851" start="1161" end="1167" title="kinase" label="kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q422476" start="1172" end="1183" title="phosphatase" label="phosphatase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="1575" end="1579" title="cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q174936" start="1616" end="1624" title="glycogen" label="glycogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q78501" start="1639" end="1643" title="Carl Ferdinand Cori" label="Carl"/>
<link wikidata="Q204733" start="1648" end="1658" title="Gerty Cori" label="Gerty Cori"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="1690" end="1727" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q412061" start="1868" end="1890" title="glycogen phosphorylase" label="glycogen phosphorylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="1898" end="1903" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q680603" start="1956" end="1970" title="glycogenolysis" label="glycogenolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q174936" start="1996" end="2004" title="glycogen" label="glycogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="2026" end="2033" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q68118" start="2041" end="2056" title="Earl Wilbur Sutherland, Jr." label="Earl Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="2097" end="2107" title="epinephrine" label="adrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q170617" start="2112" end="2120" title="glucagon" label="glucagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q109731" start="2220" end="2231" title="Edwin G. Krebs" label="Edwin Krebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q109726" start="2236" end="2250" title="Edmond H. Fischer" label="Edmond Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="2267" end="2289" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q425067" start="2330" end="2352" title="phosphorylase" label="glycogen phosphorylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q680603" start="2432" end="2446" title="glycogenolysis" label="glycogenolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12119506" start="2548" end="2554" title="enzyme substrate (biology)" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q59817493" start="2759" end="2765" title="ribose" label="ribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="2787" end="2794" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422511" start="2980" end="3010" title="cyclic guanosine monophosphate" label="cyclic guanosine monophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q505544" start="3052" end="3056" title="rod cell" label="rods"/>
<link wikidata="Q180436" start="3127" end="3132" title="cilium" label="cilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q460276" start="3136" end="3160" title="olfactory sensory neuron" label="olfactory sensory neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q147298" start="3335" end="3354" title="cone cell" label="cone photoreceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198121" start="3472" end="3479" title="cyclase" label="cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="3633" end="3640" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="3646" end="3662" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q242736" start="3677" end="3692" title="phosphorylation" label="phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="3694" end="3701" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q412747" start="3703" end="3712" title="forskolin" label="forskolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407438" start="3755" end="3765" title="G proteins" label="G proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="4281" end="4288" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="4301" end="4308" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="4366" end="4372" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188261" start="4450" end="4456" title="purine" label="purine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171973" start="4516" end="4523" title="thymine" label="thymine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182990" start="4529" end="4535" title="uracil" label="uracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q207722" start="4578" end="4588" title="pyrimidine" label="pyrimidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="5026" end="5030" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q201479" start="5168" end="5176" title="carbonyl" label="carbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q356257" start="6240" end="6256" title="adenylyl cyclase" label="adenylyl cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q419566" start="6296" end="6312" title="guanylyl cyclase" label="guanylyl cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q356257" start="6314" end="6330" title="Adenylyl cyclase" label="Adenylyl cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q220599" start="6374" end="6381" title="cytosol" label="cytosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="6495" end="6505" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q863983" start="6521" end="6540" title="phosphodiester bond" label="phosphodiester bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q424304" start="6637" end="6654" title="phosphodiesterase" label="phosphodiesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q609809" start="6729" end="6737" title="Protein isoform" label="isoforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="7238" end="7257" title="smooth muscle cells" label="smooth muscle cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q827450" start="7262" end="7273" title="liver cells" label="liver cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q672821" start="7349" end="7350" title="molar concentration" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="7366" end="7376" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q24768350" start="7462" end="7494" title="cyclic nucleotide-binding domain" label="cyclic nucleotide-binding domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q283449" start="7693" end="7703" title="beta sheet" label="beta sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q281417" start="7975" end="7991" title="protein kinase A" label="protein kinase A"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="9458" end="9463" title="chemical polarity" label="polar"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="9812" end="9825" title="blood sugar" label="blood glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="9836" end="9844" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="9850" end="9858" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="10006" end="10009" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="10010" end="10023" title="transcription (genetics)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="10083" end="10091" title="Blood vessel" label="vascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="10136" end="10142" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q460276" start="10163" end="10187" title="olfactory sensory neuron" label="olfactory sensory neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="10253" end="10265" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q336484" start="10308" end="10325" title="vomeronasal organ" label="vomeronasal organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="10365" end="10374" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454532" start="10378" end="10392" title="taste receptor" label="taste receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210973" start="10400" end="10418" title="cell signaling" label="cellular signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="10422" end="10427" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="10436" end="10446" title="epithelium" label="epithelial"/>
<link wikidata="Q318896" start="10454" end="10484" title="gonadotropin-releasing hormone" label="gonadotropin-releasing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="10502" end="10508" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="10526" end="10531" title="kidney" label="renal"/>
<link wikidata="Q452419" start="10532" end="10563" title="collecting duct system" label="inner medullary collecting duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="10686" end="10690" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q133696" start="10748" end="10763" title="color blindness" label="color blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="10769" end="10783" title="gene expression" label="overexpression"/>
<link wikidata="Q24722135" start="10800" end="10824" title="soluble adenylyl cyclase" label="soluble adenylyl cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="10856" end="10874" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="10911" end="10927" title="RNA interference" label="RNA interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429031" start="10935" end="10947" title="transfection" label="transfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q189159" start="10978" end="10991" title="cell growth" label="proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191521" start="11310" end="11320" title="sildenafil" label="sildenafil"/>
<link wikidata="Q424156" start="11325" end="11334" title="tadalafil" label="tadalafil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="158543" wikidata="Q7360637" url="?curid=158543" title="Role homogeneity">
<text>In sociology, role homogeneity is the degree of overlap amongst the different roles performed by different members of a community.

==Rural sociology==
Rural sociologists often note that amongst rural communities there exists a very high degree of role homogeneity, that is, one person may perform the duties of banker, coach, deacon, school board member, and neighbor.

==Controversy==
Sociologists have demonstrated that in areas of strong homogeneity, there is a general tendency to repress controversy. As a result, when disagreements arise, they can result in serious crises. Such communities tend to have local newspapers which are more oriented towards marketing, rather than news. What news is published, in a highly-homogeneous society, tends to focus on non-controversial topics and avoid &quot;bad news&quot;.

==See also==
* dramaturgy
* rural sociology
* sociology

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="3" end="12" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360637" start="14" end="30" title="Role homogeneity" label="role homogeneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q492537" start="78" end="83" title="dramaturgy" label="roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q396246" start="152" end="170" title="rural sociology" label="Rural sociologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="312" end="318" title="banking" label="banker"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="320" end="325" title="sports" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="327" end="333" title="religion" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="335" end="347" title="education" label="school board"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="617" end="626" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="660" end="669" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q492537" start="837" end="847" title="dramaturgy" label="dramaturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q396246" start="850" end="865" title="rural sociology" label="rural sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="868" end="877" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
</links>
</doc>
