<doc id="180727" wikidata="Q57135" url="?curid=180727" title="Erich von Manstein">
<text>Fritz Erich Georg Eduard von Manstein (born Fritz Erich Georg Eduard von Lewinski; 24 November 1887 – 9 June 1973) was a German &quot;Generalfeldmarschall&quot; (Field Marshal) in the &quot;Heer&quot; (Army) of Nazi Germany during World War II. He was subsequently convicted of war crimes and sentenced to 18 years imprisonment.

Born into an aristocratic Prussian family with a long history of military service, Manstein joined the army at a young age and saw service on both the Western and Eastern Front during the First World War (1914–18). He rose to the rank of captain by the end of the war and was active in the inter-war period helping Germany rebuild its armed forces. In September 1939, during the invasion of Poland at the beginning of the Second World War, he served as Chief of Staff to Gerd von Rundstedt&#x27;s Army Group South. Adolf Hitler chose Manstein&#x27;s strategy for the invasion of France of May 1940, a plan later refined by Franz Halder and other members of the OKH.

Anticipating a firm Allied reaction should the main thrust of the invasion take place through the Netherlands, Manstein devised an innovative operation to invade Francelater known as the &quot;Sichelschnitt&quot; (&quot;sickle cut&quot;)that called for an attack through the woods of the Ardennes and a rapid drive to the English Channel, thus cutting off the French and Allied armies in Belgium and Flanders. Attaining the rank of general at the end of the campaign, he was active in the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941. He led the Axis forces in the siege of Sevastopol (1941–1942) and the Battle of the Kerch Peninsula, and was promoted to field marshal on 1 July 1942, after which he participated in the siege of Leningrad.

In December 1942, during the catastrophic Battle of Stalingrad, Manstein commanded a failed relief effort (&quot;Operation Winter Storm&quot;). Later known as the &quot;backhand blow&quot;, Manstein&#x27;s counteroffensive in the Third Battle of Kharkov (February–March 1943) regained substantial territory and resulted in the destruction of three Soviet armies and the retreat of three others. He was one of the primary commanders at the Battle of Kursk (July–August 1943). His ongoing disagreements with Hitler over the conduct of the war led to his dismissal in March 1944. He never obtained another command and was taken prisoner by the British in August 1945, three months after Germany&#x27;s defeat.

Manstein gave testimony at the main Nuremberg trials of war criminals in August 1946, and prepared a paper that, along with his later memoirs, helped cultivate the myth of the clean &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;the myth that the German armed forces were not culpable for the atrocities of the Holocaust. In 1949 he was tried in Hamburg for war crimes and was convicted on nine of seventeen counts, including the poor treatment of prisoners of war and failing to protect civilian lives in his sphere of operations. His sentence of eighteen years in prison was later reduced to twelve, and he served only four years before being released in 1953.

As a military advisor to the West German government in the mid-1950s, he helped re-establish the armed forces. His memoir, &quot;Verlorene Siege&quot; (1955), translated into English as &quot;Lost Victories&quot;, was highly critical of Hitler&#x27;s leadership, and dealt with only the military aspects of the war, ignoring its political and ethical contexts. Manstein died near Munich in 1973.

==Early life==
Manstein was born Fritz Erich Georg Eduard von Lewinski in Berlin into the noble Lewinski family, the tenth son of a Prussian aristocrat and artillery general, Eduard von Lewinski (1829–1906), and Helene von Sperling (1847–1910). His father&#x27;s family had Kashubian ancestry and was entitled to use the Brochwicz coat of arms (Brochwicz III). Hedwig von Sperling (1852–1925), Helene&#x27;s younger sister, was married to Lieutenant General Georg von Manstein (1844–1913); the couple was unable to have children, so they adopted Erich. They had previously adopted Erich&#x27;s cousin Martha, the daughter of Helene&#x27;s and Hedwig&#x27;s deceased brother.

Manstein&#x27;s biological and adoptive fathers were both Prussian generals, as were his mother&#x27;s brother and both his grandfathers (His paternal grandfather, Albrecht Gustav von Manstein, had led a corps in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71, and maternal grandfather, Oskar von Sperling, was the chief of staff of First Army). Sixteen relatives on each side of his family were military officers, many of whom rose to the rank of general. Paul von Hindenburg, the future &quot;Generalfeldmarschall&quot; and President of Germany, was his uncle; Hindenburg&#x27;s wife, Gertrud, was the sister of Hedwig and Helene.

Manstein attended the Imperial &quot;Lyzeum&quot;, a Catholic &quot;Gymnasium&quot; in Strasbourg, from 1894 to 1899. Then he entered the cadet corps. As a cadet, Manstein was reported to be intelligent and capable. In March 1906, after six years in the cadet corps in Plön and Groß-Lichterfelde, he was commissioned into the Third Foot Guards Regiment (&quot;Garde zu Fuß&quot;) as an ensign. He was promoted to lieutenant in January 1907 and in October 1913 began the three-year officer training programme at the Prussian War Academy. However, Manstein only completed the first year of the programme, as when the First World War began in August 1914 all students of the academy were ordered to report for active service. He never completed the remainder of his general staff officer training.

==Early military career==

===First World War===
During the First World War, Manstein served on both the German Western and Eastern Fronts. At the beginning of the war, he was promoted to lieutenant and participated in the invasion of Belgium with the 2nd Guard Reserve Infantry Regiment. In August 1914, he took part in the capture of Namur, the site of a massive citadel surrounded by outlying forts. In September, Manstein&#x27;s unit was one of two transferred to East Prussia and attached to the Eighth Army, commanded by Hindenburg. After seeing action in the First Battle of the Masurian Lakes, his unit was soon reassigned to the Ninth Army, which was in the process of advancing from Upper Silesia to Warsaw. Overstretched, the Ninth Army was forced to withdraw in the face of a Russian counterattack, and on 16 November, Manstein was wounded during the retreat when he was among a detachment that stormed a Russian entrenchment. He was shot in the left shoulder and the left knee; one bullet hit his sciatic nerve, causing the leg to be numb. Recovery took six months in hospital in Beuthen and Wiesbaden.

After a period of home leave, on 17 June 1915, Manstein was reassigned as an assistant general staff officer of operations to the Tenth Army, commanded by Max von Gallwitz. Soon promoted to captain, he learned first-hand how to plan and conduct offensive operations as the Tenth Army undertook successful attacks on Poland, Lithuania, Montenegro, and Albania. During offensive operations at Verdun in early 1916, Manstein was stationed with Gallwitz and his staff at a new headquarters near the action. He next served as a staff supply officer under General Fritz von Below and chief of staff Fritz von Lossberg at a command post near the River Somme; the area was the scene of several battles over the course of the war. British and French operations from July to November 1916 forced a German withdrawal over the winter to the Hindenburg Line, a series of defensive positions between Verdun and Lens. Manstein continued to serve under Below until October 1917, when he was transferred as chief of staff to the 4th Cavalry Division, serving in Riga during the German occupation of the area. As a result of the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918, Manstein&#x27;s unit was no longer needed on the Eastern Front; he was reassigned to the 213th Infantry Division near Reims. The German Imperial Army saw some minor successes in the area but was beginning to lose the war. The armistice was signed on 11 November 1918.

===Inter-war era===
Manstein married Jutta Sibylle von Loesch, the daughter of a Silesian landowner, in 1920. He proposed marriage after having known her for only three days. She died in 1966. They had three children: a daughter, Gisela (born 1921), and two sons, Gero (born 1922) and Rüdiger (born 1929). Gero died on the battlefield in the northern sector of the Eastern Front on 29 October 1942 while serving as a lieutenant in the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;. Gisela was married to Major Edel-Heinrich Zachariae-Lingenthal, a highly decorated officer who commanded II. Panzer-Regiment 15 during the Second World War.

Manstein remained in the armed forces after the war ended. In 1918 he volunteered for a staff position with the Frontier Defence Force in Breslau and served there until 1919. As part of &quot;Gruppenkommando&quot; II, he participated in the restructuring of the German Imperial Army of 500,000 men into the &quot;Reichswehr&quot;, the army of the Weimar Republic (restricted to 100,000 men by the Versailles Treaty). Recognised from an early age as a talented and intelligent commander, Manstein was chosen as one of only 4,000 officers permitted under the treaty. In 1921 he was appointed company commander of the sixth company of the 5th Prussian Infantry Regiment and next served as a staff officer for &quot;Wehrkreiskommando&quot; II and IV, teaching military history and tactics until 1927. That year he was promoted to major and served with the General Staff at the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; Ministry in Berlin, visiting other countries to learn about their military facilities and helping to draft mobilisation plans for the army. Promoted to lieutenant colonel, he was given command of the light infantry battalion of the 4th Infantry Regiment, serving with that unit until 1934. In 1933 the Nazi Party seized power in Germany, ending the Weimar period. In violation of the Versailles treaty, the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; had been secretly re-arming since the 1920s; the new government formally renounced the Treaty and proceeded with large scale re-armament and expansion of the military.

Manstein was moved back to Berlin as full colonel in February 1934, serving as chief of staff of &quot;Wehrkreiskommando&quot; III. On 1 July 1935 he was appointed the Head of the Operations Branch of the Army General Staff (&quot;Generalstab des Heeres&quot;), part of the Army High Command (&quot;Oberkommando des Heeres&quot; – OKH). During his tenure there, Manstein was one of the people responsible for the development of &quot;Fall Rot&quot; (Case Red), a defensive plan to protect Germany from attack by France. During this period Manstein came into contact with Heinz Guderian and Oswald Lutz, who advocated drastic changes in warfare, emphasising the role of the Panzer. However, officers like Ludwig Beck, Chief of the Army General Staff, were against such drastic changes, and therefore Manstein proposed an alternative: the development of &quot;Sturmgeschütze&quot; (StuG), self-propelled assault guns that would provide heavy direct-fire support to infantry. In World War II, the resulting StuG vehicles proved to be among the most successful and cost-effective German weapons.

He was promoted to Generalmajor in October 1936, becoming the Deputy Chief of Staff (&quot;Oberquartiermeister I&quot;) to General Beck. On 4 February 1938, Manstein was transferred to the command of the 18th Infantry Division in Liegnitz, Silesia, with the rank of Generalleutnant. The transfer meant that Manstein did not receive Beck&#x27;s post as Chief of the Army General Staff that August (Beck had resigned, despite Manstein&#x27;s urgings not to do so, as he felt Hitler&#x27;s intended invasion of Czechoslovakia that October would be premature). The position was given to General Franz Halder, who had taken Manstein&#x27;s former post as Deputy Chief of Staff. The incident created a lasting hatred between the two men. On 20 April 1939, Manstein delivered a speech at the celebration of Hitler&#x27;s 50th birthday, in which he praised Hitler as a leader sent by God to save Germany. He warned the &quot;hostile world&quot; that if it kept erecting &quot;ramparts around Germany to block the way of the German people towards their future&quot;, then he would be quite happy to see the world plunged into another world war. Israeli historian Omer Bartov notes that the rise of officers such as Manstein was part of a tendency for technocratic officers, usually ardent Nazis, to come to the fore; his opinion is that the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; was fully integrated into Nazi Germany, not a separate apolitical organisation independent of the Nazi regime.

==Second World War==

===Invasion of Poland===

On 18 August 1939, in preparation for &quot;Fall Weiss&quot; (Case White)the German invasion of PolandManstein was appointed Chief of Staff to Gerd von Rundstedt&#x27;s Army Group South. Here he worked along with Rundstedt&#x27;s Chief of Operations, Colonel Günther Blumentritt, to develop the operational plan. Rundstedt accepted Manstein&#x27;s plan calling for the concentration of the majority of the army group&#x27;s armoured units into Walter von Reichenau&#x27;s 10th Army, with the objective of a decisive breakthrough which would lead to the encirclement of Polish forces west of the River Vistula. In Manstein&#x27;s plan, two other armies comprising Army Group South, Wilhelm List&#x27;s 14th Army, and Johannes Blaskowitz&#x27;s 8th Army, would provide flank support for Reichenau&#x27;s armoured thrust towards Warsaw, the Polish capital. Privately, Manstein was lukewarm about the Polish campaign, thinking that it would be better to keep Poland as a buffer between Germany and the Soviet Union. He also worried about an Allied attack from the west once the Polish campaign was underway, which would draw Germany into a two-front war.

Manstein took part in a conference on 22 August 1939 where Hitler underlined to his commanders the need for the physical destruction of Poland as a nation. After the war, he would state in his memoirs that he did not recognise at the time of this meeting that Hitler was going to pursue a policy of extermination against the Poles. He did become aware of the policy later on, as he and other &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; generals received reports on the activities of the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;, the &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS) death squads tasked with following the army into Poland to murder intellectuals and other civilians. These squads were also assigned to round up Jews and others for relocation to ghettos and Nazi concentration camps. Manstein would later face three charges of war crimes relating to Jewish and civilian deaths in the sectors under his control, and the mistreatment and deaths of prisoners of war.

Launched on 1 September 1939, the invasion began successfully. In Army Group South&#x27;s area of responsibility under Rundstedt, the 8th, 10th and 14th Armies pursued the retreating Poles. The initial plan was for the 8th Army, the northernmost of the three, to advance towards Łódź. The 10th Army, with its motorised divisions, was to move quickly towards the Vistula, and the 14th Army was to advance and attempt to encircle the Polish troops in the Kraków area. These actions led to the encirclement and defeat of Polish forces in the Radom area on 8–14 September by six German corps. Meanwhile, the German Eighth Army was under attack from the north, so elements of the Fourth, Eighth and Tenth Armies were quickly redeployed with air support in an improvised attempt to cut off any Polish break-out back towards Warsaw. The flexibility and agility of the German forces led to the defeat of nine Polish infantry divisions and other units in the resulting Battle of the Bzura (8–19 September), the largest engagement of the war thus far. The conquest of Poland was quickly over, with the last Polish military units surrendering on 6 October.

===The Offensive in the West===
&quot;Fall Gelb&quot; (&quot;Case Yellow&quot;), the initial plan for the invasion of France, was prepared by Commander-in-Chief of the Army Colonel General (&quot;Generaloberst&quot;) Walther von Brauchitsch, Halder, and other members of the OKH in early October 1939. Like the Schlieffen Plan of World War I, it called for an encirclement attack through the Netherlands and Belgium. Hitler was not satisfied, so revisions of the plan continued throughout October. Manstein was not satisfied with the plan either, as it focused heavily on the northern wing; he felt an attack from this direction would lack the element of surprise and would expose the German forces to counterattacks from the south. The terrain in Belgium was not well-suited as a base of operations for further attacks on France, so Manstein felt the operation would fail to wipe out the enemyas it did in the First World Warleading to only partial success and trench warfare. By the end of October Manstein had prepared the outline of a different plan and submitted it to the OKH via his superior, Rundstedt, for whom he was now serving as chief of staff of Army Group A.

Manstein&#x27;s plan, developed with the informal co-operation of Heinz Guderian, suggested that the Panzer divisions attack through the wooded hills of the Ardennes where no one would expect them, then establish bridgeheads on the Meuse and rapidly drive to the English Channel. The &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; would thus cut off the French and Allied armies in Belgium and Flanders. This part of the plan later became known as the &quot;Sichelschnitt&quot; (&quot;sickle cut&quot;). Manstein&#x27;s proposal also included a second thrust outflanking the Maginot Line, which would allow the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; to force any future defensive line much further south.

The OKH originally rejected the proposal; Halder in particular said the plan was entirely without merit. However, on 11 November, Hitler ordered the reallocation of the forces needed to make a surprise thrust in Sedan, thus pushing the plan in the direction that Manstein had suggested. When documents outlining details of &quot;Fall Gelb&quot; fell into the hands of the Belgians on 10 January 1940, Hitler became even more receptive to change. But Manstein&#x27;s superiors, Generals Halder and Brauchitsch, resented Manstein&#x27;s repeated insistence that his plan be implemented in place of theirs. Halder had Manstein removed from Rundstedt&#x27;s headquarters and sent to Stettin to command the XXXVIII Army Corps on 27 January. Hitler, still looking for a more aggressive plan, approved a modified version of Manstein&#x27;s ideas, today known as the Manstein Plan, after meeting with him on 17 February. Manstein and his corps played a minor role during the operations in France, serving under Günther von Kluge&#x27;s 4th Army. His corps helped achieve the first breakthrough east of Amiens during &quot;Fall Rot&quot; (&quot;Case Red&quot;the second phase of the invasion plan), and was the first to reach and cross the River Seine. The invasion of France was an outstanding military success; Manstein was promoted to full general and awarded the Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross.

===Battle of Britain===

Manstein was a proponent of the prospective German invasion of Great Britain, named Operation Sea Lion. He considered the operation risky but necessary. Early studies by various staff officers determined that air superiority was a prerequisite to the planned invasion. His corps was to be shipped across the English Channel from Boulogne to Bexhill as one of four units assigned to the first wave. But as the Luftwaffe failed to overcome the Royal Air Force during the Battle of Britain, Operation Sea Lion was postponed indefinitely on 12 October. For the rest of the year, Manstein, with little to do, spent time in Paris and at home.

===Invasion of the Soviet Union===
In July 1940 the German High Command commenced planning Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union. On 15 March 1941 Manstein was appointed commander of the LVI Panzer Corps; he was one of 250 commanders to be briefed for the upcoming major offensive, first seeing detailed plans of the offensive in May. His corps was part of the Fourth Panzer Group under the command of General Erich Hoepner in Wilhelm Ritter von Leeb&#x27;s Army Group North. The Army Group was tasked with thrusting through the Baltic States and then advancing on Leningrad. Manstein arrived at the front only six days prior to the launch of the offensive. Operation Barbarossa commenced on 22 June 1941 with a massive German attack along the whole front line. Manstein&#x27;s corps was to advance with Georg-Hans Reinhardt&#x27;s XLI Panzer Corps to the Dvina River to secure the bridges near the town of Daugavpils. The Soviet forces mounted a number of counterattacks, but those were aimed against Reinhardt&#x27;s corps, leading to the Battle of Raseiniai. Manstein&#x27;s corps advanced rapidly, reaching the Dvina River, distant, in just 100 hours. Overextended and well ahead of the rest of the army group, he fended off a number of determined Soviet counterattacks. After Reinhardt&#x27;s corps closed in, the two corps were tasked with encircling the Soviet formations around Luga in a pincer movement. Again having penetrated deep into the Soviet lines with unprotected flanks, his corps was the target of a Soviet counteroffensive from 15 July at Soltsy by the Soviet 11th Army, commanded by Nikolai Vatutin. Manstein&#x27;s 8th Panzer Division was cut off. Although it was able to fight its way free, it was badly mauled, and the Red Army succeeded in halting Manstein&#x27;s advance at Luga. The corps regrouped at Dno. The 8th Panzer was sent on anti-partisan duties and Manstein was given the 4th SS Polizei Division. The attack on Luga was repeatedly delayed.

The assault on Luga was still underway when Manstein received orders on 10 August that his next task would be to begin the advance toward Leningrad. No sooner had he moved to his new headquarters at Lake Samro than he was told to send his men towards Staraya Russa to relieve the X Corps, which was in danger of being encircled. On 12 August the Red Army had launched an offensive with the 11th and 34th Armies against Army Group North, cutting off three divisions. Frustrated with the loss of the 8th Panzer and the missed opportunity to advance on Leningrad, Manstein returned to Dno. His counteroffensive led to a major Soviet defeat when his unit encircled five Soviet divisions, receiving air support for the first time on that front. They captured 12,000 prisoners and 141 tanks. His opponent, General Kuzma M. Kachanov of the 34th Army, was subsequently court martialed and executed for the defeat. Manstein tried to obtain rest days for his men, who had been constantly fighting in poor terrain and increasingly poor weather since the start of the campaign, but to no avail. They were ordered to advance to the east on Demyansk. On 12 September, when he was near the city, he was informed that he would take over 11th Army of Army Group South in Ukraine.

===Crimea and the Battle of Sevastopol===

In September 1941 Manstein was appointed commander of the 11th Army after its previous commander, Colonel-General Eugen Ritter von Schobert, perished when his plane landed in a Soviet minefield. The 11th Army was tasked with invading the Crimean Peninsula, capturing Sevastopol, and pursuing enemy forces on the flank of Army Group South during its advance into the Soviet Union. Hitler aimed to prevent the Red Army from using airbases in the Crimea and to cut off the Soviet supply of oil from the Caucasus.

Manstein&#x27;s forcesmostly infantryachieved a rapid breakthrough during the first days against heavy Soviet resistance. After most of the neck of the Perekop Isthmus had been taken, his forces were substantially reduced, leaving six German divisions and the Romanian Third Army. The rest of the Perekop Isthmus was captured slowly and with some difficulty; Manstein complained of a lack of air support to contest Soviet air superiority in the region. He next formed a mobile reconnaissance unit to press down the peninsula, cutting the road between Simferopol and Sevastopol on 31 October 1941. Axis forces captured Simferopol the next day. The 11th Army had captured all of the Crimean Peninsula—except for Sevastopol—by 16 November. Meanwhile, the Red Army had evacuated 300,000 personnel out of the city by sea.

Manstein&#x27;s first attack on Sevastopol in November failed, and with insufficient forces left for an immediate assault, he ordered an investment of the heavily fortified city. By 17 December 1941 he launched another offensive, which also failed. On 26 December Soviet troops landed on the Kerch Straits to retake Kerch and its peninsula, and on 30 December 1941 executed another landing near Feodosiya. Only a hurried withdrawal from the Kerch Peninsula, in contravention of Manstein&#x27;s orders, by the 46th Infantry Division under General Hans Graf von Sponeck, prevented an Axis collapse in the eastern part of the Crimea; the division lost most of its heavy equipment. Manstein cancelled a planned resumption of the attack and sent most of his forces east to destroy the Soviet bridgehead. The Soviet forces were in a superior position regarding men and materiel as they were able to re-supply by sea; accordingly, Stalin pushed them to conduct further offensives. However, the Soviet troops were unable to capture the critical rail- and road-access points which would have cut the German lines of supply.

For the Battle of the Kerch Peninsula, launched on 8 May 1942, Hitler finally assigned Manstein major air support. The 11th Army was outnumbered on the ground, so Manstein had them feint an attack in the north while the bulk of the force attacked to the south. The Soviet troops soon fled. Manstein recorded in his memoirs the capture of &quot;170,000 prisoners, 1,133 guns and 258 tanks&quot;. Kerch was captured on 16 May. The &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; lost only 8,000 men.

After a month&#x27;s delay, Manstein turned his attention once more to the capture of Sevastopol, a battle in which Germany used some of the largest guns ever built. Along with large numbers of regular artillery pieces, super-heavy Karl-Gerät mortars and the &quot;Dora&quot; railway gun were brought in for the assault. A furious barrage began on the morning of 2 June 1942. All of the resources of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;″s &quot;Luftflotte 4&quot;, commanded by Wolfram von Richthofen, were committed; the barrage continued for five days before the ground assault began.

The 11th Army gained ground during mid-June, focusing their attention on the northern approaches to the city. Casualties were high on both sides as the month dragged on. Aware of the need to act before the German offensive of 1942 reduced the availability of reinforcements and supplies, Manstein ordered a surprise attack across using amphibious landings on 29 June 1942. The operation was a success; Soviet resistance crumbled. On 1 July 1942 German forces entered the city while the Soviet forces conducted a disorganised evacuation, and Hitler promoted Manstein to &quot;Generalfeldmarschall&quot; the same day. The entire city was in German hands by 4 July 1942.

During the Crimean campaign Manstein was indirectly involved in atrocities against the Soviet population, especially those committed by &quot;Einsatzgruppe&quot; D, one of several Schutzstaffel (SS) groups that had been tasked with the elimination of the Jews of Europe. &quot;Einsatzgruppe&quot; D travelled in the wake of Manstein&#x27;s 11th Army and were provided by Manstein&#x27;s command with vehicles, fuel, and drivers. Military police cordoned off areas where the &quot;Einsatzgruppe&quot; planned to shoot Jews to prevent anyone from escaping. Captain Ulrich Gunzert, shocked to have witnessed &quot;Einsatzgruppe&quot; D massacre a group of Jewish women and children, went to Manstein to ask him to do something to stop the murders. Gunzert states that Manstein told him to forget what he had seen and to concentrate on fighting the Red Army. Eleven of the seventeen charges against Manstein at his later war crimes trial related to Nazi maltreatment and murder of Jews and prisoners-of-war in the Crimea.

===Siege of Leningrad===

After the capture of Sevastopol, Hitler felt Manstein was the right man to command the forces at Leningrad, which had been under siege since September 1941. With elements of the 11th Army, Manstein was transferred to the Leningrad front, arriving on 27 August 1942. Manstein again lacked the proper forces to storm the city, so he planned Operation Nordlicht, a bold plan for a thrust to cut off Leningrad&#x27;s supply line at Lake Ladoga.

However, on the day of his arrival, the Red Army launched the Sinyavin Offensive. Originally planned as a spoiling attack against Georg Lindemann&#x27;s 18th Army in the narrow German salient west of Lake Ladoga, the offensive appeared able to break through the German lines, lifting the siege. Hitler, bypassing the usual chain of command, telephoned Manstein directly and ordered him to take offensive action in the area. After a series of heavy battles, he launched a counterattack on 21 September 1942 that cut off the two Soviet armies in the salient. Fighting continued throughout October 1942. Although the Soviet offensive was fended off, the resulting attrition meant that the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; could no longer execute a decisive assault on Leningrad, and &quot;Nordlicht&quot; was put on hold. The siege was finally lifted by the Soviet forces in January 1944.

===Battle of Stalingrad===
In an attempt to resolve their persistent shortage of oil, the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; had launched &quot;Fall Blau&quot; (Case Blue), a massive offensive aimed against the Caucasian oilfields, in 1942. After German air attacks, the 6th Army, led by Friedrich Paulus, was tasked with capturing Stalingrad, a key city on the River Volga. His troops, supported by 4th Panzer Army, entered the city on 12 September. Hand-to-hand combat and street fighting ensued. The Red Army launched a huge counteroffensive on 19 November, codenamed Operation Uranus, which was designed to encircle the German armies and trap them in the city; this goal was accomplished on 23 November. Hitler, aware that if Stalingrad were lost it would likely never be retaken, appointed Manstein as commander of the newly created Army Group Don (&quot;Heeresgruppe Don&quot;), tasked with mounting a relief operation named &quot;Unternehmen Wintergewitter&quot; (Operation Winter Storm), to reinforce the German hold on the city. Manstein&#x27;s initial assessment on 24 November was that the 6th Army, given adequate air support, would be able to hold on.

In October 1942, his son, Gero, was killed in battle. He later described this as &quot;The worst thing that happened to me personally during the war&quot;.

Launched on 12 December, Winter Storm achieved some initial success. Manstein&#x27;s three Panzer divisions (comprising the 23rd, 6th, and 17th Panzer Divisions) and supporting units of the LVII Panzer Corps advanced to within of Stalingrad by 20 December at the Myshkova River, where they came under assault by Soviet tanks in blizzard conditions. Manstein made a request to Hitler on 18 December that 6th Army should attempt to break out. Hitler was against it, and both Manstein and Paulus were reluctant to openly disobey his orders. Conditions deteriorated inside the city; the men suffered from lice, the cold weather, and inadequate supplies of food and ammunition. Reichsminister of Aviation Hermann Göring had assured Hitler that the trapped 6th Army could be adequately supplied by air, but due to poor weather, a lack of aircraft, and mechanical difficulties, this turned out not to be the case. On 24 January, Manstein urged Hitler to allow Paulus to surrender, but he refused. In spite of Hitler&#x27;s wishes, Paulus surrendered with his remaining 91,000 soldiers on 31 January 1943. Some 200,000 German and Romanian soldiers died; of those who surrendered, only 6,000 survivors returned to Germany after the end of the war. Manstein believed he had done his best for the 6th Army. The encircled men saw it differently:

American historians Williamson Murray and Allan Millett wrote that Manstein&#x27;s message to Hitler on 24 November advising him that the 6th Army should not break out, along with Göring&#x27;s statements that the Luftwaffe could supply Stalingrad, &quot;... sealed the fate of Sixth Army&quot;. Historians, including Gerhard Weinberg, have pointed out that Manstein&#x27;s version of the events at Stalingrad in his memoir is distorted and several events described there were probably made up. &quot;Because of the sensitivity of the Stalingrad question in post-war Germany, Manstein worked as hard to distort the record on this matter as on his massive involvement in the murder of Jews&quot;, wrote Weinberg.

Meanwhile, the Red Army launched an offensive of their own. Operation Saturn was intended to capture Rostov and thus cut off the German Army Group A. However, after the launch of Winter Storm, the Soviet army had to reallocate forces to prevent the relief of Stalingrad, so the operation was scaled down and redubbed &quot;Little Saturn&quot;. The offensive forced Manstein to divert forces to avoid the collapse of the entire front. The attack also prevented the XLVIII Panzer Corps (comprising the 336th Infantry Division, the 3rd Luftwaffe Field Division, and the 11th Panzer Division), under the command of General Otto von Knobelsdorff, from joining up with the LVII Panzer Corps as planned to aid the relief effort. Instead, the XLVIII Panzer Corps held a line along the Chir River, beating off successive Soviet attacks. General Hermann Balck used the 11th Panzer Division to counterattack Soviet salients. On the verge of collapse, the German units were able to hold the line, but the Italian 8th Army on the flanks was overwhelmed and subsequently destroyed.

Spurred on by this success, the Red Army planned a series of follow-up offensives in January and February 1943 intended to decisively beat the German forces in southern Russia. After the destruction of the remaining Hungarian and Italian forces during the Ostrogozhsk–Rossosh Offensive, Operation Star and Operation Gallop were launched to recapture Kharkov and Kursk and to cut off all German forces east of Donetsk. Those operations succeeded in breaking through the German lines and threatened the whole southern part of the German front. To deal with this threat, Army Group Don, Army Group B, and parts of Army Group A were united as Army Group South (&quot;Heeresgruppe Süd&quot;) under Manstein&#x27;s command in early February.

===Kharkov counter-offensive===
During their offensives in February 1943, the Red Army broke through the German lines, retaking Kursk on 9 February. As Army Groups B and Don were in danger of being surrounded, Manstein repeatedly called for reinforcements. Although Hitler called on 13 February for Kharkov to be held &quot;at all costs&quot;, &quot;SS-Oberst-Gruppenführer&quot; Paul Hausser, commander of the II SS Panzer Corps, ordered the city evacuated on 15 February. Hitler arrived at the front in person on 17 February, and over the course of three days of exhausting meetings, Manstein convinced him that offensive action was needed in the area to regain the initiative and prevent encirclement. Troops were reorganised and reinforcements were pulled into the zone from neighbouring armies. Manstein immediately began planning a counteroffensive, launched on 20 February, that later became known as the &quot;backhand blow&quot;; Vatutin and the Soviet forces, believing that Manstein would retreat, were taken completely by surprise. By 2 March, the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; had captured 615 tanks and had killed some 23,000 Soviet soldiers.

To reinforce the point that the recapture of Kharkov was important politically, Hitler travelled again to the front lines in Ukraine on 10 March 1943 where he met with Manstein to review the situation. Manstein carefully assembled his available forces along a wide front to prevent their encirclement and the Germans recaptured Kharkov on 14 March, after bloody street fighting in the Third Battle of Kharkov. For this accomplishment, he received the Oak Leaves for the Knight&#x27;s Cross. Hausser&#x27;s II SS Panzer Corps captured Belgorod on 18 March. Manstein&#x27;s counteroffensive had not only prevented the disintegration of the entire front, it had regained substantial territory and resulted in the destruction of three Soviet armies and the retreat of three others. Soviet casualties for the preceding month in that sector had been 46,000 dead and 14,000 taken prisoner. Captured or destroyed were 600 tanks and 1,200 pieces of artillery. The spring thaw began by 23 March, ending operations in the area for the time being. Planning was then undertaken to eliminate the enemy salient at Kursk.

===Operation Citadel===
Manstein favoured an immediate pincer attack on the Kursk salient after the battle at Kharkov, but Hitler was concerned that such a plan would draw forces away from the industrial region in the Donets Basin. In any event, the ground was still too muddy to move the tanks into position. In lieu of an immediate attack, the OKH prepared Operation Citadel, the launching of which would be delayed while more troops were gathered in the area and the mud solidified. Meanwhile, the Red Army, well aware of the danger of encirclement, also moved in large numbers of reinforcements, and their intelligence reports revealed the expected locations and timing of the German thrusts.

Citadel was the last German strategic offensive on the Eastern Front, and one of the largest battles in history, involving more than four million men. By the time the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; launched their initial assault on 5 July 1943, the Soviet forces outnumbered them by nearly three to one. Walter Model was in command of the northern pincer, with the Ninth Army, while Manstein&#x27;s Army Group South formed the southern pincer.

Both armies were slowed as the tanks were blown up in minefields and caught up in combat on a series of prepared Soviet defensive lines. After five days of fighting Model&#x27;s advance was stopped, with the Ninth Panzers suffering 25,000 casualties. By 13 July Model&#x27;s forces were being drawn away towards Orel, where the Soviet army had launched Operation Kutuzov. Manstein&#x27;s forces were able to penetrate the Soviet lines, causing heavy casualties. He reached, but did not enter or capture, Prokhorovka, his first major objective, on 11 July, inflicting serious Soviet losses in the resulting Battle of Prokhorovka.

However, on 13 July Hitler called off the failed Kursk offensive; the Allies had landed in Sicily, so he issued the order for a withdrawal. Manstein protested; he felt that the Soviet forces had exhausted all their reserves in the area, and he did not want to stop until all his own reserves had been committed. Hitler, however, insisted on calling off the operation. Although Soviet casualties were indeed heavy, modern historians discount the possibility of a successful German continuation of the offensive.

===Retreat to the Dnieper===

Manstein regarded the Battle of Kursk as something of a German victory, as he believed that he had destroyed much of the Red Army&#x27;s offensive capacity for the rest of 1943. This assessment turned out to be incorrect, as the Red Army was able to recover much faster than Manstein expected. Manstein moved his panzer reserves to the Mius River and the lower Dnieper, not realising the Soviet activities there were a diversion. A Soviet offensive that began on 3 August put Army Group South under heavy pressure. After two days of heavy fighting, the Soviet troops broke through the German lines and retook Belgorod, punching a wide hole between the Fourth Panzer Army and the Army Detachment Kempf, tasked with holding Kharkov. In response to Manstein&#x27;s demands for reinforcements, Hitler sent the &quot;Großdeutschland&quot;, 7th Panzer, SS 2nd &quot;Das Reich&quot;, and SS 3rd &quot;Totenkopf&quot; Divisions.

Construction began of defensive positions along the Dnieper, but Hitler refused requests to pull back, insisting that Kharkov be held. With reinforcements trickling in, Manstein waged a series of counterattacks and armoured battles near Bohodukhiv and Okhtyrka between 13 and 17 August, which resulted in heavy casualties as they ran into prepared Soviet lines. On 20 August he informed the OKH that his forces in the Donets river area were holding a too-wide front with insufficient numbers, and that he needed to either withdraw to the Dnieper River or receive reinforcements. Continuous pressure from the Soviet forces had separated Army Group Centre from Army Group South and severely threatened Manstein&#x27;s northern flank. When the Red Army threw their main reserves behind a drive to retake Kharkov on 21–22 August, Manstein took advantage of this to close the gap between the 4th Panzer and 8th Armies and reestablish a defensive line. Hitler finally allowed Manstein to withdraw back across the Dnieper on 15 September. During the withdrawal, Manstein ordered scorched earth actions to be taken in a zone from the river, and later faced charges at his war crimes trial for issuing this order. Soviet losses in July and August included over 1.6 million casualties, 10,000 tanks and self-propelled artillery pieces, and 4,200 aircraft. German losses, while only one-tenth that of the Soviet losses, were much more difficult to sustain, as there were no further reserves of men and materiel to draw on. In a series of four meetings that September, Manstein tried unsuccessfully to convince Hitler to reorganise the high command and let his generals make more of the military decisions. 

===Battle of the Dnieper===
In September 1943 Manstein withdrew to the west bank of the Dnieper in an operation that for the most part was well-ordered, but at times degenerated into a disorganised rout as his exhausted soldiers became &quot;unglued&quot;. Hundreds of thousands of Soviet civilians travelled west with them, many bringing livestock and personal property. Manstein correctly deduced that the next Soviet attack would be towards Kiev, but as had been the case throughout the campaign, the Red Army used &quot;maskirovka&quot; (deception) to disguise the timing and exact location of their intended offensive. Historians Williamson Murray and Allan Reed Millett wrote that many German generals&#x27; &quot;fanatical belief&quot; in Nazi racial theories &quot; ... made the idea that Slavs could manipulate German intelligence with such consistency utterly inconceivable&quot;. The 1st Ukrainian Front, led by Nikolai Fyodorovich Vatutin, met the outnumbered Fourth Panzer Army near Kiev. Vatutin first made a thrust near Liutezh, just north of Kiev, and then attacked near Bukrin, to the south, on 1 November. The German troops, thinking Bukrin would be the location of the main attack, were taken completely by surprise when Vatutin captured the bridgehead at Liutezh and gained a foothold on the west bank of the Dnieper. Kiev was liberated on 6 November. The 17th Army was cut off and isolated in the Crimea by the attacking 4th Ukrainian Front on 28 October.

Under the guidance of General Hermann Balck, the cities of Zhytomyr and Korosten were retaken in mid-November, but after receiving reinforcements Vatutin resumed the offensive on 24 December 1943, and the Red Army continued its successful advance. Manstein&#x27;s repeated requests to Hitler for more reinforcements were turned down. On 4 January 1944 Manstein met with Hitler to tell him that the Dnieper line was untenable and that he needed to retreat in order to save his forces. Hitler refused, and Manstein again requested changes in the highest levels of the military leadership, but was turned down, as Hitler believed that he alone was capable of managing the wider strategy.

In January Manstein was forced to retreat further west by the Soviet offensive. Without waiting for permission from Hitler, he ordered the German XI and XXXXII Corps (consisting of 56,000 men in six divisions) of Army Group South to break out of the Korsun Pocket during the night of 16–17 February 1944. By the beginning of March, the Soviet forces had driven the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; well back of the river. Because of Hitler&#x27;s directive of 19 March that from that point forward all positions were to be defended to the last man, Manstein&#x27;s 1st Panzer Army became encircled on 21 March when permission to break out was not received from Hitler in time. Manstein flew to Hitler&#x27;s headquarters in Lvov to try to convince him to change his mind. Hitler eventually relented, but relieved Manstein of his command on 30 March 1944.

Manstein appeared on the cover of the 10 January 1944 issue of &quot;Time&quot; magazine, above the caption &quot;Retreat may be masterly, but victory is in the opposite direction&quot;.

===Dismissal===
Manstein received the Swords of the Knight&#x27;s Cross on 30 March 1944 and handed over control of Army Group South to Model on 2 April during a meeting at Hitler&#x27;s mountain retreat, the Berghof. Model&#x27;s adjutant, Günther Reichhelm, later described the scene and Manstein&#x27;s response:

While on medical leave after surgery to remove a cataract in his right eye, Manstein recovered at home in Liegnitz and in a medical facility in Dresden. He suffered from an infection and for a time was in danger of losing his sight. On the day of the failed 20 July plot, an assassination attempt on Hitler&#x27;s life that was part of a planned military &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot;, Manstein was at a seaside resort on the Baltic. Although he had met at various times with three of the main conspiratorsClaus von Stauffenberg, Henning von Tresckow, and Rudolf Christoph Freiherr von GersdorffManstein was not involved in the conspiracy; he later said &quot;Preussische Feldmarschälle meutern nicht&quot;—&quot;Prussian field marshals do not mutiny.&quot; Still, the Gestapo placed Manstein&#x27;s house under surveillance.

When it became obvious that Hitler was not going to appoint him to a new post, Manstein bought an estate in East Pomerania in October 1944, but he was soon forced to abandon it when Soviet forces overran the area. His home at Liegnitz had to be evacuated on 22 January 1945, and he and his family took refuge temporarily with friends in Berlin. While there, Manstein tried to get an audience with Hitler in the &quot;Führerbunker&quot; but was turned away. He and his family continued to move farther west into Germany until the war in Europe ended with a German defeat in May 1945. Manstein suffered further complications in his right eye and was receiving treatment in a hospital in Heiligenhafen when he was arrested by the British and transferred to a prisoner of war camp near Lüneburg on 26 August.

==Post-war==

===Trial and conviction===

Manstein was moved to Nuremberg in October 1945. He was held at the Palace of Justice, the location of the Nuremberg trials of major Nazi war criminals and organisations. While there, Manstein helped prepare a 132-page document for the defence of the General Staff and the OKW, on trial at Nuremberg in August 1946. The myth that the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; was &quot;clean&quot;not culpable for the events of the Holocaustarose partly as a result of this document, written largely by Manstein, along with General of Cavalry Siegfried Westphal. He also gave oral testimony about the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;, the treatment of prisoners of war, and the concept of military obedience, especially as related to the Commissar Order, an order issued by Hitler in 1941, requiring all Soviet political commissars to be shot without trial. Manstein admitted that he received the order, but said he did not carry it out.

Documents from 1941 presented at Nuremberg and at Manstein&#x27;s own later trial contradict this claim: He actually received regular reports throughout that period regarding the execution of hundreds of political commissars. He denied any knowledge of the activities of the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;, and testified that soldiers under his command were not involved in the murder of Jewish civilians. Otto Ohlendorf, commander of &quot;Einsatzgruppe&quot; D, contradicted this during his testimony, saying that not only was Manstein aware of what was happening but that the Eleventh Army was involved. In September 1946, the General Staff and the OKW were declared to not be a criminal organisation. Their decision was that a collection of military officers was not a group or organisation as defined by article 9 of their charter.

After his testimony at Nuremberg, Manstein was interned by the British as a prisoner of war at Island Farm (also known as Special Camp 11) in Bridgend, Wales, where he awaited the decision as to whether or not he would face a war crimes trial. He mostly kept apart from the other inmates, taking solitary walks, tending a small garden, and beginning work on the drafts of two books. British author B. H. Liddell Hart was in correspondence with Manstein and others at Island Farm and visited inmates of several camps around Britain while preparing his best-selling 1947 book &quot;On the Other Side of the Hill&quot;. Liddell Hart was an admirer of the German generals; he described Manstein as an operational genius. The two remained in contact, and Liddell Hart later helped Manstein arrange the publication of the English edition of his memoir, &quot;Verlorene Siege&quot; (&quot;Lost Victories&quot;), in 1958.

The British cabinet, under pressure from the Soviet Union, finally decided in July 1948 to prosecute Manstein for war crimes. He and three other senior officers (Walther von Brauchitsch, Gerd von Rundstedt and Adolf Strauss) were transferred to &quot;Munsterlager&quot; to await trial. Brauchitsch died that October and Rundstedt and Strauss were released on medical grounds in March 1949. Manstein&#x27;s trial was held in Hamburg from 23 August to 19 December 1949.

Manstein faced seventeen charges at the trial, three of which pertained to events in Poland and fourteen regarding events in the Soviet Union. Charges included maltreatment of prisoners of war, co-operation with the &quot;Einsatzgruppe&quot; D in murdering Jewish residents of the Crimea, and disregarding the welfare of civilians by using &quot;scorched earth&quot; tactics while retreating from the Soviet Union. The prosecution, led by senior counsel Arthur Comyns Carr, used an order Manstein had signed on 20 November 1941, based on the Severity Order that had been issued by Field Marshal Walther von Reichenau, to build their case that Manstein had known about and was complicit with the genocide. The order called for the elimination of the &quot;Jewish Bolshevik system&quot; and the &quot;harsh punishment of Jewry&quot;.

Manstein claimed that he remembered asking for a draft of such an order but had no recollection of signing it. American historians Ronald Smelser and Edward J. Davies wrote in 2008 that Manstein agreed with Hitler&#x27;s idea that the war against the Soviet Union was a war to exterminate Judeo-Bolshevism and that he committed perjury when he claimed not to remember signing his version of the Severity Order.

Manstein&#x27;s defence, led by the lawyer Reginald Thomas Paget, argued that the order was justified because many partisans were Jews, and therefore Manstein&#x27;s order calling for all Jews to be executed was justified by his desire to protect his men from partisan attacks. He argued that Manstein was not compelled to disobey orders given by his sovereign government, even if such orders were illegal. Manstein, speaking in his defence, stated that he found the Nazi racial policy to be repugnant. Sixteen other witnesses testified that Manstein had no knowledge of or involvement in genocide. Paget called the Soviets &quot;savages&quot;, arguing that Manstein showed restraint as a &quot;decent German soldier&quot; in upholding the laws of war when fighting against the Soviets, who displayed &quot;appalling savagery&quot;.

Whether or not Manstein was responsible for the activities of &quot;Einsatzgruppe&quot; D, a unit not under his direct control but operating in his zone of command, became one of the key points of the trial. The prosecution claimed it was Manstein&#x27;s duty to know about the activities of this unit and also his duty to put a stop to their genocidal operations. Recent scholars, including Ronald Smelser and Benoît Lemay, are of the opinion that he almost certainly perjured himself at his trial and at Nuremberg.

Manstein was found guilty on nine of the charges and was sentenced to eighteen years in prison. The charges for which he was found guilty included shooting Soviet war prisoners; carrying out the Commissar Order; and allowing subordinates to shoot civilians. Manstein&#x27;s supporters in Britain and in Germany protested. Liddell Hart lobbied in the British press, and in Germany the sentence was seen as a political decision. The sentence was reduced to 12 years in February 1950. Paget published a best-selling book in 1951 about Manstein&#x27;s career and trial which portrayed Manstein as an honourable soldier fighting heroically despite overwhelming odds on the Eastern Front and who had been convicted of crimes that he did not commit. The book helped to contribute to the growing cult surrounding Manstein&#x27;s name. His release on 7 May 1953 was partly a result of a recurrence of his eye problems but also the result of pressure by Winston Churchill, Konrad Adenauer, Liddell Hart, Paget, and others. Also, the British wanted Germany to take part in the defence of Western Europe, and Adenauer made Germany&#x27;s re-armament contingent on the release of their war criminals.

===Antisemitism===
Manstein believed that Bolshevism and Jews were inextricably linked, that there was a global conspiracy led by the Jews, and that in order to stop the spread of communism it was necessary to remove the Jews from European society. His order of 20 November 1941, based on the Severity Order of Reichenau, reads in part:

Manstein did nothing to prevent the murder of Jews and other civilians in the areas where his units were operating, and in which his Eleventh Army actively participated. That Manstein was well aware of the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; massacres is demonstrated by a 1941 letter he sent to Otto Ohlendorf, in which Manstein demands Ohlendorf hand over the wristwatches of murdered Jews. Manstein felt his men deserved the watches, since they were doing so much to help Ohlendorf&#x27;s men with their work. Smelser and Davies note that this letter was the only time that Manstein ever complained about the activities of the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;. Manstein later stated that he felt the number of Jews murdered in the Holocaust was exaggerated.

Antisemitism was common in Germany and throughout Europe during this period, and Manstein&#x27;s attitude towards the Jews had its roots in his exposure to and assimilation of these views. Biographer Benoît Lemay describes Manstein&#x27;s actions as a reflection of his loyalty toward Hitler and the Nazi regime and of his grounding in a sense of duty based on traditional Prussian military values.

His criticism of Hitler was based solely on their disagreements over the conduct of the war, not about the regime&#x27;s racial policies. Some historians, including Antony Beevor and Benoît Lemay, are of the opinion that Manstein had some Jewish ancestry. Manstein was the only &quot;Reichswehr&quot; officer who opposed the introduction of the Aryan paragraph in 1934. He sent a letter of protest to General Beck, commenting that anyone who had volunteered to serve in the armed forces had already proven their worth.

Lemay speculated that Manstein may have been interested in protecting his two &quot;Mischlinge&quot; grandnephews who were already serving in the Reichswehr. He may have also been concerned about the possibility that he had distant Jewish ancestry. The SS carried out an investigation into Manstein&#x27;s ancestry but the report was not completed and the results remain unknown.

===Post-war life and memoirs===
Along with ten other former senior officers, Manstein was called on in 1955 by the Amt Blank to formulate plans for the re-founding of the German army. On 20 June 1953, he spoke to the &quot;Bundestag&quot;, giving his analysis of strategic power considerations and the country&#x27;s defence and spoke about whether the country should have a professional army or a conscripted army. His opinion was that the length of service for &quot;Bundeswehr&quot; conscripts should be at least 18 months, preferably 24 months. His idea to form a reserve force was later implemented.

Manstein&#x27;s war memoir, &quot;Verlorene Siege&quot; (&quot;Lost Victories&quot;), was published in West Germany in 1955 and was later translated into several other languages. The book was a highly acclaimed best-seller, critical of Hitler and his leadership style. Historians such as Liddell Hart saw Manstein&#x27;s emphasis on the purely military aspects of the war, while ignoring the political and moral aspects, as a way for him to absolve himself and the high command of any responsibility for the events of the Holocaust. Over the years, he became the centre of a &quot;military cult&quot; which cast him not only as one of Germany&#x27;s greatest generals, but also one of the greatest in history. He has been described as a &quot;militärische Kult- und Leitfigur&quot; (&quot;military cult figure and leading personality&quot;), a general of legendaryalmost mythicalability, much honoured by both the public and historians. Biographers, including Benoît Lemay, feel that his narrow focus on military matters to the exclusion of moral issues cannot be considered ethical.

Manstein and his wife moved several times after his release from prison, living in Essen and Bonn for a time before settling into a house near Munich in 1958. The second volume of his memoirs, &quot;Aus einem Soldatenleben&quot; (&quot;A Soldier&#x27;s Life&quot;), covering the period from 1887 to 1939, was published in 1958. His wife, Jutta Sibylle von Manstein, died in 1966.

On Manstein&#x27;s 80th birthday, he received congratulations from the &quot;Bundeswehr&quot;″s supreme high commander, General Ulrich de Maizière, with entourage.

Erich von Manstein died of a stroke on the night of 9 June 1973 at the age of 85. As the penultimate surviving German field marshal (Ferdinand Schörner died 2 July 1973), he was buried with full military honours. His funeral was attended by hundreds of soldiers of all ranks. In Manstein&#x27;s obituary, &quot;Spiegel&quot; magazine said, &quot;He assisted in the march to catastrophe—misled by a blind sense of duty.&quot;

==Awards==
* Iron Cross of 1914, 1st and 2nd class
* Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Royal House Order of Hohenzollern with Swords
* Knight&#x27;s Cross, First Class of the Friedrich Order with Swords
* Hanseatic Cross (Hamburg version) 
* Honour Cross of the World War 1914/1918
* Clasp to the Iron Cross (1939) 2nd Class (16 September 1939) and 1st Class (21 September 1939)
* Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords
** Knight&#x27;s Cross on 19 July 1940 as &quot;General der Infanterie&quot; and commanding general of the XXXVIII Army Corps
** Oak Leaves on 14 March 1943 as &quot;Generalfeldmarschall&quot; and commander-in-chief of Army Group South
** Swords on 30 March 1944 as &quot;Generalfeldmarschall&quot; and commander-in-chief of Army Group South

==References==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
===Official records===
* The British records of the Manstein trial are now housed in the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives, King&#x27;s College London.
* Manstein&#x27;s testimony at Nuremberg is contained in three files at the Yale University Avalon Project: 9 August 1946, 10 August 1946, and 12 August 1946.

===Books and articles===
* 
* 
* . English translation: &quot;Lost Victories&quot;. First published 1958. Zenith Press 2004, The book (in German) had its 8th ed. in 1964 and its 12th in 1991. Bernhard &amp; Graefe 2009, . Here is one contemporary review (in Der Spiegel 3/1959): In Treue kess
* (first published in 1958 as &quot;Aus einem Soldatenleben&quot; (Athenäum, Bonn))
* 


==External links==
* 
* &quot;How Wrong Was Churchill?&quot; by Noel Annan, &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57135" start="0" end="37" title="Erich von Manstein" label="Fritz Erich Georg Eduard von Manstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q57135" start="44" end="81" title="Erich von Manstein" label="Fritz Erich Georg Eduard von Lewinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820253" start="134" end="154" title="Generalfeldmarschall" label="Generalfeldmarschall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="162" end="175" title="Field marshal" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="190" end="194" title="German Army (1935–1945)" label="Heer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="211" end="223" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="231" end="243" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="356" end="363" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="481" end="488" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="493" end="506" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="518" end="533" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="620" end="636" title="inter-war period" label="inter-war period"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="709" end="727" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q70527" start="801" end="819" title="Gerd von Rundstedt" label="Gerd von Rundstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q266893" start="827" end="843" title="Army Group South" label="Army Group South"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="845" end="857" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="897" end="915" title="Battle of France" label="invasion of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q57174" start="953" end="965" title="Franz Halder" label="Franz Halder"/>
<link wikidata="Q155870" start="991" end="994" title="OKH" label="OKH"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287072" start="1139" end="1148" title="Operational level of war" label="operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="1285" end="1293" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="1319" end="1334" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1385" end="1392" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="1397" end="1405" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q21996303" start="1429" end="1436" title="general (Germany)" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="1486" end="1514" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="1540" end="1544" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154860" start="1559" end="1590" title="siege of Sevastopol (1941–1942)" label="siege of Sevastopol (1941–1942)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119625147" start="1599" end="1628" title="Battle of the Kerch Peninsula" label="Battle of the Kerch Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="1715" end="1733" title="siege of Leningrad" label="siege of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="1778" end="1798" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q698170" start="1849" end="1871" title="Operation Winter Storm" label="Operation Winter Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q157873" start="1966" end="1989" title="Third Battle of Kharkov" label="Third Battle of Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="2175" end="2190" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Battle of Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="2480" end="2496" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q973290" start="2608" end="2647" title="myth of the clean Wehrmacht" label="myth of the clean &amp;quot;Wehrmacht&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="2725" end="2738" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839974" start="2751" end="2760" title="Trial of Erich von Manstein" label="was tried"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="2764" end="2771" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="3111" end="3122" title="West Germany" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q933075" start="3211" end="3226" title="Verlorene Siege" label="Verlorene Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="3462" end="3468" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="3553" end="3559" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130329548" start="3575" end="3590" title="Lewinski family" label="Lewinski family"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="3611" end="3618" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478141" start="3620" end="3630" title="aristocrat" label="aristocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="3635" end="3644" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q77911" start="3654" end="3673" title="Eduard von Lewinski" label="Eduard von Lewinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q147239" start="3753" end="3762" title="Kashubians" label="Kashubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097105" start="3800" end="3822" title="Brochwicz coat of arms" label="Brochwicz coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q86258" start="4319" end="4347" title="Albrecht Gustav von Manstein" label="Albrecht Gustav von Manstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="4372" end="4391" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724871" start="4430" end="4448" title="Oskar von Sperling" label="Oskar von Sperling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4476" end="4486" title="First Army (Franco-Prussian War)" label="First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="4600" end="4619" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157740" start="4669" end="4689" title="President of Germany (1919–1945)" label="President of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="4845" end="4854" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="4864" end="4874" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q54552" start="4915" end="4926" title="Cadet Corps" label="cadet corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q497060" start="5046" end="5050" title="Plön" label="Plön"/>
<link wikidata="Q155211" start="5055" end="5072" title="Lichterfelde (Berlin)" label="Groß-Lichterfelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q144242" start="5292" end="5312" title="Prussian War Academy" label="Prussian War Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5392" end="5407" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="5678" end="5684" title="German Empire" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="5685" end="5692" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="5697" end="5704" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="5808" end="5815" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q134121" start="5909" end="5914" title="Namur" label="Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="6041" end="6053" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q270188" start="6074" end="6085" title="8th Army (German Empire)" label="Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q660655" start="6139" end="6173" title="First Battle of the Masurian Lakes" label="First Battle of the Masurian Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q275077" start="6211" end="6221" title="9th Army (German Empire)" label="Ninth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q81011" start="6266" end="6279" title="Upper Silesia" label="Upper Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="6283" end="6289" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q307869" start="6583" end="6596" title="sciatic nerve" label="sciatic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q102350" start="6666" end="6673" title="Beuthen" label="Beuthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721" start="6678" end="6687" title="Wiesbaden" label="Wiesbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q167593" start="6820" end="6830" title="10th Army (German Empire)" label="Tenth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q62428" start="6845" end="6861" title="Max von Gallwitz" label="Max von Gallwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="7014" end="7023" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="7025" end="7035" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="7041" end="7048" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q154748" start="7081" end="7087" title="Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q77414" start="7248" end="7263" title="Fritz von Below" label="Fritz von Below"/>
<link wikidata="Q73367" start="7283" end="7301" title="Fritz von Lossberg" label="Fritz von Lossberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37646" start="7329" end="7340" title="River Somme" label="River Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q311721" start="7519" end="7534" title="Hindenburg Line" label="Hindenburg Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q165271" start="7587" end="7591" title="Lens, Pas-de-Calais" label="Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q230735" start="7702" end="7722" title="4th Cavalry Division (German Empire)" label="4th Cavalry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="7735" end="7739" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="7816" end="7839" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7944" end="7967" title="213th Infantry Division (German Empire)" label="213th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="7973" end="7978" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="8081" end="8090" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="8205" end="8212" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13643998" start="8610" end="8644" title="Edel-Heinrich Zachariae-Lingenthal" label="Edel-Heinrich Zachariae-Lingenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="8878" end="8885" title="Wrocław" label="Breslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q157608" start="9053" end="9063" title="Reichswehr" label="Reichswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="9087" end="9102" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="9137" end="9154" title="Versailles Treaty" label="Versailles Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q10572199" start="9592" end="9605" title="German General Staff" label="General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="9938" end="9948" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="9949" end="9961" title="Machtergreifung" label="seized power"/>
<link wikidata="Q702246" start="10191" end="10202" title="German rearmament" label="re-armament"/>
<link wikidata="Q155870" start="10534" end="10557" title="Oberkommando des Heeres" label="Oberkommando des Heeres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350870" start="10669" end="10677" title="Fall Rot" label="Fall Rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="10806" end="10820" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q97479" start="10825" end="10836" title="Oswald Lutz" label="Oswald Lutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683569" start="10908" end="10914" title="Panzer" label="Panzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57170" start="10939" end="10950" title="Ludwig Beck" label="Ludwig Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658811" start="11093" end="11106" title="Sturmgeschütz" label="Sturmgeschütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009153" start="11347" end="11359" title="Generalmajor" label="Generalmajor"/>
<link wikidata="Q200165" start="11532" end="11554" title="18th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="18th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q106274" start="11558" end="11566" title="Liegnitz" label="Liegnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="11568" end="11575" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21996303" start="11594" end="11609" title="General (Germany)" label="Generalleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="11836" end="11850" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57174" start="11919" end="11931" title="Franz Halder" label="Franz Halder"/>
<link wikidata="Q929282" start="12482" end="12493" title="Omer Bartov" label="Omer Bartov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="12708" end="12720" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q26078" start="12880" end="12902" title="Fall Weiss (1939)" label="&amp;quot;Fall Weiss&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="12926" end="12944" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q70527" start="12985" end="13003" title="Gerd von Rundstedt" label="Gerd von Rundstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q266893" start="13011" end="13027" title="Army Group South" label="Army Group South"/>
<link wikidata="Q57793" start="13101" end="13120" title="Günther Blumentritt" label="Günther Blumentritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q57144" start="13286" end="13306" title="Walter von Reichenau" label="Walter von Reichenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q163925" start="13314" end="13323" title="10th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="10th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="13437" end="13450" title="River Vistula" label="River Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q57198" start="13523" end="13535" title="Wilhelm List" label="Wilhelm List"/>
<link wikidata="Q187119" start="13543" end="13552" title="14th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="14th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q57234" start="13558" end="13577" title="Johannes Blaskowitz" label="Johannes Blaskowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q671863" start="13585" end="13593" title="8th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="8th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="13668" end="13674" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13840" end="13852" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="14465" end="14479" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="14497" end="14510" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="14701" end="14707" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="14713" end="14737" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="15199" end="15203" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="15373" end="15379" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q104740" start="15459" end="15464" title="Radom" label="Radom"/>
<link wikidata="Q165549" start="15880" end="15899" title="Battle of the Bzura" label="Battle of the Bzura"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="16209" end="16227" title="Commander-in-Chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q155327" start="16240" end="16255" title="Colonel General" label="Colonel General"/>
<link wikidata="Q57140" start="16284" end="16307" title="Walther von Brauchitsch" label="Walther von Brauchitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q152468" start="16378" end="16393" title="Schlieffen Plan" label="Schlieffen Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="16459" end="16470" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="16475" end="16482" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q163259" start="17227" end="17239" title="Army Group A" label="Army Group A"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="17308" end="17322" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="17399" end="17407" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="17474" end="17479" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="17505" end="17520" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="17582" end="17595" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="17611" end="17619" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q162746" start="17792" end="17804" title="Maginot Line" label="Maginot Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q184371" start="18118" end="18123" title="Sedan, Ardennes" label="Sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q452157" start="18251" end="18286" title="Mechelen Incident" label="fell into the hands of the Belgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="18585" end="18592" title="Stettin" label="Stettin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578231" start="18608" end="18626" title="XXXVIII Army Corps (Wehrmacht)" label="XXXVIII Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899063" start="18765" end="18778" title="Manstein Plan" label="Manstein Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57141" start="18909" end="18926" title="Günther von Kluge" label="Günther von Kluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q464848" start="18934" end="18942" title="4th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="4th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="19000" end="19006" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350870" start="19020" end="19028" title="Fall Rot" label="Fall Rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="19137" end="19148" title="River Seine" label="River Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21996303" start="19240" end="19247" title="General (Germany)" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="19264" end="19301" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="19413" end="19431" title="Operation Sea Lion" label="Operation Sea Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="19658" end="19666" title="Boulogne" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q853012" start="19670" end="19677" title="Bexhill-on-Sea" label="Bexhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="19771" end="19786" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="19798" end="19815" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="20058" end="20078" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="20100" end="20112" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668241" start="20171" end="20187" title="LVI Panzer Corps (Germany)" label="LVI Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q168248" start="20345" end="20364" title="4th Panzer Army" label="Fourth Panzer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q57367" start="20394" end="20407" title="Erich Hoepner" label="Erich Hoepner"/>
<link wikidata="Q70546" start="20411" end="20434" title="Wilhelm Ritter von Leeb" label="Wilhelm Ritter von Leeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q163084" start="20442" end="20458" title="Army Group North" label="Army Group North"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="20513" end="20526" title="Baltic States" label="Baltic States"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="20549" end="20558" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q60552" start="20788" end="20808" title="Georg-Hans Reinhardt" label="Georg-Hans Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453565" start="20816" end="20832" title="XLI Panzer Corps" label="XLI Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="20840" end="20851" title="Daugava River" label="Dvina River"/>
<link wikidata="Q80021" start="20891" end="20901" title="Daugavpils" label="Daugavpils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528565" start="21025" end="21044" title="Battle of Raseiniai" label="Battle of Raseiniai"/>
<link wikidata="Q15322" start="21370" end="21374" title="Luga, Leningrad Oblast" label="Luga"/>
<link wikidata="Q196390" start="21543" end="21549" title="Soltsy" label="Soltsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651520" start="21557" end="21573" title="Soviet 11th Army" label="Soviet 11th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q299364" start="21588" end="21603" title="Nikolai Fyodorovich Vatutin" label="Nikolai Vatutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q270756" start="21621" end="21640" title="8th Panzer Division" label="8th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q135370" start="21813" end="21816" title="Dno" label="Dno"/>
<link wikidata="Q163809" start="21893" end="21916" title="4th SS Polizei Division" label="4th SS Polizei Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q196479" start="22213" end="22226" title="Staraya Russa" label="Staraya Russa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030954" start="22361" end="22365" title="34th Army (Soviet Union)" label="34th"/>
<link wikidata="Q372935" start="23089" end="23097" title="Demyansk" label="Demyansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q155434" start="23183" end="23192" title="11th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="11th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q266893" start="23196" end="23212" title="Army Group South" label="Army Group South"/>
<link wikidata="Q63948" start="23383" end="23408" title="Eugen Ritter von Schobert" label="Eugen Ritter von Schobert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="23507" end="23524" title="Crimean Peninsula" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="23536" end="23546" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q213214" start="23932" end="23947" title="Isthmus of Perekop" label="Perekop Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223129" start="24040" end="24059" title="Third Army (Romania)" label="Romanian Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q19566" start="24331" end="24341" title="Simferopol" label="Simferopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="24346" end="24356" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q88272" start="24735" end="24745" title="Investment (military)" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q187890" start="24890" end="24902" title="Kerch Strait" label="Kerch Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q157065" start="24914" end="24919" title="Kerch" label="Kerch"/>
<link wikidata="Q158491" start="24993" end="25002" title="Feodosiya" label="Feodosiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q235395" start="25107" end="25129" title="46th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="46th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q67609" start="25144" end="25165" title="Hans Graf von Sponeck" label="Hans Graf von Sponeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q119625147" start="25722" end="25751" title="Battle of the Kerch Peninsula" label="Battle of the Kerch Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q699606" start="26419" end="26429" title="Karl-Gerät" label="Karl-Gerät"/>
<link wikidata="Q27578" start="26446" end="26462" title="Schwerer Gustav" label="&amp;quot;Dora&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049358" start="26463" end="26474" title="railway gun" label="railway gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="26597" end="26606" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q702863" start="26621" end="26633" title="Luftflotte 4" label="Luftflotte 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q57177" start="26654" end="26676" title="Wolfram von Richthofen" label="Wolfram von Richthofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q158287" start="26977" end="26994" title="Case Blue" label="offensive of 1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="27575" end="27588" title="Einsatzgruppe" label="Einsatzgruppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="27613" end="27626" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="28575" end="28584" title="Siege of Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q19766211" start="28817" end="28836" title="Operation Nordlicht (1942)" label="Operation Nordlicht"/>
<link wikidata="Q15288" start="28906" end="28917" title="Lake Ladoga" label="Lake Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q478881" start="28982" end="29000" title="Sinyavin Offensive (1942)" label="Sinyavin Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q60994" start="29050" end="29065" title="Georg Lindemann" label="Georg Lindemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q200121" start="29073" end="29082" title="18th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="18th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030752" start="29104" end="29111" title="Salients, re-entrants and pockets" label="salient"/>
<link wikidata="Q158287" start="29944" end="29953" title="Case Blue" label="Case Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q161213" start="30054" end="30062" title="6th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="6th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q57160" start="30071" end="30087" title="Friedrich Paulus" label="Friedrich Paulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q914" start="30115" end="30125" title="Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="30145" end="30156" title="River Volga" label="River Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q168248" start="30183" end="30198" title="4th Panzer Army" label="4th Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q155008" start="30354" end="30370" title="Operation Uranus" label="Operation Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q318342" start="30621" end="30635" title="Army Group Don" label="Army Group Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q698170" start="30754" end="30776" title="Operation Winter Storm" label="Operation Winter Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q215711" start="31230" end="31234" title="23rd Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="23rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q246313" start="31236" end="31239" title="6th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="6th"/>
<link wikidata="Q34991" start="31245" end="31266" title="17th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="17th Panzer Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="31806" end="31820" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021231" start="32461" end="32478" title="Williamson Murray" label="Williamson Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q214357" start="32759" end="32775" title="Gerhard Weinberg" label="Gerhard Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q52315" start="33214" end="33230" title="Operation Saturn" label="Operation Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q908" start="33255" end="33261" title="Rostov-on-Don" label="Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q163259" start="33290" end="33302" title="Army Group A" label="Army Group A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816913" start="33618" end="33637" title="XLVIII Panzer Corps (Germany)" label="XLVIII Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q226052" start="33654" end="33677" title="336th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="336th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816016" start="33683" end="33711" title="3rd Luftwaffe Field Division (Germany)" label="3rd Luftwaffe Field Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q169932" start="33721" end="33741" title="11th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="11th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q62764" start="33773" end="33794" title="Otto von Knobelsdorff" label="Otto von Knobelsdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q71122" start="33931" end="33941" title="Chir River" label="Chir River"/>
<link wikidata="Q61239" start="33990" end="34003" title="Hermann Balck" label="Hermann Balck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659016" start="34147" end="34163" title="Italian Army in Russia" label="Italian 8th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q562797" start="34479" end="34508" title="Ostrogozhsk–Rossosh Offensive" label="Ostrogozhsk–Rossosh Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748121" start="34510" end="34524" title="Operation Star" label="Operation Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097066" start="34529" end="34545" title="Operation Gallop" label="Operation Gallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="34573" end="34580" title="Kharkov" label="Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159" start="34585" end="34590" title="Kursk" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43070" start="34632" end="34639" title="Donetsk" label="Donetsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q157572" start="34807" end="34819" title="Army Group B" label="Army Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q266893" start="34862" end="34878" title="Army Group South" label="Army Group South"/>
<link wikidata="Q161218" start="35310" end="35333" title="SS-Oberst-Gruppenführer" label="SS-Oberst-Gruppenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57181" start="35340" end="35352" title="Paul Hausser" label="Paul Hausser"/>
<link wikidata="Q701700" start="35371" end="35389" title="II SS Panzer Corps" label="II SS Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q157873" start="36495" end="36518" title="Third Battle of Kharkov" label="Third Battle of Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323" start="36644" end="36652" title="Belgorod" label="Belgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q605714" start="37435" end="37447" title="Donets Basin" label="Donets Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q745709" start="37484" end="37493" title="Rasputitsa" label="too muddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q70536" start="38210" end="38222" title="Walter Model" label="Walter Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q275151" start="38271" end="38281" title="9th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="Ninth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q672571" start="38704" end="38721" title="Operation Kutuzov" label="Operation Kutuzov"/>
<link wikidata="Q258359" start="38855" end="38866" title="Prokhorovka, Belgorod Oblast" label="Prokhorovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q541506" start="38957" end="38978" title="Battle of Prokhorovka" label="Battle of Prokhorovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="39062" end="39078" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="landed in Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165587" start="39859" end="39869" title="Mius River" label="Mius River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323" start="40132" end="40140" title="Belgorod" label="Belgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664778" start="40202" end="40223" title="Army Detachment Kempf" label="Army Detachment Kempf"/>
<link wikidata="Q696944" start="40329" end="40356" title="Panzer-Grenadier-Division Großdeutschland" label="&amp;quot;Großdeutschland&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q260811" start="40358" end="40368" title="7th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="7th Panzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160133" start="40370" end="40398" title="2nd SS Division Das Reich" label="SS 2nd &amp;quot;Das Reich&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q159522" start="40404" end="40432" title="3rd SS Division Totenkopf" label="SS 3rd &amp;quot;Totenkopf&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q889930" start="40682" end="40692" title="Bohodukhiv" label="Bohodukhiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013471" start="40697" end="40705" title="Okhtyrka" label="Okhtyrka"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="40983" end="40996" title="Dnieper River" label="Dnieper River"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="41517" end="41531" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="42586" end="42590" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051531" start="42666" end="42676" title="Russian military deception" label="maskirovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021231" start="42777" end="42794" title="Williamson Murray" label="Williamson Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348882" start="42888" end="42908" title="Nazism and race" label="Nazi racial theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q277985" start="43037" end="43056" title="1st Ukrainian Front" label="1st Ukrainian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q299364" start="43065" end="43092" title="Nikolai Fyodorovich Vatutin" label="Nikolai Fyodorovich Vatutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q197284" start="43518" end="43527" title="17th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="17th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563827" start="43584" end="43603" title="4th Ukrainian Front" label="4th Ukrainian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q61239" start="43650" end="43663" title="Hermann Balck" label="Hermann Balck"/>
<link wikidata="Q156713" start="43679" end="43687" title="Zhytomyr" label="Zhytomyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q158904" start="43692" end="43700" title="Korosten" label="Korosten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579361" start="44452" end="44454" title="XI Army Corps (Wehrmacht)" label="XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q509417" start="44556" end="44569" title="Korsun Pocket" label="Korsun Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q163388" start="44860" end="44875" title="1st Panzer Army" label="1st Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="45019" end="45023" title="Lvov" label="Lvov"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="45214" end="45239" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163181" start="45548" end="45555" title="Berghof (residence)" label="Berghof"/>
<link wikidata="Q106274" start="45762" end="45770" title="Liegnitz" label="Liegnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="45800" end="45807" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q105570" start="45914" end="45926" title="20 July plot" label="20 July plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q508967" start="46002" end="46039" title="Operation Valkyrie" label="military &amp;quot;coup d&amp;#x27;état&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q21209" start="46161" end="46183" title="Claus von Stauffenberg" label="Claus von Stauffenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q57574" start="46185" end="46205" title="Henning von Tresckow" label="Henning von Tresckow"/>
<link wikidata="Q62355" start="46211" end="46250" title="Rudolf Christoph Freiherr von Gersdorff" label="Rudolf Christoph Freiherr von Gersdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="46424" end="46431" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153491" start="46899" end="46911" title="Führerbunker" label="Führerbunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q516540" start="47167" end="47180" title="Heiligenhafen" label="Heiligenhafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920" start="47264" end="47272" title="Lüneburg" label="Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="47352" end="47361" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q128652" start="47398" end="47415" title="Palace of Justice (Nuremberg)" label="Palace of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="47437" end="47453" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q973290" start="47650" end="47707" title="Myth of the clean Wehrmacht" label="myth that the &amp;quot;Wehrmacht&amp;quot; was &amp;quot;clean&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q86608" start="47853" end="47871" title="Siegfried Westphal" label="Siegfried Westphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q820204" start="48042" end="48057" title="Commissar Order" label="Commissar Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q168559" start="48115" end="48134" title="political commissar" label="political commissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q57575" start="48645" end="48659" title="Otto Ohlendorf" label="Otto Ohlendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111514" start="49172" end="49183" title="Island Farm" label="Island Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497774" start="49219" end="49227" title="Bridgend" label="Bridgend"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="49229" end="49234" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q299431" start="49475" end="49493" title="B. H. Liddell Hart" label="B. H. Liddell Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q933075" start="49930" end="49945" title="Verlorene Siege" label="Verlorene Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q57140" start="50154" end="50177" title="Walther von Brauchitsch" label="Walther von Brauchitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q61125" start="50202" end="50215" title="Adolf Strauss (general)" label="Adolf Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q830816" start="50243" end="50255" title="Munster Training Area" label="Munsterlager"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798318" start="50915" end="50933" title="Arthur Comyns Carr" label="Arthur Comyns Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378338" start="51003" end="51017" title="Severity Order" label="Severity Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q57144" start="51056" end="51077" title="Walther von Reichenau" label="Walther von Reichenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q21520336" start="51425" end="51439" title="Ronald Smelser" label="Ronald Smelser"/>
<link wikidata="Q29589010" start="51444" end="51460" title="Edward J. Davies" label="Edward J. Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137995" start="51749" end="51770" title="Reginald Thomas Paget" label="Reginald Thomas Paget"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912661" start="52173" end="52191" title="Racial policy of Nazi Germany" label="Nazi racial policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21520336" start="52932" end="52946" title="Ronald Smelser" label="Ronald Smelser"/>
<link wikidata="Q820204" start="53253" end="53268" title="Commissar Order" label="Commissar Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="54002" end="54019" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="54021" end="54036" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q472940" start="54289" end="54299" title="Bolshevism" label="Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="54304" end="54308" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q701198" start="54314" end="54333" title="Jewish Bolshevism" label="inextricably linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q57575" start="54872" end="54886" title="Otto Ohlendorf" label="Otto Ohlendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="55332" end="55344" title="Antisemitism" label="Antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q380229" start="55897" end="55910" title="Antony Beevor" label="Antony Beevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q314732" start="56077" end="56092" title="Aryan paragraph" label="Aryan paragraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q671589" start="56336" end="56346" title="Mischlinge" label="Mischlinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q493353" start="56748" end="56757" title="Federal Ministry of Defence (Germany)" label="Amt Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="56856" end="56865" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="57102" end="57112" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q933075" start="57273" end="57288" title="Verlorene Siege" label="Verlorene Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066" start="58407" end="58412" title="Essen" label="Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="58417" end="58421" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q66353" start="58833" end="58851" title="Ulrich de Maizière" label="Ulrich de Maizière"/>
<link wikidata="Q57176" start="59003" end="59021" title="Ferdinand Schörner" label="Ferdinand Schörner"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="59181" end="59188" title="Spiegel (magazine)" label="Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="59309" end="59319" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q644621" start="59382" end="59409" title="House Order of Hohenzollern" label="House Order of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q684511" start="59464" end="59479" title="Friedrich Order" label="Friedrich Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q706808" start="59494" end="59509" title="Hanseatic Cross" label="Hanseatic Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q120758" start="59531" end="59570" title="Honour Cross of the World War 1914/1918" label="Honour Cross of the World War 1914/1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754284" start="59573" end="59596" title="Clasp to the Iron Cross" label="Clasp to the Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="59670" end="59734" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543606" start="60260" end="60301" title="Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives" label="Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="60303" end="60329" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="60407" end="60422" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827597" start="60423" end="60437" title="Avalon Project" label="Avalon Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="60749" end="60760" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="60861" end="60865" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q743424" start="60937" end="60947" title="Noel Annan" label="Noel Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="60955" end="60983" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180728" wikidata="Q590911" url="?curid=180728" title="Lou Harrison">
<text>Lou Silver Harrison (May 14, 1917 – February 2, 2003) was an American composer, music critic, music theorist, painter, and creator of unique musical instruments. Harrison initially wrote in a dissonant, ultramodernist style similar to his former teacher and contemporary, Henry Cowell, but later moved toward incorporating elements of non-Western cultures into his work. Notable examples include a number of pieces written for Javanese style gamelan instruments, inspired after studying with noted gamelan musician Kanjeng Notoprojo in Indonesia. Harrison would create his own musical ensembles and instruments with his partner, William Colvig, who are now both considered founders of the American gamelan movement and world music; along with composers Harry Partch and Claude Vivier, and ethnomusicologist Colin McPhee.

The majority of Harrison&#x27;s works and custom instruments are written for just intonation rather than the more widespread equal temperament, making him one of the most prominent composers to have experimented with microtones. He was also one of the first composers to have written in the international language Esperanto, and among the first to incorporate strong themes of homosexuality in his music.

==Early life and career==
===Childhood===
Harrison was born on May 14, 1917, in Portland, Oregon, to parents Clarence &quot;Pop&quot; Harrison and former Alaska resident Calline Lillian &quot;Cal&quot; Harrison (née Silver). The family was initially well-off financially from past inheritances, but fell on hard times leading up to the Great Depression. Harrison lived in the Portland area for only nine years before moving with his parents and younger brother, Bill, to a number of locations in Northern California, including Sacramento, Stockton, and finally, San Francisco. With the city having a large population of Asian Americans at the time, Harrison was often surrounded by the influence of the East. His mother decorated their home with Japanese lanterns, ornate Persian rugs, and replicas of ancient Chinese artifacts. The diverse array of music he was exposed to there, including Cantonese opera, Hawai&#x27;ian kīkākila, jazz, norteño and classical music, deeply fascinated and interested him. He would later say he had heard far more traditional Chinese music than European music by the time he was an adult.

Harrison&#x27;s early interest in music was supported by his parents, with Cal paying for occasional piano lessons and Pop driving the young Harrison to study traditional Gregorian chant at the Mission San Francisco de Asís for a short period. The family&#x27;s frequent moves in search of work, however, provided the adolescent Harrison little opportunity to develop any long-term friendships. Often feeling like an outsider, he relied on his own judgment to guide his aesthetic decisions and decidedly drifted further and further away from the artistic style of the West. He instead retreated into furthering his own personal education, often spending time at the local library to read books on everything ranging from zoology to Confucianism. He recalled being able to read two books a day, and the extremely wide diaspora of interests prompted him to connect disparate influences throughout his life, including in his future compositions. It&#x27;s believed the loneliness of his youth contributed to his strong dislike of urban metropolises and so-called &quot;city life&quot;.

Harrison discovered he was gay while attending Burlingame High School and realizing his attraction toward a male classmate. By the time he graduated in December 1934 at the age of 17, he had come out to his family, and decided thereafter to make no attempt at hiding his sexual preference and personality – nearly unheard of for gay men of the time.

===First musical education===
 After graduating high school in 1934, Harrison enrolled in San Francisco State College (now San Francisco State University). It was there where he took Henry Cowell&#x27;s &quot;Music of the Peoples of the World&quot; course being offered by the UC Berkeley Extension. Harrison quickly became one of Cowell&#x27;s most enthusiastic students, and he subsequently appointed him as class assistant. After attending a Palo Alto performance of one of Cowell&#x27;s pieces for piano and improvised percussion in June 1935, Harrison would proclaim it to be one of the most extraordinary works he had ever heard. He would later incorporate similar elements of found percussion and aleatoric performance in his music. In fall of the same year, Harrison approached Cowell for private composition lessons, initiating a personal and professional friendship that continued until Cowell&#x27;s death from cancer in 1965. He was the first to publish Harrison&#x27;s music, through the publishing house he founded, New Music Edition. During Cowell&#x27;s four-year stay in San Quentin Prison on a morals charge involving homosexual acts, Harrison publicly appealed for his release, and regularly visited him for composition lessons through the prison&#x27;s bars.

While still studying at age 19, he became an interim professor of music at Mills College in Oakland from 1936 to 1939. In 1941, he transferred to the University of California, Los Angeles to work in the dance department; teaching students Laban movement analysis and playing piano accompaniment. While there, he took theory lessons from Arnold Schoenberg, leading him to further his interest in the infamous twelve-tone technique. He would later say, &quot;... it was no jump at all to learn to write twelve-tone music; Henry&#x27;s the one who taught me.&quot; The pieces he was writing at this time, however, were largely percussive works using unconventional materials, such as discarded car brake drums and garbage cans, as musical instruments. Few of his surviving pieces – including one of the earliest known examples, Prelude for Grandpiano (1937) – follow the serialist twelve-tone idiom. He began using tone clusters in his piano works, à la Cowell, but differed from his technique by calling for an &quot;octave bar&quot; – a flat wooden bar approximately an octave long, with a slightly concave rubber bottom. This allowed the clusters to be much louder than they otherwise would be, and gave the piano more of an unpitched, gong-like sound. His experimental and free-wheeling style flourished during this period, with pieces like the Concerto for Violin and Percussion Orchestra (1940) and &quot;Labyrinth&quot; (1941). This ultramodern and avant-garde music captured the attention of John Cage, another one of Cowell&#x27;s students. Harrison and Cage would collaborate in the years following, and engage in several romantic liaisons.

===New York years===
Harrison was recommended several times to study musical composition in Paris – or Europe more broadly – but resolved several times against it, due to his staunch position of promoting and elevating the status of his fellow American composers. In 1943, Harrison moved to New York City and worked as a music critic for the &quot;Herald Tribune&quot; at the behest of fellow composer and tutor Virgil Thomson. While there, he met and befriended many modernist composers of the East Coast, including Carl Ruggles, Alan Hovhaness, and most consequentially, Charles Ives. Harrison would later dedicate himself to bringing Ives to the attention of the musical world – whose works had largely been scoffed at or ignored up to that point. With the assistance of his mentor Cowell, he engraved and conducted the premiere of Ives&#x27;s Symphony No. 3 (1910); receiving financial help from Ives in return. When Ives won the Pulitzer Prize for Music for that piece, he gave half of the money rewarded to Harrison. Harrison also edited a large number of Ives&#x27;s works, receiving compensation often in excess of what he billed.

As fruitful as his creative endeavors were becoming, Harrison was fraught with loneliness and anxiety while in the city. A romantic relationship with a dancer in Los Angeles had to be terminated due to the move, a move which he had already begun to regret as he missed the West Coast more and more. By 1945, he had developed several painful ulcers, which he could not seem to cure as his nervous condition worsened. Despite attempting to complete new music for publishing, many of them (including one from the commission of Ives) were violently torn up and blackened out by Harrison from an extreme lack of confidence as he began to internalize the negative opinions of his compositions and public image.

In May 1947, extreme stress from homesickness, a vigorous work schedule and homophobic colleagues culminated in a severe nervous breakdown. Cage came to Harrison&#x27;s aid, assisting him and bringing him to a psychiatric clinic in nearby Ossining. Harrison remained in the clinic for several weeks before transferring to the New York Presbyterian Hospital. He wrote frequently to Cowell and his wife Sidney in the first few months, expressing his deep regret and depression for what he felt to be a wasted career and adulthood. His recovery entailed nine months of extensive treatment and several more years of regular checkups, at the request of Harrison. Many of his colleagues predicted the breakdown would herald the end his career, but Harrison continued to compose in spite of the stress plaguing him. While staying in the hospital, he composed several works, including much of his Symphony on G (1952), and regularly painted.

He decided, however, to return to California as soon as possible. In a 1948 letter addressed to his mother, Harrison wrote from the hospital, &quot;I long to live simply and well and that just isn&#x27;t possible here.&quot;

==New life in California==
===New compositional style===
The crisis during his New York years prompted Harrison to heavily reevaluate his compositional language and style. He ultimately rejected the dissonant idiom he had previously cultivated, and turned toward a more sophisticated melodic lyricism in diatonic and pentatonic scales. This put him sharply at odds with the then-current academic styles, and set him apart from the ultramodernist composers he had studied and associated with. The two years following his leave from the hospital in 1949 became one of the most productive of Harrison&#x27;s entire career, yielding impressionistic works such as the Suite for Cello and Harp, and &quot;The Perilous Chapel and Solstice&quot;. Following in the path of Canadian-American composer and friend Colin McPhee, who had done extensive research in Indonesian music in the 1930s and wrote a number of compositions incorporating Balinese and Javanese elements, Harrison&#x27;s style began emulating the influence of gamelan music more clearly, if only in timbre: &quot;It was the sound itself that attracted me. In New York, when I changed gears out of twelve tonalism, I explored this timbre. The gamelan movements in my Suite for Violin, Piano, and Small Orchestra [1951] are aural imitations of the generalized sounds of gamelan&quot;.

In the early 1950s, Harrison was given a first edition copy of Harry Partch&#x27;s book on musical tuning, &quot;Genesis of a Music&quot; (1949) from Thomson. This prompted him to abandon equal temperament and begin writing music in just intonation. He strived to achieve powerful music using simple ratios, and would later consider music itself to be &quot;emotional mathematics&quot;. In an oft-quoted comment referring to the frequency ratios used in just intonation, he said, &quot;I&#x27;d long thought that I would love a time when musicians were numerate as well as literate. I&#x27;d love to be a conductor and say, &#x27;Now, cellos, you gave me 10:9 there, please give me a 9:8 instead,&#x27; I&#x27;d love to get that!&quot;

===Teaching and time abroad===
Harrison taught music at various colleges and universities, including Mills College from 1936 to 1939 and again from 1980 to 1985, San Jose State University, Cabrillo College, Reed College, and Black Mountain College. In 1953 he moved back to California, settling in Aptos near Santa Cruz, where he lived the rest of his life. He and Colvig purchased land in Joshua Tree, California, where they designed and built the &quot;Harrison House Retreat&quot;, a straw bale house. He continued working on his experimental musical instruments.

Although much influenced by Asian music, Harrison did not visit the continent until a 1961 trip to Japan and Korea, and a 1962 trip to Taiwan (where he studied with the zheng master Liang Tsai-Ping). He and his partner William Colvig later constructed a tuned percussion ensemble, using resonated aluminium keys and tubes, as well as oxygen tanks and other found percussion instruments. They called this &quot;an American gamelan&quot;, to distinguish it from those in Indonesia. They also constructed gamelan-type instruments tuned to just pentatonic scales from unusual materials such as tin cans and aluminium furniture tubing. He wrote &quot;La Koro Sutro&quot; (in Esperanto) for these instruments and chorus, as well as Suite for Violin and American Gamelan. In addition, Harrison played and composed for the Chinese guzheng zither, and presented (with Colvig, his student Richard Dee, and the singer Lily Chin) over 300 concerts of traditional Chinese music in the 1960s.

He was a composer-in-residence at San Jose State University in San Jose, California, during the 1960s. The university honored him with an all-Harrison concert in Morris Daley Auditorium in 1969, featuring dancers, singers, and musicians. The highlight of the concert was the world premiere of Harrison&#x27;s depiction of the story of Orpheus, which used soloists, the San Jose State University a cappella choir, as well as a unique group of percussionists.

===Activism and other endeavors===
Harrison was outspoken about his political views, such as his pacifism (he was an active supporter of the international language Esperanto), and the fact that he was gay. He was also politically active and informed, including knowledge of gay history. He wrote many pieces with political texts or titles, writing, for instance, &quot;Homage to Pacifica&quot; for the opening of the Berkeley Headquarters of the Pacifica Foundation, and accepting commissions from the Portland Gay Men&#x27;s Chorus (1988 and 1985) and by the Seattle Men&#x27;s Chorus to arrange (1987) his &quot;Strict Songs&quot;, originally for eight baritones, for &quot;a chorus of 120 male singing enthusiasts. Some of them good; some not so good. But the number is so fabulous&quot;. Lawrence Mass describes:With Lou Harrison...being gay is something affirmative. He&#x27;s proud to be a gay composer and interested in talking about what that might mean. He doesn&#x27;t feel threatened that this means he won&#x27;t be thought of as an American composer who is also great and timeless and universal. Janice Giteck describes Harrison as: unabashedly androgynous in his way of approaching creativity. He has a vital connection to the feminine as well as to the masculine. The female part is apparent in the sense of beingness. But at the same time, Lou is very male, too, ferociously active and assertive, rhythmic, pulsing, and aggressive.
Like many other 20th-century composers, Harrison found it hard to support himself with his music, and took a number of other jobs to earn a living, including record salesman, florist, animal nurse, and forestry firefighter.

==Later life==
On November 2, 1990, the Brooklyn Philharmonic premiered Harrison&#x27;s fourth symphony, which he titled &quot;Last Symphony&quot;. He combined Native American music, ancient music, and Asian music, tying it all together with lush orchestral writing. A special inclusion was a series of Navajo &quot;Coyote Stories&quot;. He made a number of revisions to the symphonies before completing a final version in 1995, which was recorded by Barry Jekowsky and the California Symphony for Argo Records at Skywalker Ranch in Nicasio, California, in March 1997. The CD also included Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Elegy, to the Memory of Calvin Simmons&quot; (a tribute to the former conductor of the Oakland Symphony, who drowned in a boating accident in 1982), excerpts from &quot;Solstice&quot;, &quot;Concerto in Slendro&quot;, and &quot;Double Music&quot; (his collaboration with John Cage).

From the late 1980s onward, William Colvig&#x27;s health began to dramatically deteriorate. He first lost his hearing, and Harrison&#x27;s solution was for them to learn American Sign Language. Though Colvig decided not to communicate in ASL, Harrison continued to learn, as he was captivated by the dance-esque beauty of signing. A series of surgeries in the 1990s to replace Colvig&#x27;s weak knee joints triggered a series of allergic reactions that led to significant degeneration of his physical and mental health. Harrison carefully nursed his partner, sitting with him for months, even after Colvig could no longer recognize Harrison due to his dementia. Harrison was by Colvig&#x27;s side when he died on March 1, 2000.

===Death===

Harrison and his recent partner Todd Burlingame were driving from Chicago en route to Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio, where a six-day festival showcasing his music – Beyond the Rockies: A Tribute to Lou Harrison at 85 – was scheduled for the week of January 30, 2003. On Sunday, February 2, they decided to stop off the highway at a Denny&#x27;s in Lafayette, Indiana for lunch. While inside, Harrison began experiencing unexpected chest pains and collapsed on the scene. He was pronounced dead by the paramedics within minutes, the cause likely being from a heart attack, but no autopsy was performed. He was cremated as per his wishes.

==Harrison&#x27;s music==
===Overview===
Many of Harrison&#x27;s early works are for percussion instruments, often made out of what would usually be regarded as junk or found objects such as garbage cans and steel brake drums. He also wrote a number of pieces using Schoenberg&#x27;s twelve tone technique, including the opera &quot;Rapunzel&quot; and his Symphony on G (Symphony No. 1) (1952). Several works feature the tack piano, a kind of prepared piano with small nails inserted into the hammers to give the instrument a more percussive sound. Harrison&#x27;s mature musical style is based on &quot;melodicles&quot;, short motifs which are turned backward and upside down to create a musical mode the piece is based on. His music is typically spartan in texture but lyrical, and harmony usually simple or sometimes lacking altogether, with the focus instead being on rhythm and melody. Ned Rorem describes, &quot;Lou Harrison&#x27;s compositions demonstrate a variety of means and techniques. In general he is a melodist. Rhythm has a significant place in his work, too. Harmony is unimportant, although tonality is. He is one of the first American composers to successfully create a workable marriage between Eastern and Western forms.&quot;
An often used technique is &quot;interval control&quot;, in which only small number of melodic intervals, either ascending or descending, are used, without inversion. For example, for the opening of the Fourth Symphony, the permitted intervals are minor third, minor sixth, and major second.

Another component of Harrison&#x27;s aesthetic is what Harry Partch would call corporeality, an emphasis on the physical and the sensual including live, human, performance and improvisation, timbre, rhythm, and the sense of space in his melodic lines, whether solo or in counterpoint, and most notably in his frequent dance collaborations. The American dancer and choreographer Mark Morris used Harrison&#x27;s Serenade for Guitar [with optional percussion] (1978) as the &quot;basis of a new kind of dance. Or, at least, one I&#x27;ve [Morris] never seen or done before.&quot;

Harrison and Colvig built two full Javanese-style gamelan, modeled on the instrumentation of Kyai Udan Mas at U.C. Berkeley. One was named Si Betty for the art patron Betty Freeman; the other, built at Mills College, was named Si Darius/Si Madeliene. Harrison held the Darius Milhaud Chair of Musical Composition at Mills College from 1980 until his retirement in 1985. One of his students at Mills was Jin Hi Kim. He also taught at San Jose State University and Cabrillo College.

He was awarded the Edward MacDowell Medal in 2000.

Among Harrison&#x27;s better known works are the &quot;Concerto in Slendro&quot;, Concerto for Violin with Percussion Orchestra, Organ Concerto with Percussion (1973), which was given at the Proms in London in 1997; the Double Concert&#x27; (1981–82) for violin, cello, and Javanese gamelan; the Piano Concerto (1983–85) for piano tuned in Kirnberger#2 (a form of well temperament) and orchestra, which was written for Keith Jarrett; and a Concerto for Piano and Javanese Gamelan; as well as four numbered orchestral symphonies. He also wrote a large number of works in non-traditional forms. Harrison was fluent in several languages including American Sign Language, Mandarin and Esperanto, and several of his pieces have Esperanto titles and texts, most notably &quot;La Koro Sutro&quot; (1973).

Like Charles Ives, Harrison completed four symphonies. He typically combined a variety of the musical forms and languages that he preferred. This is quite apparent in the fourth symphony, recorded by the California Symphony for Argo Records, as well as his third symphony, which was performed and broadcast by Dennis Russell Davies and the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra. Russell Davies also recorded the third symphony with the Cabrillo Music Festival orchestra.

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
===Archives===
* Lou Harrison Archive at the University of California, Santa Cruz
* San Jose State University School of Music &amp; Dance
* Lou Harrison music manuscripts, sketches, poetry, and drawings, 1945–1991 at Isham Memorial Library, Harvard University 

===Interviews===
* Duffie, Bruce. &quot;Composer Lou Harrison: A Conversation With Bruce Duffie.&quot; April 1987.
* Golden, Barbara. &quot;Conversation with Lou Harrison&quot;. &quot;eContact!&quot; 12.2 – Interviews (2) (April 2010). Montréal: CEC.

===Other links===
* New Albion Artists: Lou Harrison
* Peermusic Classical: Lou Harrison Composer&#x27;s Publisher and Bio
* Lou Harrison artist page from Frog Peak Music site
* Other Minds: Lou Harrison
* Lou Harrison Documentary Project
* Lou Harrison: an interview by Dr Geoff Smith
* Rapunzel by William Morris, inspiration for Lou Harrison&#x27;s opera 
* Lou Harrison at Music of the United States of America (MUSA)

===Listening===
* Art of the States: Lou Harrison, seven works
* Lou Harrison tribute from Other Minds Festival 9, 2003
* Epitonic.com: Lou Harrison including tracks from &quot;Rhymes With Silver&quot; and &quot;La Koro Sutro&quot;
* Del Sol Quartet:&quot;Tear&quot; with Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Song of Palestine from String Quartet Set&quot; by Del Sol Quartet
* Kate Stenberg: &quot;Sonata for Unaccompanied Violin (1936)&quot; (Other Minds Records, 2022)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q590911" start="0" end="19" title="Lou Harrison" label="Lou Silver Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="70" end="78" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11748889" start="80" end="92" title="music critic" label="music critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="94" end="108" title="music theorist" label="music theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="110" end="117" title="painter" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="192" end="201" title="dissonance (music)" label="dissonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426218" start="203" end="217" title="Modernism (music)" label="ultramodernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q434610" start="272" end="284" title="Henry Cowell" label="Henry Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="335" end="355" title="world music" label="non-Western cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="427" end="431" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q194492" start="442" end="449" title="gamelan" label="gamelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="450" end="461" title="musical instrument" label="instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q347239" start="515" end="532" title="K. P. H. Notoprojo" label="Kanjeng Notoprojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="536" end="545" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007022" start="629" end="643" title="William Colvig" label="William Colvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745477" start="689" end="705" title="American gamelan" label="American gamelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="719" end="730" title="world music" label="world music"/>
<link wikidata="Q201494" start="753" end="765" title="Harry Partch" label="Harry Partch"/>
<link wikidata="Q650551" start="770" end="783" title="Claude Vivier" label="Claude Vivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="789" end="806" title="ethnomusicology" label="ethnomusicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188369" start="807" end="819" title="Colin McPhee" label="Colin McPhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q752518" start="899" end="914" title="just intonation" label="just intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="947" end="964" title="equal temperament" label="equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045756" start="1039" end="1048" title="microtonal music" label="microtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="1136" end="1145" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="1199" end="1212" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="1308" end="1324" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="1382" end="1388" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1564" end="1580" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="1724" end="1743" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="1755" end="1765" title="Sacramento" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="1767" end="1775" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="1790" end="1803" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="1848" end="1863" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="1927" end="1935" title="East Asia" label="the East"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1974" end="1991" title="Traditional lighting equipment of Japan#Bonbori" label="Japanese lanterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251541" start="2000" end="2012" title="Oriental rug" label="Persian rugs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2030" end="2045" title="History of China#Ancient China" label="ancient Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708318" start="2119" end="2134" title="Cantonese opera" label="Cantonese opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="2136" end="2159" title="Steel guitar" label="Hawai&amp;#x27;ian kīkākila"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="2161" end="2165" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780056" start="2167" end="2174" title="norteño (music)" label="norteño"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="2179" end="2194" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="2452" end="2457" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q26473" start="2522" end="2537" title="Gregorian chant" label="Gregorian chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000321" start="2545" end="2574" title="Mission San Francisco de Asís" label="Mission San Francisco de Asís"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="2669" end="2679" title="adolescence" label="adolescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2915" end="2923" title="Western world" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q207650" start="2970" end="2988" title="autodidact" label="personal education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="3023" end="3030" title="library" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="3072" end="3079" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="3083" end="3095" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="3378" end="3396" title="urban area" label="urban metropolises"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="3462" end="3465" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999175" start="3482" end="3504" title="Burlingame High School (California)" label="Burlingame High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="3626" end="3634" title="coming out" label="come out"/>
<link wikidata="Q104969456" start="3764" end="3771" title="gay men" label="gay men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256981" start="3909" end="3939" title="San Francisco State University" label="San Francisco State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q434610" start="3969" end="3981" title="Henry Cowell" label="Henry Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q108532572" start="4063" end="4084" title="UC Berkeley Extension" label="UC Berkeley Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="4231" end="4240" title="Palo Alto" label="Palo Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105516" start="4469" end="4485" title="found percussion" label="found percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171564" start="4490" end="4499" title="aleatoricism" label="aleatoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q207628" start="4591" end="4602" title="music composition" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q912407" start="4874" end="4892" title="San Quentin Prison" label="San Quentin Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="5119" end="5128" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q638859" start="5141" end="5154" title="Mills College" label="Mills College"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="5158" end="5165" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="5216" end="5253" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16377450" start="5305" end="5328" title="Laban movement analysis" label="Laban movement analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q504514" start="5347" end="5360" title="accompaniment" label="accompaniment"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="5403" end="5420" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="5474" end="5495" title="twelve-tone technique" label="twelve-tone technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="5690" end="5700" title="percussion instrument" label="percussive"/>
<link wikidata="Q854852" start="5757" end="5772" title="drum brake" label="car brake drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q216530" start="5777" end="5789" title="waste container" label="garbage cans"/>
<link wikidata="Q507246" start="5934" end="5943" title="serialism" label="serialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103530" start="5978" end="5990" title="tone cluster" label="tone cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="6302" end="6306" title="gong" label="gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="6563" end="6572" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q532494" start="7063" end="7077" title="New York Herald Tribune" label="Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q544485" start="7127" end="7141" title="Virgil Thomson" label="Virgil Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q958763" start="7232" end="7244" title="Carl Ruggles" label="Carl Ruggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q542232" start="7246" end="7260" title="Alan Hovhaness" label="Alan Hovhaness"/>
<link wikidata="Q309648" start="7288" end="7300" title="Charles Ives" label="Charles Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q460053" start="7511" end="7519" title="Music engraving" label="engraved"/>
<link wikidata="Q223521" start="7562" end="7576" title="Symphony No. 3 (Ives)" label="Symphony No. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783509" start="7649" end="7673" title="Pulitzer Prize for Music" label="Pulitzer Prize for Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="7949" end="7956" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="8128" end="8138" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567921" start="8196" end="8201" title="ulcer" label="ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595931" start="8594" end="8606" title="homesickness" label="homesickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="8637" end="8647" title="homophobia" label="homophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="8682" end="8699" title="nervous breakdown" label="nervous breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="8771" end="8789" title="psychiatric clinic" label="psychiatric clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q522356" start="8800" end="8808" title="Ossining (town), New York" label="Ossining"/>
<link wikidata="Q975653" start="8887" end="8917" title="New York Presbyterian Hospital" label="New York Presbyterian Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="9025" end="9035" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500368" start="9349" end="9355" title="Psychological stress" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="9486" end="9493" title="painting" label="painted"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221917" start="10026" end="10034" title="diatonicism" label="diatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191345" start="10039" end="10049" title="pentatonic" label="pentatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="10050" end="10056" title="scale (music)" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q837182" start="10351" end="10366" title="impressionism (music)" label="impressionistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188369" start="10524" end="10536" title="Colin McPhee" label="Colin McPhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942012" start="10652" end="10660" title="music of Bali" label="Balinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942130" start="10665" end="10673" title="music of Java" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="10778" end="10784" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q201494" start="11126" end="11138" title="Harry Partch" label="Harry Partch"/>
<link wikidata="Q858576" start="11154" end="11168" title="musical tuning" label="musical tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532838" start="11176" end="11194" title="Genesis of a Music" label="Genesis of a Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q752518" start="11296" end="11311" title="just intonation" label="just intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q638859" start="11901" end="11914" title="Mills College" label="Mills College"/>
<link wikidata="Q498526" start="11962" end="11987" title="San Jose State University" label="San Jose State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024969" start="11989" end="12005" title="Cabrillo College" label="Cabrillo College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140775" start="12007" end="12019" title="Reed College" label="Reed College"/>
<link wikidata="Q880447" start="12025" end="12047" title="Black Mountain College" label="Black Mountain College"/>
<link wikidata="Q622269" start="12098" end="12103" title="Aptos, California" label="Aptos"/>
<link wikidata="Q168308" start="12190" end="12213" title="Joshua Tree, California" label="Joshua Tree, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255891" start="12287" end="12303" title="Straw-bale construction" label="straw bale house"/>
<link wikidata="Q726303" start="12537" end="12542" title="Guzheng" label="zheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468698" start="12550" end="12565" title="Liang Tsai-Ping" label="Liang Tsai-Ping"/>
<link wikidata="Q726303" start="13191" end="13198" title="guzheng" label="guzheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q498526" start="13382" end="13407" title="San Jose State University" label="San Jose State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="13411" end="13431" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="13683" end="13690" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="13971" end="13980" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045587" start="14253" end="14272" title="Pacifica Radio" label="Pacifica Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231934" start="14309" end="14339" title="Portland Gay Men&amp;#x27;s Chorus" label="Portland Gay Men&amp;#x27;s Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442138" start="14367" end="14392" title="Seattle Men&amp;#x27;s Chorus" label="Seattle Men&amp;#x27;s Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503972" start="14599" end="14612" title="Lawrence Mass" label="Lawrence Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154238" start="14916" end="14929" title="Janice Giteck" label="Janice Giteck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039845" start="15520" end="15541" title="Brooklyn Philharmonic" label="Brooklyn Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021130" start="15954" end="15973" title="California Symphony" label="California Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q647983" start="15978" end="15990" title="Argo Records" label="Argo Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q991250" start="15994" end="16009" title="Skywalker Ranch" label="Skywalker Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476052" start="16013" end="16032" title="Nicasio, California" label="Nicasio, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="16546" end="16568" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="17029" end="17037" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="17185" end="17192" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="17205" end="17226" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="17230" end="17244" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189695" start="17461" end="17473" title="Denny&amp;#x27;s" label="Denny&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q638187" start="17477" end="17495" title="Lafayette, Indiana" label="Lafayette, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="17687" end="17699" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q572916" start="17936" end="17948" title="found object" label="found object"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673920" start="18188" end="18198" title="tack piano" label="tack piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q754186" start="18210" end="18224" title="prepared piano" label="prepared piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q731978" start="18456" end="18468" title="musical mode" label="musical mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="18551" end="18558" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="18639" end="18645" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="18650" end="18656" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q733299" start="18658" end="18667" title="Ned Rorem" label="Ned Rorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q711688" start="19686" end="19697" title="Mark Morris (choreographer)" label="Mark Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408893" start="20290" end="20300" title="Jin Hi Kim" label="Jin Hi Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344291" start="20388" end="20410" title="Edward MacDowell Medal" label="Edward MacDowell Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046677" start="20612" end="20617" title="The Proms" label="Proms"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20761" end="20773" title="Kirnberger temperament#Practical Temperaments: Kirnberger II" label="Kirnberger#2"/>
<link wikidata="Q667313" start="20785" end="20801" title="well temperament" label="well temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q207034" start="20840" end="20853" title="Keith Jarrett" label="Keith Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="21065" end="21087" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="21089" end="21097" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q475198" start="21530" end="21551" title="Dennis Russell Davies" label="Dennis Russell Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q933993" start="21560" end="21592" title="San Francisco Symphony Orchestra" label="San Francisco Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047293" start="21827" end="21863" title="University of California, Santa Cruz" label="University of California, Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029962" start="22228" end="22237" title="eContact!" label="eContact!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029962" start="22290" end="22293" title="Canadian Electroacoustic Community" label="CEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252997" start="23064" end="23079" title="Del Sol Quartet" label="Del Sol Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108602" start="23149" end="23160" title="Other Minds (organization)" label="Other Minds"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180733" wikidata="Q313674" url="?curid=180733" title="Jack Charlton">
<text>John &quot;Jack&quot; Charlton (8 May 193510 July 2020) was an English professional footballer and manager who played as a centre-back. He was part of the England national team that won the 1966 World Cup and managed the Republic of Ireland national team from 1986 to 1996, taking them to two World Cups and one European Championship. He was the elder brother of Manchester United forward Bobby Charlton and one of his teammates in England&#x27;s World Cup final victory. 

Charlton spent his entire club career with Leeds United from 1950 to 1973, helping the club to the Second Division title (1963–64), First Division title (1968–69), FA Cup (1972), League Cup (1968), Charity Shield (1969), Inter-Cities Fairs Cup (1968 and 1971), as well as one other promotion from the Second Division (1955–56) and five second-place finishes in the First Division, two FA Cup final defeats and one Inter-Cities Fairs Cup final defeat. His 629 league and 762 total competitive appearances are club records. In 2006, Leeds United supporters voted Charlton into the club&#x27;s greatest XI.

Called up to the England team days before his 30th birthday, Charlton went on to score six goals in 35 international games and to appear in two World Cups and one European Championship. He played in the World Cup final victory over West Germany in 1966 and helped England finish third in Euro 1968 and win four British Home Championship tournaments. He was named FWA Footballer of the Year in 1967.

After retiring as a player, Charlton worked as a manager. He led Middlesbrough to the Second Division title in 1973–74, winning the Manager of the Year award in his first season as a manager. He kept Boro as a stable top-flight club before he resigned in April 1977. He took charge of Sheffield Wednesday in October 1977 and led the club to promotion out of the Third Division in 1979–80. He left the Owls in May 1983 and served Middlesbrough as caretaker-manager at the end of the 1983–84 season. He worked as Newcastle United manager for the 1984–85 season. He took charge of the Republic of Ireland national team in February 1986 and led them to their first World Cup in 1990, where they reached the quarter-finals. He also led the nation to successful qualification to Euro 1988 and the 1994 World Cup. He resigned in January 1996 and retired. He was married to Pat Kemp, and they had three children.

==Early life==
Born into a footballing family in Ashington, Northumberland, on 8 May 1935, Charlton was initially overshadowed by his younger brother Bobby, who was taken on by Manchester United while Jack was doing his national service with the Household Cavalry. His uncles were Jack Milburn (Leeds United and Bradford City), George Milburn (Leeds United and Chesterfield), Jim Milburn (Leeds United and Bradford Park Avenue) and Stan Milburn (Chesterfield, Leicester City and Rochdale), and legendary Newcastle United and England footballer Jackie Milburn was his mother&#x27;s cousin.

The economy of the village of Ashington was based entirely on coal mining, and though his family had a strong footballing pedigree, his father was a miner. The eldest of four brothers – Bobby, Gordon and Tommy – the family&#x27;s tight finances meant that all four siblings shared the same bed. His father, Bob, had no interest in football, but his mother, Cissie, played football with her children and later coached the local school&#x27;s team. As a teenager, she took them to watch Ashington and Newcastle United play, and Charlton remained a lifelong Newcastle supporter.

At the age of 15, he was offered a trial at Leeds United, where his uncle Jim played at left-back, but turned it down and instead joined his father in the mines. He worked in the mines for a short time but handed in his notice after finding out just how difficult and unpleasant it was to work deep underground. He applied to join the police and reconsidered the offer from Leeds United. His trial game for Leeds clashed with his police interview, and Charlton chose to play in the game; the trial was a success and he joined the ground staff at Elland Road.

==Club career==
Charlton played for Leeds United&#x27;s youth team in the Northern Intermediate League and then for the third team in the Yorkshire League; playing in the physically demanding Yorkshire League at the age of 16 impressed the club&#x27;s management, and he was soon promoted to the reserve team. Charlton was given his first professional contract when he turned 17. He made his debut on 25 April 1953 against Doncaster Rovers, taking John Charles&#x27; place at centre-half after Charles was moved up to centre-forward. It was the final Second Division game of the 1952–53 season, and ended in a 1–1 draw. He then had to serve two years&#x27; national service with the Household Cavalry and captained the Horse Guards to victory in the Cavalry Cup in Hanover. His national service limited his contribution to Leeds, and he made only one appearance in the 1954–55 season.

Charlton returned to the first team in September 1955. He kept his place for the rest of the 1955–56 season, helping Leeds win promotion into the First Division after finishing second to Sheffield Wednesday. He was dropped in the second half of the 1956–57 campaign, partly due to his habit of partying late at night and losing focus on his football. He regained his place in the 1957–58 season. He stopped his partying lifestyle as he settled down to married life. In October 1957 he was picked to represent the English Football League in a game against the League of Ireland.

Leeds struggled after Raich Carter left the club in 1958, and Willis Edwards and then Bill Lambton took charge in the 1958–59 season as Leeds finished nine points above the relegation zone. Jack Taylor was appointed manager and failed to keep Leeds out of the relegation zone by the end of the 1959–60 campaign. During this time, Charlton began taking his coaching badges and took part in the Football Association&#x27;s coaching courses at Lilleshall.

Leeds finished just five points above the Second Division relegation zone in the 1960–61 season, and Taylor resigned; his replacement, Don Revie, was promoted from the United first team, and initially he was not fond of Charlton. Revie played Charlton up front at the start of the 1961–62 season, but he soon moved him back to centre-half after he proved ineffective as a centre-forward. He became frustrated and difficult to manage, feeling in limbo playing for a club seemingly going nowhere whilst his younger brother was enjoying great success at Manchester United. Revie told Charlton that he was prepared to let him go in 1962, but never actually transfer listed him. Liverpool manager Bill Shankly failed to meet the £30,000 Leeds demanded for Charlton and though Manchester United manager Matt Busby was initially willing to pay the fee he eventually decided to try an untested youngster at centre-half instead. During these discussions, Charlton refused to sign a new contract at Leeds but felt frustrated by Busby&#x27;s hesitance and so signed a new contract with Leeds whilst making a promise to Revie to be more professional in his approach.

The 1962–63 season began a new era for Leeds United as Revie began to mould the team and the club to his own liking. In a game against Swansea Town in September, Revie dropped many senior players and played Charlton in a young new defensive line-up: Gary Sprake (goalkeeper), Paul Reaney (right-back), Norman Hunter and Charlton (centre-back), and Rod Johnson (left-back). Except Johnson, this defensive line-up would remain consistent for much of the rest of the decade. Charlton took charge of the defence that day and insisted upon a zonal marking system; Revie agreed to allow Charlton to become the key organiser in defence. Aided by new midfield signing Johnny Giles, Leeds put in a strong promotion challenge and finished fifth before securing promotion as champions in the 1963–64 campaign, topping the table two points ahead of Sunderland. Other players that began to make their mark on the first team included Billy Bremner, Paul Madeley and Peter Lorimer.

Leeds made an immediate impact on their first season back in the top flight. However, the team gained a reputation for rough play, and Charlton said in his autobiography that &quot;the way we achieved that success made me feel uncomfortable&quot;. They went 25 games unbeaten before losing to Manchester United at Elland Road – their title race meant that the two clubs built up an intense rivalry. Leeds needed a win in their final game of the season to secure the title but could only manage a 3–3 draw with Birmingham City at St Andrew&#x27;s – Charlton scored the equalising goal on 86 minutes. Still, they could not push on for a winner. They gained some measure of revenge over Man United by beating them 1–0 in the replay of the FA Cup semi-finals. Leeds met Liverpool in the final at Wembley, and the game went into extra-time after a goalless draw. Roger Hunt opened the scoring three minutes into extra-time, but seven minutes later Charlton headed on a cross for Bremner to volley into the net for the equaliser; with seven minutes left Ian St John scored for Liverpool to win the game 2–1.

United again competed for honours in the 1965–66 season, finishing second to Liverpool in the league and reaching the semi-finals of the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup. It was the club&#x27;s first season in European competition, and they beat the Italian side Torino, and the East German club SC Leipzig, Spanish club Valencia and Hungarian outfit Újpest, before they were beaten 3–1 by Spanish side Real Zaragoza at Elland Road in a tiebreaker game following a 2–2 aggregate draw. Charlton caused controversy against Valencia after he and defender Vidagany began fighting after Vidagany kicked Charlton in an off-the-ball incident; Charlton never actually struck the Spaniard, who hid behind his teammates.

The 1966–67 season proved frustrating for United, despite the introduction of another club great in the form of Eddie Gray. Leeds finished fourth, five points behind champions Manchester United, and exited the FA Cup at the semi-finals after defeat to Chelsea. They made progress in the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup, beating DWS (Netherlands), Valencia, Bologna (Italy) and Kilmarnock (Scotland) to reach the final, where they were beaten 2–0 on aggregate by Yugoslavian outfit Dinamo Zagreb. At the end of the season he was named as the Footballer of the Year, succeeding his brother who had won the award the previous year. During the award ceremony, he told some amusing stories and won a standing ovation from the crowd; this started him on a successful sideline as an after-dinner speaker.

Charlton developed a new ploy for the 1967–68 season by standing next to the goalkeeper during corners to prevent him from coming out to collect the ball; this created havoc for opposition defences and is still a frequently used tactic in the modern era. However, for the second successive season Leeds finished fourth and exited the FA Cup in the semi-finals, this time losing 1–0 to Everton at Old Trafford. They finally won major honours by beating Arsenal 1–0 in the final of the League Cup; Terry Cooper scored the only goal of the game despite allegations that Charlton pushed goalkeeper Jim Furnell in the build-up to the goal. Leeds then went on to lift the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup after beating CA Spora Luxembourg, FK Partizan (Yugoslavia), Hibernian (Scotland), Rangers (Scotland) and Dundee (Scotland) to reach the final with Hungarian club Ferencvárosi. They won 1–0 at Elland Road and drew 0–0 in Budapest to claim their first European trophy.

Charlton helped Leeds to their first ever Football League title in 1968–69, as they lost just two games to finish six points clear of second-place Liverpool. They secured the title with a goalless draw at Anfield on 28 April, and Charlton later recalled the Liverpool supporters affectionately called him &quot;big dirty giraffe&quot;, and that manager Bill Shankly went into the Leeds dressing room after the match to tell them they were &quot;worthy champions&quot;.

United opened the 1969–70 campaign by winning the Charity Shield with a 2–1 win over Manchester City and went on to face the realistic possibility of winning the treble – the league, FA Cup and European Cup. However they missed out on all three trophies as the games built up towards the end of the season. The league title was the first to slip out of their hands as Everton went on to build an insurmountable lead. They then bowed out of the European Cup after a 3–1 aggregate defeat to Celtic, including a 2–1 loss at Hampden Park in front of a UEFA record crowd of 136,505. They took two replays to overcome Manchester United in the FA Cup semi-finals (Bremner scored the only goal in 300 minutes of football), but lost 2–1 in the replayed final to Chelsea after the original 2–2 draw, in which Charlton opened the scoring. Charlton took responsibility for Peter Osgood&#x27;s goal in the replay as he was distracted from marking duties as he was trying to get revenge on a Chelsea player who had kicked him.

Charlton caused controversy early in the 1970–71 season as in an October appearance on the Tyne Tees football programme, he said he&#x27;d once had a &quot;little black book&quot; of names of players whom he intended to hurt or exact some form of revenge upon during his playing days. He was tried by the Football Association and was found not guilty of any wrongdoing after arguing that the press had misquoted him. He admitted that though he never actually had a book of names, he had a short list of names in his head of players who had made nasty tackles on him and that he intended to put in a hard but fair challenge on those players if he got the opportunity in the course of a game. Leeds ended the season in second place yet again, as Arsenal overtook them with a late series of 1–0 wins despite Leeds beating Arsenal in the penultimate game of the season after Charlton scored the winning goal. The final tally of 64 points was a record high for a second-placed team. In the last ever season of the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup they beat Sarpsborg FK (Norway), Dynamo Dresden (Germany), Sparta Prague (Czechoslovakia), Vitória (Portugal) and Liverpool to secure a place in the final against Italian club Juventus. They drew 2–2 at the Stadio Olimpico and 1–1 at Elland Road to win the cup on the away goals rule. They had the opportunity to win the cup permanently but lost 2–1 to Barcelona at Camp Nou in the trophy play-off game.

Leeds finished second in the 1971–72 season for the third successive time, this time ending up just one point behind champions Derby County after losing to Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux on the final day of the season. However, Charlton managed to complete his list of domestic honours as Leeds beat Arsenal 1–0 in the FA Cup final; he kept Charlie George to a very quiet game as Leeds successfully defended their slender lead.

Charlton was limited to 25 appearances in the 1972–73 campaign and suffered an injury in the FA Cup semi-final against Wolves which ended his season. After failing to regain his fitness for the final, he announced his retirement. Madeley played in his place, but Gordon McQueen had been signed as his long-term replacement. He played his testimonial against Celtic, and was given £28,000 of the £40,000 matchday takings.

==International career==

With Charlton approaching his 30th birthday, he was called up by Alf Ramsey to play for England against Scotland at Wembley on 10 April 1965. The game ended 2–2 despite England being forced to end the game with nine men after picking up two injuries; he assisted his brother Bobby for England&#x27;s first goal. Ramsey later said that he picked Charlton to play alongside Bobby Moore as he was a conservative player able to provide cover to the more skilful Moore, who could get caught out if he made a rare mistake. The defence remained relatively constant in the build up to the 1966 FIFA World Cup: Gordon Banks (goalkeeper), Ray Wilson (left-back), Charlton and Moore (centre-backs), and George Cohen (right-back). After playing in a 1–0 win over Hungary the following month, Charlton joined England for a tour of Europe as they drew 1–1 with Yugoslavia and beat West Germany 1–0 and Sweden 2–1. He played in a 0–0 draw with Wales and a 2–1 win over Northern Ireland to help England win the British Home Championship, though sandwiched between these two games was a 3–2 defeat to Austria – the first of only two occasions he was on the losing side in an England shirt. He played all nine England games in 1965, the final one being a 2–0 win over Spain at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium.

England opened the year of 1966 on 5 January with a 1–1 draw with Poland at Goodison Park; Ramsey&#x27;s managerial ability was demonstrated during the game as the equalising goal came from Bobby Moore, who was allowed to surge forward as Charlton covered the gap he left behind in defence. Charlton played in six of the next seven international victories as England prepared for the World Cup. The run started with impressive victories over West Germany and then Scotland in front of 133,000 fans at Hampden Park. He scored his first international goal with a deflected shot on 26 June, as England recorded a 3–0 victory over Finland at the Helsinki Olympic Stadium. He missed the match against Norway but returned to action with a headed goal in a 2–0 win over Denmark at Idrætsparken.

England drew 0–0 in their opening World Cup group game against Uruguay after the South Americans came to play for a draw. They then beat Mexico 2–0 after a &quot;tremendous goal&quot; from Bobby Charlton opened up the game shortly before the half-time whistle. England beat France 2–0 in the final group game, with Charlton assisting Roger Hunt after heading the ball onto the post. England eliminated Argentina in the quarter-finals with a 1–0 win – their efforts were greatly aided after Argentine centre-half Antonio Rattín was sent off for dissent, after which Argentina stopped attacking the ball and concentrated of holding out for a draw with their aggressive defending. England&#x27;s opponents in the semi-finals were Portugal, who had giant centre-forward José Torres to compete with Charlton for aerial balls. Late in the game Charlton gave away a penalty by sticking out a hand to stop Torres from scoring; Eusébio scored the penalty but was largely contained by Nobby Stiles, and England won the game 2–1 after two goals from Bobby Charlton.

West Germany awaited in the final at Wembley, and they took the lead through Helmut Haller on 12 minutes; Charlton felt that he could have blocked the shot, but at the time he believed that Banks had it covered, though it was Wilson who was at fault for allowing Haller the chance to shoot. England came back and took the lead, but with only a few minutes left in the game, Charlton gave away a free kick after fouling Uwe Seeler whilst competing for an aerial ball; Wolfgang Weber scored the equalising goal from a goalmouth scramble created from the free kick. Geoff Hurst scored two goals in extra-time to win the game 4–2.

After the World Cup England lost the annual Home Championship to Scotland after a 3–2 defeat in April 1967, Charlton scored for the second successive international game running after also finding the net against Wales the previous November. He injured his foot during the game as he broke two sesamoid bones in his big toe. As his career went on he began to miss England games with niggling injuries to avoid friendly games in favour of playing important matches for Leeds; Brian Labone would take his place in the England team during Charlton&#x27;s absences. He was named in the squad for UEFA Euro 1968, but did not feature in either of England&#x27;s games. He won five caps in 1969, helping England to a memorable 5–0 win over France and scoring in a 1–0 win over Portugal from a corner taken by his brother Bobby.

In mid-1970, Ramsey named Charlton in his squad of 22 for the 1970 World Cup in Mexico. However, he favoured Labone over Charlton and only picked Charlton for his 35th and final England game in the 1–0 group win over Czechoslovakia at the Estadio Jalisco. England lost in the quarter finals to West Germany, and on the flight home, Charlton asked Ramsey not to consider him for international duty again. He had agonised over how to break the news to Ramsey and eventually said: &quot;Great times ... absolute privilege ... getting older ... slowing down ... not sure I am up to it any more ... time to step down.&quot; Ramsey listened, then agreed with him: &quot;Yes, I had reached that conclusion myself.&quot;

==Managerial career==

===Middlesbrough===
Charlton was offered the job as manager of Second Division club Middlesbrough on his 38th birthday in 1973. He declined to be interviewed for the position and instead handed the club a list of responsibilities he expected to take, which, if agreed to, would give him total control of the running of the club. He refused a contract and would never sign a contract throughout his managerial career. He took a salary of £10,000 a year despite the chairman being willing to pay a lot more; his only stipulations were a gentleman&#x27;s agreement that he would not be sacked, assurances that he would have no interference from the board in team affairs, and three days off a week for fishing and shooting. He decided first to repaint Ayresome Park and to publicise the upcoming league campaign to generate higher attendance figures.

Charlton took advice from Celtic manager Jock Stein, who allowed him to sign right-sided midfielder Bobby Murdoch on a free transfer. Besides Murdoch the club already had ten players who Charlton moulded into a championship-winning side: Jim Platt (goalkeeper), John Craggs (right-back), Stuart Boam and Willie Maddren (centre-backs), Frank Spraggon (left-back), David Armstrong (left midfield), Graeme Souness (central midfield), Alan Foggon (attacking midfield), John Hickton and David Mills (forwards). Some of these players were already settled at the club and in their positions, whilst Charlton had to work with some of the other players. He moved Souness from left midfield to central midfield to compensate for his lack of pace and coached him to play the ball forward rather than side to side as was his instinct. Foggon was played in a new role which Charlton created to break the offside trap set by opposition defenders, an extremely fast player he was instructed to run behind defenders and latch on to the long ball to find himself one-on-one with the goalkeeper.

Middlesbrough secured promotion with seven games still to play of the 1973–74 season, and Charlton told his team to settle for a point away at Luton Town so they could win the title at home but his players ignored his instruction to concede a goal and the title was secured with a 1–0 win at Kenilworth Road. They won the title by a 15-point margin (at the time only two points were awarded for a win); in contrast promoted Carlisle United (3rd) finished only 15 points ahead of Crystal Palace (20th), who were relegated. He was named Manager of the Year, the first time that a manager outside of the top-flight had been given such an honour.

He continued to manage and change every aspect of the club. He decided to disassemble the club&#x27;s scouting network to instead focus on local talent in Northumberland and Durham. His only major new signing of the 1974–75 season was Terry Cooper, a former Leeds United teammate. They adapted well to the First Division, finishing in seventh place, but would have finished fourth and qualified for Europe had Derby County not scored a last-second goal against them on the last day of the season.

Building for the 1975–76 campaign, he signed Phil Boersma from Liverpool to replace Murdoch, but Boersma never settled at the club and was frequently injured. They finished in 13th place, and went on to win the Anglo-Scottish Cup with a 1–0 win over Fulham. They also reached the semi-finals of the League Cup, and took a 1–0 lead over Manchester City into the second leg at Maine Road, where they were soundly beaten 4–0. Teams had begun to learn how to combat Charlton&#x27;s attack strategy. They left their centre-backs outside of the penalty box to neutralise Foggon&#x27;s threat. Despite the team&#x27;s steady progress, the club&#x27;s board voted to sack Charlton in July 1976 after becoming increasingly concerned that he was overstepping his authority in negotiating business deals on behalf of the club and choosing the club&#x27;s strip. The club chairman overruled the decision and Charlton remained in charge.

With Hickton coming to the end of his career, Charlton tried to sign David Cross as a replacement but refused to go above £80,000, and Cross instead went to West Ham United for £120,000. Middlesbrough finished the 1976–77 campaign in 12th place, and Charlton left the club at the end of the season on the belief that four years was an optimum time with one group of players and that he had reached his peak with them – he later regretted his decision. He stated that he could have led the club to a league title if he had stayed and signed two more top-quality players. He applied for the job of England manager after Don Revie quit the role and Brian Clough was ruled out by the Football Association. Charlton did not receive a reply to his application and vowed never to apply for another job again, instead waiting until he was approached.

===Sheffield Wednesday===
In October 1977, he replaced Len Ashurst as manager at Sheffield Wednesday, who were then bottom of the Third Division. He appointed as his assistant Maurice Setters, who had experience managing at that level but had effectively ruled himself out of another management job after taking Doncaster Rovers to court for unfair dismissal. The two agreed that while the standard of football in the division was low, the work rates were high. So, the best way to make progress would be to play long balls into the opposition penalty area while recruiting big defenders to avoid being caught by opposition teams with similar tactics. He took the &quot;Owls&quot; to mid-table safety with a 14th-place finish in the 1977–78 season, though they did suffer embarrassment by being knocked out of the FA Cup by Northern Premier League side Wigan Athletic.

His priority in the summer of 1978 was to find a target man for Tommy Tynan to play alongside. He found it in Andrew McCulloch, who arrived from Brentford for a £70,000 fee. He signed Terry Curran as a winger but eventually moved him up front to play alongside McCulloch. He sold goalkeeper Chris Turner to Sunderland and replaced him with the bigger Bob Bolder. He further raised the average height of the team by signing uncompromising centre-half Mick Pickering from Southampton. The team failed to advance in the league, finishing the 1978–79 season again in 14th spot. They did make their mark on the FA Cup in the Third Round by taking eventual winners Arsenal to four replays before they eventually succumbed to a 2–0 defeat.

Charlton&#x27;s major acquisition for the 1979–80 campaign was signing Yugoslavia international midfielder Ante Miročević for a £200,0000 fee from FK Budućnost Podgorica. Miročević proved unable to handle the British winter but otherwise added flair to the team in fairer weather. Wednesday went on to secure promotion with a third-place finish, and Curran finished as the division&#x27;s top-scorer.

As the 1980–81 season came around Wednesday had young talent such as Mark Smith, Kevin Taylor, Peter Shirtliff and Mel Sterland breaking into the first team. The club were comfortable in the Second Division, finishing in tenth position.

Wednesday pushed for promotion in the 1981–82 season, but it ended just one place and one point outside the promotion places and would have been promoted under the old two points for a win system that was replaced by the three points for a win system at the beginning of the campaign.

In building for the 1982–83 campaign, Charlton signed experienced defender Mick Lyons from Everton, and by Christmas Wednesday were top of the table. The club had a limited squad, and successful cup runs took their toll, as did injuries to McCulloch and Brian Hornsby as they drifted down to sixth place by the close of the season. They reached the semi-finals of the FA Cup, losing 2–1 to Brighton &amp; Hove Albion at Highbury with key defender Ian Bailey out with a broken leg sustained the previous week. Charlton announced his departure from Hillsborough in May 1983 despite pleas from the directors for him to stay.

In March 1984, Malcolm Allison left Middlesbrough and Charlton agreed to manage the club until the end of the 1983–84 to help steer the club away from the Second Division relegation zone. He was unpaid except for expenses and only took the job as a favour to his friend Mike McCullagh, who was the club&#x27;s chairman. Middlesbrough ended the season in 17th place, seven points clear of the relegation zone.

===Newcastle United===
Charlton was appointed manager of Newcastle United in June 1984 after being persuaded to take the job by Jackie Milburn. Arthur Cox had left the club after leading the &quot;Magpies&quot; to the First Division and key player Kevin Keegan announced his retirement. His first action was to release Terry McDermott from his contract, who refused to agree to Charlton&#x27;s offer of a new contract. He had little money to spend in preparation for the 1984–85 season, though he did have young talents in Chris Waddle and Peter Beardsley. He signed midfielder Gary Megson and big striker George Reilly. The &quot;Toon&quot; finished safely in 14th place, and a teenage Paul Gascoigne was on the verge of breaking into the first team.

Charlton resigned at the end of pre-season training for the 1985–86 campaign after fans at St James&#x27; Park started calling for his dismissal after the club failed to secure the signing of Eric Gates, who instead joined Lawrie McMenemy at Sunderland.

===Republic of Ireland===
Charlton was approached by the FAI to manage the Republic of Ireland in December 1985. His appointment was controversial in Ireland at the time due to his status as an Englishman. His first game in charge was on 26 March 1986 against Wales at Lansdowne Road which ended in a 1–0 defeat. 
In May 1986, Ireland won the Iceland Triangular Tournament at Laugardalsvöllur, in Iceland&#x27;s capital of Reykjavík, with a 2–1 victory over Iceland and a 1–0 win over Czechoslovakia. By this time, Charlton had developed his tactics, which were based on the traditional British 4–4–2 system, as opposed to the continental approach of using deep-lying midfielders, as he noted that most of the Ireland international players plied their trade in England. Crucially, he instructed all members of his team to pressure opposition players and, in particular, force ball-playing defenders into mistakes.

====Euro 1988====
Qualification for Euro 1988 meant winning a group containing Belgium, Bulgaria, Luxembourg and Scotland. The campaign opened with Belgium at the Heysel Stadium, and though Ireland contained danger man Nico Claesen, they had to settle for a 2–2 draw after conceding twice from corner-kicks; Frank Stapleton and Liam Brady scored the goals for Ireland. They then dominated Scotland at Lansdowne Road, but failed to find the net and instead drew 0–0. In the return fixture at Hampden Park Mark Lawrenson scored an early goal and another clean sheet won the Irish their first win of qualification. The campaign faltered with a 2–1 loss in Bulgaria, though Charlton was furious with referee Carlos Silva Valente as he felt that both of Lachezar Tanev&#x27;s goals should not have counted as Nasko Sirakov allegedly pushed Mick McCarthy in the build-up to the first and he felt that Sirakov was outside the penalty box when he was fouled by Kevin Moran – Valente instead gave a penalty. They picked up another point after a 0–0 draw with Belgium in Dublin. Despite not particularly impressing, Ireland then picked up four points with two victories over Luxembourg. They ended the campaign with a 2–0 home win over Bulgaria, Paul McGrath and Kevin Moran the scorers, though Liam Brady (an ever-present in qualification) picked up a two-match suspension after lashing out late in the game after being repeatedly kicked by Bulgarian midfielder Ayan Sadakov. Despite the victory the Irish had to rely on a favour from the Scots in order to qualify, who duly obliged with a 1–0 victory, courtesy of Gary Mackay – a substitute earning his first cap – in Sofia to keep Bulgaria one point behind Ireland in the table.

The build up to Euro 1988 in West Germany was far from ideal, as key player Mark Lawrenson was forced to retire after injuring his Achilles tendon, Liam Brady picked up a serious knee injury and Mark Kelly was also injured. The first match of the tournament was against England at the Neckarstadion, and Charlton reasoned that the threat posed by English wingers Chris Waddle and John Barnes could be nullified by allowing the English defence to feel comfortable on the ball without allowing them a pass; this made the build-up play slow and containable. His game-plan worked and Ireland claimed a 1–0 win after Ray Houghton secured an early lead. He then compensated for a series of injuries by playing Ronnie Whelan and Kevin Sheedy in central midfield, and was rewarded with a great performance and a good point in a 1–1 draw with the Soviet Union at the Niedersachsenstadion, Whelan scoring the goal. To qualify they only needed a point against the Netherlands at the Parkstadion, and Charlton devised a time-wasting plan with goalkeeper Packie Bonner that he was forced to abandon after referee Horst Brummeier was less than impressed. Ireland lost the game 1–0 after Wim Kieft scored an 82nd-minute goal. England and Ireland were eliminated while Netherlands and the Soviet Union qualified – both teams would go on to contest the final, which the Dutch won 2–0.

====1990 World Cup====
Qualification for the 1990 World Cup required Charlton to mastermind a top two finish in a group consisting of Spain, Hungary, Northern Ireland and Malta. The campaign started on hostile ground at Belfast&#x27;s Windsor Park, and he had stand-in goalkeeper Gerry Peyton to thank for the point gained from a goalless draw with Northern Ireland. A series of injuries left only a skeleton squad to face Spain at the Estadio Benito Villamarín, leaving a recall for defender David O&#x27;Leary, and Ireland were beaten 2–0. They then left Budapest&#x27;s Népstadion with a point from another goalless draw. However, they were criticised for not taking all two points after dominating the game. The next four fixtures would be played at Lansdowne Road, and all four games ended in victory. First, they beat Spain 1–0 after an own goal from Míchel, then they overcame Malta and Hungary with 2–0 wins before beating Northern Ireland 3–0. Qualification for Ireland&#x27;s first World Cup was assured at the Ta&#x27; Qali National Stadium after John Aldridge scored both goals in another 2–0 victory.

Ireland&#x27;s group opponents in Italia &#x27;90 were England, Egypt and the Netherlands. Charlton felt that England&#x27;s four-man midfield of Waddle, Barnes, Bryan Robson and Paul Gascoigne did not offer enough protection to the back four, and he was proved correct when Kevin Sheedy cancelled out Gary Lineker&#x27;s opener to secure a 1–1 draw in the group opener at the Stadio Sant&#x27;Elia. A poor performance against a negative Egyptian side at the Stadio La Favorita meant that neither side scored a goal in a dour draw. They ended the group with a 1–1 draw with the Dutch, Niall Quinn cancelling out Ruud Gullit&#x27;s opener in the 71st minute, after which both sides settled for a stalemate as a draw meant that both qualified ahead of Egypt. Ireland then defeated Romania in the Second Round match at the Stadio Luigi Ferraris which went to penalties after a 0–0 draw, before the whole team had a meeting with Pope John Paul II at the Vatican.

One of the most iconic moments from Ireland&#x27;s unexpected success in &quot;Italia 90&quot;, (the 1990 FIFA World Cup), took place at Walkinstown roundabout, Dublin on 25 June 1990 after Ireland beat Romania on penalties. Crowds emerged from the nearby public houses of the Kestrel and Cherry Tree and invaded the roundabout to celebrate the win. Amateur footage of the joyous scenes became synonymous with Ireland&#x27;s success that year and epitomised the sense of hope which prevailed throughout the country, especially after a decade of economic recession. After Charlton died in 2020, fans gathered at the roundabout to recreate the moment and pay their respects to the past manager.

Ireland eventually went out to the host country, Italy, 1–0 in the quarter-finals at the Stadio Olimpico. A lapse of concentration meant that Italy&#x27;s Salvatore Schillaci scored on 38 minutes. Ireland failed to build up enough chances to find the equalising goal. After returning to Dublin, over 500,000 people turned out to welcome the team back.

====Euro 1992 qualifying====
Qualification for Euro 92 in Sweden left Ireland facing a group of England, Poland and Turkey. They opened in style with a 5–0 home win over the Turks and then drew 1–1 home and away with the English; Ireland were the better team than England in both encounters, and Charlton said that they &quot;twice let them off the hook&quot; after Houghton missed easy chances in both games. A 0–0 draw at home with Poland followed, and they were then leading 3–1 in the return fixture in Poznań but conceded two late goals to end the match at 3–3. Ireland beat Turkey 3–1 in Istanbul despite the intimidating atmosphere of the İnönü Stadium, but were denied a place in the tournament as England scored a late equalizing goal in Poland to secure the point that would take them above Ireland in the group.

====1994 World Cup====
To qualify for the 1994 World Cup in the US, Ireland had to finish first or second in a seven-team group of Spain, European champions Denmark, Northern Ireland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Albania. Lithuania, Latvia, and Albania proved to be little threat to the Irish, and both home and away matches against these three teams earned Ireland the maximum of two points. The two most difficult fixtures – Denmark and Spain away – ended in goalless draws. John Aldridge had a goal disallowed for offside against the Spanish which even Spain manager Javier Clemente said should have stood. Ireland then beat Northern Ireland 3–0 at home before settling for a 1–1 draw with Denmark. The qualification campaign was then derailed in the opening 26 minutes of the home tie with Spain as the Spanish took a three-goal lead; the game ended 3–1, with John Sheridan&#x27;s late consolation eventually proving crucial at the end of the campaign. The final game was in Belfast against Northern Ireland during a tense period of The Troubles. Jimmy Quinn put Northern Ireland into the lead on 74 minutes, but four minutes later Alan McLoughlin scored the equalising goal to allow the Republic of Ireland to secure second place in the group due to their superior goals scored tally over Denmark. When Quinn scored Northern Ireland assistant manager Jimmy Nicholl shouted &quot;Up yours!&quot; to his counterpart Maurice Setters (Charlton&#x27;s assistant); in response to this Charlton approached Northern Ireland manager Billy Bingham at the final whistle and told him &quot;Up yours too, Billy&quot;.

In the build up to the World Cup Charlton gave out first caps to Gary Kelly, Phil Babb and Jason McAteer; he had difficulty convincing McAteer to join Ireland as he first had to turn down an approach by the FA to play for the England under-21s. He scheduled difficult matches before the tournament and Ireland picked up positive results by beating both the Netherlands and Germany away from home. Ireland opened the group stage of the tournament by beating Italy 1–0 at the Giants Stadium, Ray Houghton scoring the winning goal on 11 minutes. They then fell to a 2–1 defeat to Mexico at the Florida Citrus Bowl Stadium, during which Charlton had a pitch-side argument with an official who was preventing substitute John Aldridge (who went on to score the consolation goal) from taking the pitch minutes after his teammate Tommy Coyne had left the pitch and sat down on the bench. For his arguing, Charlton was suspended by FIFA for the final group game against Norway, and had to watch from the commentary box as Ireland qualified with a 0–0 draw. They faced the Netherlands in the Round of 16; Dennis Bergkamp put the Dutch ahead on 11 minutes after Marc Overmars took advantage of a mistake by Terry Phelan, and Wim Jonk scored the second and final goal of the game from 30 yards after Packie Bonner fluffed an otherwise routine save. For his achievements Charlton was awarded the Freedom of the City of Dublin in 1994 by Lord Mayor Tomás Mac Giolla, the first Englishman to be given the honour since 1854.

====Euro 1996 qualifying====
Ireland failed to qualify for Euro 96, despite a strong start to the group, when they won their opening three games, including a 4–0 win against Northern Ireland. The Republic&#x27;s next game was also against Northern Ireland, although the result was a 1–1 draw. From that point onwards, the Republic stuttered badly as injuries struck down key players Roy Keane, Andy Townsend, John Sheridan and Steve Staunton. After beating the highly fancied Portugal, the Irish then endured an embarrassing 0–0 draw to Liechtenstein (this was Liechtenstein&#x27;s only point in their ten matches), before losing twice to Austria, on both occasions by three goals to one. Although they defeated Latvia, Ireland needed to beat Portugal in Lisbon to qualify outright but lost 3–0. They finished second in the group, ahead of Northern Ireland on goal difference, but as the worst performing runners-up they had to win a play-off game at Anfield against the Netherlands; Ireland lost 2–0 after a brace from Patrick Kluivert. Charlton resigned shortly after the game.

==Personal life==
Charlton married Pat Kemp on 6 January 1958, and his brother Bobby acted as his best man. They had three children: John (born in January 1959), Deborah (born 1961) and Peter, who was born just after Charlton senior played in the 1966 World Cup final. During the 1960s, he ran two clothes shops in Leeds, and he later operated the club shop at Elland Road. Charlton was a keen amateur fisherman and took part in field sports. Politically, Charlton was a socialist. He was a founding supporter of the Anti-Nazi League. Along with his wife, he was a supporter of the UK miners&#x27; strike of 1984-85, and lent two of his cars to striking miners for travelling to pickets. He appeared on &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot; in 1972 and 1996, and chose to take with him &quot;The Adventures of Tom Sawyer&quot; and &quot;Adventures of Huckleberry Finn&quot; by Mark Twain, the &quot;Encyclopaedia of How to Survive&quot;, a spyglass, and a fishing rod. Charlton was the subject of &quot;This Is Your Life&quot; in 1973 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews.

He was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 1974 Birthday Honours. In 1996, he was awarded honorary Irish citizenship. The honour amounts to full Irish citizenship, the highest honour the Irish state gives and is rarely granted. In 1994, he was made a Freeman of the city of Dublin, and was given an Honorary degree of Doctor of Science (D.Sc.) by the University of Limerick on 9 September 1994. He was posthumously awarded the Presidential Distinguished Service Award for the Irish Abroad in 2020. In 1997, he was appointed a deputy lieutenant of Northumberland. Charlton was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2005 in recognition of his contribution to the English game. There is a life-size statue of him at Cork Airport in Ireland, representing him sitting in his fishing gear and displaying a salmon. On 4 December 2019, he was made a Freeman of the City of Leeds along with the other members of the Revie team of the 1960s and 1970s but was unable to attend the ceremony.

He revealed in his 1996 autobiography that he had a strained relationship with his brother Bobby. Jack felt Bobby began to drift away from the Charlton family following his marriage to Norma, who did not get along with their mother. Bobby did not see his mother after 1992 until her death on 25 March 1996 as a result of the feud, though he and Norma did attend her funeral. Though the two brothers remained distant, Jack presented Bobby with his BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award on 14 December 2008.

===Death===
Charlton died at his home in Ashington Northumberland on 10 July 2020 at the age of 85 after suffering from lymphoma and dementia. The following day his former club Leeds United won 1–0 over Swansea City with a last-minute winner; the goalscorer, Pablo Hernández, dedicated his goal to Charlton.

On 20 July, ten days after his death, Irish fans gathered at Walkinstown roundabout in Dublin to recreate the highwater mark of Ireland&#x27;s success at the 1990 World Cup under Charlton and to pay their respects. &quot;Put &#x27;Em Under Pressure&quot;, the official song of the Republic of Ireland national football team&#x27;s 1990 campaign (which features soundbites of Charlton uttering the eponymous phrase), was played at 12:30 pm synchronously with all national radio stations to remember the man who had led Ireland to their first-ever major tournament at Euro 88, as well as two World Cups in Italy (1990) and USA (1994).

Charlton became the 12th player from the 1966 FIFA World Cup squad to die, after Bobby Moore (1993), Alan Ball (2007), John Connelly (2012), Ron Springett (2015), Gerry Byrne (2015), Jimmy Armfield (2018), Ray Wilson (2018), Gordon Banks (2019), Martin Peters (2019), Peter Bonetti (2020) and Norman Hunter (2020). His brother Bobby Charlton, also part of the 1966 FIFA World Cup squad, died in 2023.

==Career statistics==

===Club===
===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list England&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Charlton goal.&quot;

===As a manager===
==Honours==
===Player===
Leeds United
*Football League First Division: 1968–69
*Football League Second Division: 1963–64
*FA Cup: 1971–72; runner-up: 1964–65, 1969–70
*Football League Cup: 1967–68
*FA Charity Shield: 1969
*Inter-Cities Fairs Cup: 1967–68, 1970–71

England
*FIFA World Cup: 1966
*British Home Championship: 1964–65, 1965–66, 1967–68, 1968–69
*UEFA European Championship third place: 1968

Individual
*&quot;FUWO European Team of the Season&quot;: 1966, 1967
*FWA Footballer of the Year: 1967
*English Football Hall of Fame: 2005
*PFA Team of the Century (1907–1976): 2007

===Manager===
Middlesbrough
*Football League Second Division: 1973–74
*Anglo-Scottish Cup: 1975–76

Sheffield Wednesday
*Football League Third Division third-place promotion: 1979–80

Republic of Ireland
*Iceland Triangular Tournament: 1986

Individual
*English Manager of the Year winner: 1974
*Philips Sports Manager of the Year: 1987, 1988, 1989, 1993

==See also==
* &quot;Put &#x27;Em Under Pressure&quot;, the official song to the Republic of Ireland national football team&#x27;s 1990 FIFA World Cup campaign in Italy.

==References==
===Specific===
===General===
*
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q313674" start="0" end="30" title="Jack Charlton" label="John &amp;quot;Jack&amp;quot; Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="84" end="94" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q628099" start="99" end="106" title="Manager (association football)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="123" end="134" title="Defender (association football)" label="centre-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="155" end="176" title="England national football team" label="England national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="190" end="204" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="221" end="254" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="293" end="302" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="312" end="333" title="UEFA European Championship" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="363" end="380" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q171583" start="389" end="403" title="Bobby Charlton" label="Bobby Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="517" end="529" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="573" end="588" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="606" end="620" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822886" start="628" end="635" title="1968–69 Football League First Division" label="1968–69"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="638" end="644" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484505" start="646" end="650" title="1972 FA Cup final" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="653" end="663" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q718716" start="665" end="669" title="1968 Football League Cup final" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="672" end="686" title="FA Community Shield" label="Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736648" start="688" end="692" title="1969 FA Charity Shield" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q245375" start="695" end="717" title="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup" label="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q223415" start="719" end="723" title="1968 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup Final" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414320" start="728" end="732" title="1971 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup Final" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q919472" start="1390" end="1415" title="British Home Championship" label="British Home Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750244" start="1442" end="1468" title="FWA Footballer of the Year" label="FWA Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="1544" end="1557" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="1764" end="1783" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="1841" end="1855" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="1990" end="2006" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="2153" end="2157" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q151867" start="2252" end="2261" title="UEFA Euro 1988" label="Euro 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="2270" end="2284" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q202348" start="2434" end="2443" title="Ashington" label="Ashington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="2445" end="2459" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q171583" start="2535" end="2540" title="Bobby Charlton" label="Bobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="2562" end="2579" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2605" end="2621" title="Conscription in the United Kingdom#After 1945" label="national service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631440" start="2631" end="2648" title="Household Cavalry" label="Household Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986988" start="2666" end="2678" title="Jack Milburn (footballer)" label="Jack Milburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="2680" end="2692" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q48879" start="2697" end="2710" title="Bradford City A.F.C." label="Bradford City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542472" start="2713" end="2727" title="George Milburn" label="George Milburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q48935" start="2746" end="2758" title="Chesterfield F.C." label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986997" start="2761" end="2772" title="Jim Milburn" label="Jim Milburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q896965" start="2791" end="2811" title="Bradford (Park Avenue) A.F.C." label="Bradford Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599799" start="2817" end="2829" title="Stanley Milburn" label="Stan Milburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="2845" end="2859" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q48949" start="2864" end="2872" title="Rochdale A.F.C." label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="2889" end="2905" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="2910" end="2917" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q726085" start="2929" end="2943" title="Jackie Milburn" label="Jackie Milburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047845" start="3460" end="3469" title="Ashington A.F.C." label="Ashington"/>
<link wikidata="Q619505" start="4098" end="4109" title="Elland Road" label="Elland Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="4148" end="4160" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516136" start="4168" end="4178" title="Leeds United F.C. Reserves and Youth Team" label="youth team"/>
<link wikidata="Q10723637" start="4250" end="4266" title="Yorkshire Football League" label="Yorkshire League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19589" start="4535" end="4551" title="Doncaster Rovers F.C." label="Doncaster Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q312404" start="4560" end="4572" title="John Charles" label="John Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="4663" end="4678" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839557" start="4691" end="4698" title="1952–53 Football League" label="1952–53"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="4877" end="4884" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061416" start="4981" end="4988" title="1954–55 Football League" label="1954–55"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509764" start="5091" end="5098" title="1955–56 Football League" label="1955–56"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="5144" end="5158" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="5185" end="5204" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839571" start="5247" end="5254" title="1956–57 Football League" label="1956–57"/>
<link wikidata="Q47509545" start="5378" end="5385" title="1957–58 Football League" label="1957–58"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="5511" end="5534" title="English Football League" label="English Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q312370" start="5557" end="5574" title="League of Ireland" label="League of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362448" start="5639" end="5653" title="Willis Edwards" label="Willis Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909819" start="5663" end="5675" title="Bill Lambton" label="Bill Lambton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47509509" start="5695" end="5702" title="1958–59 Football League" label="1958–59"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115454" start="5767" end="5778" title="Jack Taylor (footballer, born 1914)" label="Jack Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q370276" start="5871" end="5878" title="1959–60 Football League" label="1959–60"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="5966" end="5990" title="the Football Association" label="the Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877270" start="6018" end="6028" title="Lilleshall" label="Lilleshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436148" start="6112" end="6119" title="1960–61 Football League" label="1960–61"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="6166" end="6175" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153210" start="6312" end="6319" title="1961–62 Football League" label="1961–62"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="6705" end="6714" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q207457" start="6723" end="6735" title="Bill Shankly" label="Bill Shankly"/>
<link wikidata="Q206237" start="6828" end="6838" title="Matt Busby" label="Matt Busby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815466" start="7191" end="7198" title="1962–63 Football League" label="1962–63"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="7322" end="7334" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000214" start="7437" end="7448" title="Gary Sprake" label="Gary Sprake"/>
<link wikidata="Q949203" start="7463" end="7474" title="Paul Reaney" label="Paul Reaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q430746" start="7489" end="7502" title="Norman Hunter (footballer)" label="Norman Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356249" start="7535" end="7546" title="Rod Johnson (footballer)" label="Rod Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q444329" start="7847" end="7859" title="Johnny Giles" label="Johnny Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808921" start="7968" end="7975" title="1963–64 Football League" label="1963–64"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="8024" end="8034" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q202867" start="8107" end="8120" title="Billy Bremner" label="Billy Bremner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362135" start="8122" end="8134" title="Paul Madeley" label="Paul Madeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q463985" start="8139" end="8152" title="Peter Lorimer" label="Peter Lorimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807997" start="8195" end="8230" title="1964–65 Football League" label="first season back in the top flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658538" start="8537" end="8552" title="Leeds United F.C.–Manchester United F.C. rivalry" label="intense rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="8665" end="8680" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q819179" start="8684" end="8700" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s (stadium)" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424533" start="8891" end="8909" title="FA Cup semi-finals" label="FA Cup semi-finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="8921" end="8930" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q8214268" start="8934" end="8943" title="1965 FA Cup Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="8947" end="8954" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q366022" start="9013" end="9023" title="Roger Hunt" label="Roger Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q428757" start="9203" end="9214" title="Ian St John" label="Ian St John"/>
<link wikidata="Q11969493" start="9299" end="9306" title="1965–66 Football League" label="1965–66"/>
<link wikidata="Q245375" start="9395" end="9417" title="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup" label="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2768" start="9511" end="9517" title="Torino F.C." label="Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q162317" start="9544" end="9554" title="1. FC Lokomotive Leipzig" label="SC Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q10333" start="9569" end="9577" title="Valencia CF" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244595" start="9599" end="9605" title="Újpest FC" label="Újpest"/>
<link wikidata="Q10308" start="9651" end="9664" title="Real Zaragoza" label="Real Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037105" start="9964" end="9971" title="1966–67 Football League" label="1966–67"/>
<link wikidata="Q111770" start="10072" end="10082" title="Eddie Gray (footballer, born 1948)" label="Eddie Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="10212" end="10219" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q478766" start="10279" end="10282" title="AFC DWS" label="DWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893" start="10308" end="10315" title="Bologna F.C. 1909" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q210961" start="10328" end="10338" title="Kilmarnock F.C." label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414310" start="10359" end="10368" title="1967 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q172803" start="10432" end="10445" title="GNK Dinamo Zagreb" label="Dinamo Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750244" start="10492" end="10514" title="FWA Footballer of the Year" label="Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342738" start="10727" end="10747" title="after-dinner speaker" label="after-dinner speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512942" start="10788" end="10795" title="1967–68 Football League" label="1967–68"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="11135" end="11142" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="11146" end="11158" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="11202" end="11209" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q718716" start="11217" end="11226" title="1968 Football League Cup Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="11234" end="11244" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q959830" start="11246" end="11258" title="Terry Cooper (footballer, born 1944)" label="Terry Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8995251" start="11344" end="11355" title="Jim Furnell" label="Jim Furnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329903" start="11453" end="11472" title="CA Spora Luxembourg" label="CA Spora Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188656" start="11474" end="11485" title="FK Partizan" label="FK Partizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192597" start="11500" end="11509" title="Hibernian F.C." label="Hibernian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="11522" end="11529" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q335483" start="11545" end="11551" title="Dundee F.C." label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q223415" start="11572" end="11581" title="1968 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q208396" start="11602" end="11614" title="Ferencvárosi TC" label="Ferencvárosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="11660" end="11668" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="11750" end="11765" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446317" start="11775" end="11782" title="1968–69 Football League" label="1968–69"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="11913" end="11920" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444542" start="12196" end="12203" title="1969–70 Football League" label="1969–70"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="12228" end="12242" title="FA Community Shield" label="Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736648" start="12250" end="12253" title="1969 FA Charity Shield" label="2–1"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="12263" end="12278" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q845101" start="12340" end="12346" title="Treble (association football)" label="treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="12372" end="12384" title="UEFA Champions League" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="12667" end="12673" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193651" start="12699" end="12711" title="Hampden Park" label="Hampden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q777237" start="12909" end="12927" title="1970 FA Cup Final" label="the replayed final"/>
<link wikidata="Q178312" start="13039" end="13051" title="Peter Osgood" label="Peter Osgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444792" start="13233" end="13240" title="1970–71 Football League" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975140" start="13283" end="13292" title="ITV Tyne Tees" label="Tyne Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115921" start="14234" end="14246" title="Sarpsborg FK" label="Sarpsborg FK"/>
<link wikidata="Q141931" start="14257" end="14271" title="Dynamo Dresden" label="Dynamo Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q193481" start="14283" end="14296" title="AC Sparta Prague" label="Sparta Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q208585" start="14315" end="14322" title="Vitória F.C." label="Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="14400" end="14408" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214629" start="14431" end="14446" title="Stadio Olimpico di Torino" label="Stadio Olimpico"/>
<link wikidata="Q208679" start="14492" end="14507" title="away goals rule" label="away goals rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="14577" end="14586" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q159848" start="14590" end="14598" title="Camp Nou" label="Camp Nou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986518" start="14606" end="14626" title="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup Trophy Play-Off" label="trophy play-off game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446114" start="14658" end="14665" title="1971–72 Football League" label="1971–72"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="14756" end="14768" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="14785" end="14808" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q380823" start="14812" end="14820" title="Molineux Stadium" label="Molineux"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484505" start="14953" end="14965" title="1972 FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066901" start="14975" end="14989" title="Charlie George" label="Charlie George"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246066" start="15109" end="15116" title="1972–73 Football League" label="1972–73"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="15182" end="15188" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q950967" start="15326" end="15340" title="Gordon McQueen" label="Gordon McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q311029" start="15576" end="15586" title="Alf Ramsey" label="Alf Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="15615" end="15623" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="15627" end="15634" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q191492" start="15883" end="15894" title="Bobby Moore" label="Bobby Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="16092" end="16111" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q213879" start="16113" end="16125" title="Gordon Banks" label="Gordon Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q249912" start="16140" end="16150" title="Ray Wilson (English footballer)" label="Ray Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q446908" start="16203" end="16215" title="George Cohen" label="George Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="16262" end="16269" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="16358" end="16368" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="16378" end="16390" title="Germany national football team" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q160826" start="16399" end="16405" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="16440" end="16445" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="16465" end="16481" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q919472" start="16506" end="16531" title="British Home Championship" label="British Home Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="16595" end="16602" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="16761" end="16766" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q164027" start="16774" end="16799" title="Santiago Bernabéu Stadium" label="Santiago Bernabéu Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q166196" start="16868" end="16874" title="Poland national football team" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q968420" start="16878" end="16891" title="Goodison Park" label="Goodison Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q193651" start="17303" end="17315" title="Hampden Park" label="Hampden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q186532" start="17429" end="17436" title="Finland national football team" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q332219" start="17444" end="17468" title="Helsinki Olympic Stadium" label="Helsinki Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="17498" end="17504" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="17565" end="17572" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017115" start="17576" end="17588" title="Idrætsparken" label="Idrætsparken"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="17654" end="17661" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="17728" end="17734" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="17865" end="17871" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q366022" start="17925" end="17935" title="Roger Hunt" label="Roger Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="17993" end="18002" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q604553" start="18103" end="18117" title="Antonio Rattín" label="Antonio Rattín"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="18318" end="18326" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q508897" start="18357" end="18368" title="José Torres (footballer, born 1938)" label="José Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q162043" start="18510" end="18517" title="Eusébio" label="Eusébio"/>
<link wikidata="Q344152" start="18566" end="18578" title="Nobby Stiles" label="Nobby Stiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065912" start="18671" end="18680" title="1966 FIFA World Cup Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="18684" end="18691" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q57375" start="18724" end="18737" title="Helmut Haller" label="Helmut Haller"/>
<link wikidata="Q44470" start="19066" end="19076" title="Uwe Seeler" label="Uwe Seeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q509064" start="19114" end="19128" title="Wolfgang Weber" label="Wolfgang Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q212738" start="19210" end="19221" title="Geoff Hurst" label="Geoff Hurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365684" start="19568" end="19581" title="sesamoid bone" label="sesamoid bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q538322" start="19749" end="19761" title="Brian Labone" label="Brian Labone"/>
<link wikidata="Q182201" start="19866" end="19880" title="UEFA Euro 1968" label="UEFA Euro 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="20007" end="20013" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q132664" start="20158" end="20172" title="1970 FIFA World Cup" label="1970 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="20176" end="20182" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="20313" end="20327" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346716" start="20335" end="20350" title="Estadio Jalisco" label="Estadio Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="20896" end="20911" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="20917" end="20930" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q602392" start="21582" end="21595" title="Ayresome Park" label="Ayresome Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q355378" start="21723" end="21733" title="Jock Stein" label="Jock Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q888638" start="21782" end="21795" title="Bobby Murdoch" label="Bobby Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q654719" start="21920" end="21929" title="Jim Platt" label="Jim Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227462" start="21944" end="21955" title="John Craggs (footballer)" label="John Craggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626332" start="21970" end="21981" title="Stuart Boam" label="Stuart Boam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021651" start="21986" end="22000" title="Willie Maddren" label="Willie Maddren"/>
<link wikidata="Q16740208" start="22017" end="22031" title="Frank Spraggon" label="Frank Spraggon"/>
<link wikidata="Q763421" start="22045" end="22060" title="David Armstrong (footballer, born 1954)" label="David Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q310352" start="22078" end="22092" title="Graeme Souness" label="Graeme Souness"/>
<link wikidata="Q23421" start="22113" end="22124" title="Alan Foggon" label="Alan Foggon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239213" start="22147" end="22159" title="John Hickton" label="John Hickton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237585" start="22164" end="22175" title="David Mills (footballer)" label="David Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444780" start="22831" end="22838" title="1973–74 Football League" label="1973–74"/>
<link wikidata="Q18520" start="22904" end="22914" title="Luton Town F.C." label="Luton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613767" start="23053" end="23068" title="Kenilworth Road" label="Kenilworth Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q19575" start="23185" end="23200" title="Carlisle United F.C." label="Carlisle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="23240" end="23254" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="23560" end="23574" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="23579" end="23585" title="County Durham" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446160" start="23621" end="23628" title="1974–75 Football League" label="1974–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q959830" start="23640" end="23652" title="Terry Cooper (footballer, born 1944)" label="Terry Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="23711" end="23725" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="23815" end="23827" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q266747" start="23920" end="23927" title="1975–76 Football League" label="1975–76"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085601" start="23948" end="23960" title="Phil Boersma" label="Phil Boersma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="23966" end="23975" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q541298" start="24114" end="24132" title="Anglo-Scottish Cup" label="Anglo-Scottish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="24153" end="24159" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="24202" end="24212" title="Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="24239" end="24254" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q865093" start="24278" end="24288" title="Maine Road" label="Maine Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q15044080" start="24898" end="24909" title="David Cross (footballer, born 1950)" label="David Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="24986" end="25001" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446143" start="25043" end="25050" title="1976–77 Football League" label="1976–77"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="25425" end="25432" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="25447" end="25456" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q207658" start="25475" end="25487" title="Brian Clough" label="Brian Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="25505" end="25529" title="the Football Association" label="the Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521658" start="25728" end="25739" title="Len Ashurst" label="Len Ashurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="25754" end="25773" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="25803" end="25817" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403344" start="25849" end="25864" title="Maurice Setters" label="Maurice Setters"/>
<link wikidata="Q19589" start="25985" end="26001" title="Doncaster Rovers F.C." label="Doncaster Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446255" start="26406" end="26413" title="1977–78 Football League" label="1977–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="26487" end="26493" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18502" start="26497" end="26520" title="Northern Premier League" label="Northern Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="26526" end="26540" title="Wigan Athletic F.C." label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306751" start="26607" end="26618" title="Tommy Tynan" label="Tommy Tynan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757932" start="26653" end="26669" title="Andrew McCulloch (footballer)" label="Andrew McCulloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="26688" end="26697" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405587" start="26727" end="26739" title="Terry Curran" label="Terry Curran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108332" start="26834" end="26846" title="Chris Turner (footballer, born 1958)" label="Chris Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="26850" end="26860" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641272" start="26894" end="26904" title="Bob Bolder" label="Bob Bolder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838402" start="26993" end="27007" title="Mick Pickering" label="Mick Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="27013" end="27024" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446249" start="27082" end="27089" title="1978–79 Football League" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484510" start="27185" end="27201" title="1979 FA Cup Final" label="eventual winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="27202" end="27209" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252526" start="27319" end="27326" title="1979–80 Football League" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="27348" end="27358" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771085" start="27384" end="27398" title="Ante Miročević" label="Ante Miročević"/>
<link wikidata="Q219264" start="27424" end="27446" title="FK Budućnost Podgorica" label="FK Budućnost Podgorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446106" start="27686" end="27693" title="1980–81 Football League" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769767" start="27748" end="27758" title="Mark Smith (footballer, born 1960)" label="Mark Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397603" start="27760" end="27772" title="Kevin Taylor (English footballer)" label="Kevin Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176915" start="27774" end="27789" title="Peter Shirtliff" label="Peter Shirtliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334680" start="27794" end="27806" title="Mel Sterland" label="Mel Sterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="27870" end="27885" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580182" start="27955" end="27962" title="1981–82 Football League" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849988" start="28223" end="28230" title="1982–83 Sheffield Wednesday F.C. season" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838293" start="28278" end="28288" title="Mick Lyons (English footballer)" label="Mick Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="28294" end="28301" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964098" start="28457" end="28470" title="Brian Hornsby" label="Brian Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q19453" start="28593" end="28619" title="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion F.C." label="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q205309" start="28623" end="28631" title="Arsenal Stadium" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980822" start="28650" end="28660" title="Ian Bailey (footballer)" label="Ian Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q642557" start="28750" end="28762" title="Hillsborough Stadium" label="Hillsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383862" start="28841" end="28856" title="Malcolm Allison" label="Malcolm Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="28862" end="28875" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q195936" start="28936" end="28943" title="1983–84 Football League" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="29293" end="29309" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q726085" start="29364" end="29378" title="Jackie Milburn" label="Jackie Milburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q472835" start="29380" end="29390" title="Arthur Cox (footballer)" label="Arthur Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="29454" end="29468" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q152832" start="29484" end="29496" title="Kevin Keegan" label="Kevin Keegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q536896" start="29555" end="29570" title="Terry McDermott" label="Terry McDermott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582095" start="29707" end="29714" title="1984–85 Newcastle United F.C. season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q352878" start="29759" end="29771" title="Chris Waddle" label="Chris Waddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q344989" start="29776" end="29791" title="Peter Beardsley" label="Peter Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337010" start="29814" end="29825" title="Gary Megson" label="Gary Megson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543788" start="29842" end="29855" title="George Reilly" label="George Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13002" start="29923" end="29937" title="Paul Gascoigne" label="Paul Gascoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846001" start="30049" end="30056" title="1985–86 Newcastle United F.C. season" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q191774" start="30080" end="30099" title="St James&amp;#x27; Park" label="St James&amp;#x27; Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q608040" start="30181" end="30191" title="Eric Gates" label="Eric Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504854" start="30212" end="30227" title="Lawrie McMenemy" label="Lawrie McMenemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="30231" end="30241" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q497782" start="30301" end="30304" title="Football Association of Ireland" label="FAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="30319" end="30338" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="30504" end="30509" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q601162" start="30513" end="30527" title="Lansdowne Road" label="Lansdowne Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985671" start="30587" end="30616" title="Iceland Triangular Tournament" label="Iceland Triangular Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q151212" start="30620" end="30636" title="Laugardalsvöllur" label="Laugardalsvöllur"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="30641" end="30648" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="30667" end="30676" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q189198" start="30702" end="30709" title="Iceland national football team" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="30729" end="30743" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697150" start="31177" end="31190" title="UEFA Euro 1988 qualifying" label="Qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q151867" start="31195" end="31204" title="UEFA Euro 1988" label="Euro 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864339" start="31219" end="31226" title="UEFA Euro 1988 qualifying Group 7" label="a group"/>
<link wikidata="Q180845" start="31247" end="31255" title="Bulgaria national football team" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q184266" start="31257" end="31267" title="Luxembourg national football team" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="31272" end="31280" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q622671" start="31322" end="31336" title="King Baudouin Stadium" label="Heysel Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333795" start="31378" end="31390" title="Nico Claesen" label="Nico Claesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q118942" start="31467" end="31482" title="Frank Stapleton" label="Frank Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q356466" start="31487" end="31497" title="Liam Brady" label="Liam Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q601162" start="31560" end="31574" title="Lansdowne Road" label="Lansdowne Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q193651" start="31650" end="31662" title="Hampden Park" label="Hampden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q263951" start="31663" end="31677" title="Mark Lawrenson" label="Mark Lawrenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q858608" start="31863" end="31883" title="Carlos Silva Valente" label="Carlos Silva Valente"/>
<link wikidata="Q10482995" start="31908" end="31922" title="Lachezar Tanev" label="Lachezar Tanev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366521" start="31963" end="31976" title="Nasko Sirakov" label="Nasko Sirakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q437925" start="31994" end="32007" title="Mick McCarthy" label="Mick McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q940663" start="32112" end="32123" title="Kevin Moran (footballer)" label="Kevin Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="32220" end="32226" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q380200" start="32395" end="32407" title="Paul McGrath (footballer)" label="Paul McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986376" start="32612" end="32624" title="Ayan Sadakov" label="Ayan Sadakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645258" start="32765" end="32776" title="Gary Mackay" label="Gary Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="32819" end="32824" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="32911" end="32923" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768340" start="33077" end="33087" title="Mark Kelly (footballer, born 1969)" label="Mark Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="33152" end="33159" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q152349" start="33167" end="33180" title="MHPArena" label="Neckarstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q352878" start="33245" end="33257" title="Chris Waddle" label="Chris Waddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10536" start="33262" end="33273" title="John Barnes (footballer)" label="John Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q703538" start="33494" end="33506" title="Ray Houghton" label="Ray Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q544085" start="33586" end="33599" title="Ronnie Whelan" label="Ronnie Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q713720" start="33604" end="33616" title="Kevin Sheedy (Irish footballer)" label="Kevin Sheedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189275" start="33720" end="33732" title="Soviet Union national football team" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q152633" start="33740" end="33760" title="Niedersachsenstadion" label="Niedersachsenstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="33835" end="33846" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q700462" start="33854" end="33865" title="Parkstadion" label="Parkstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q371002" start="33924" end="33937" title="Packie Bonner" label="Packie Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q746770" start="33982" end="33997" title="Horst Brummeier" label="Horst Brummeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q350625" start="34055" end="34064" title="Wim Kieft" label="Wim Kieft"/>
<link wikidata="Q944139" start="34214" end="34223" title="UEFA Euro 1988 Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q657087" start="34274" end="34287" title="1990 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)" label="Qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="34296" end="34310" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586012" start="34363" end="34370" title="1990 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 6" label="a group"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="34385" end="34390" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="34392" end="34399" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="34401" end="34417" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188782" start="34422" end="34427" title="Malta national football team" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="34471" end="34478" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049601" start="34486" end="34498" title="Windsor Park" label="Windsor Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563672" start="34531" end="34543" title="Gerry Peyton" label="Gerry Peyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q126844" start="34687" end="34712" title="Estadio Benito Villamarín" label="Estadio Benito Villamarín"/>
<link wikidata="Q132026" start="34744" end="34762" title="David O&amp;#x27;Leary" label="David O&amp;#x27;Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="34808" end="34816" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q594230" start="34824" end="34834" title="Ferenc Puskás Stadium" label="Népstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q558689" start="35108" end="35114" title="Míchel (footballer, born 1963)" label="Míchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354010" start="35272" end="35302" title="Ta&amp;#x27; Qali National Stadium" label="Ta&amp;#x27; Qali National Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q342826" start="35309" end="35322" title="John Aldridge" label="John Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477595" start="35381" end="35386" title="1990 FIFA World Cup Group F" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="35400" end="35406" title="Italy" label="Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28089" start="35430" end="35435" title="Egypt national football team" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q296583" start="35528" end="35540" title="Bryan Robson" label="Bryan Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13002" start="35545" end="35559" title="Paul Gascoigne" label="Paul Gascoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q47778" start="35668" end="35680" title="Gary Lineker" label="Gary Lineker"/>
<link wikidata="Q754200" start="35743" end="35764" title="Stadio Sant&amp;#x27;Elia" label="Stadio Sant&amp;#x27;Elia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28500" start="35825" end="35843" title="Stadio Renzo Barbera" label="Stadio La Favorita"/>
<link wikidata="Q335831" start="35951" end="35962" title="Niall Quinn" label="Niall Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q173972" start="35978" end="35989" title="Ruud Gullit" label="Ruud Gullit"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="36145" end="36152" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q271568" start="36186" end="36207" title="Stadio Luigi Ferraris" label="Stadio Luigi Ferraris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="36222" end="36231" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="36291" end="36308" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="36316" end="36323" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="36405" end="36414" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="Italia 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566547" start="36463" end="36474" title="Walkinstown" label="Walkinstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="37069" end="37074" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159884" start="37109" end="37124" title="Stadio Olimpico" label="Stadio Olimpico"/>
<link wikidata="Q295307" start="37175" end="37194" title="Salvatore Schillaci" label="Salvatore Schillaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="37307" end="37313" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="37420" end="37427" title="UEFA Euro 1992" label="Euro 92"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864356" start="37458" end="37465" title="UEFA Euro 1992 qualifying Group 7" label="a group"/>
<link wikidata="Q166196" start="37478" end="37484" title="Poland national football team" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q483856" start="37489" end="37495" title="Turkey national football team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="37880" end="37886" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="37967" end="37975" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q751820" start="38019" end="38032" title="BJK İnönü Stadium" label="İnönü Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204914" start="38223" end="38230" title="1994 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)" label="qualify"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="38239" end="38253" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589409" start="38308" end="38324" title="1994 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA – Group 3)" label="seven-team group"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="38335" end="38353" title="UEFA Euro 1992" label="European champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="38354" end="38361" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q186276" start="38381" end="38390" title="Lithuania national football team" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q189322" start="38392" end="38398" title="Latvia national football team" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186262" start="38404" end="38411" title="Albania national football team" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q299413" start="38761" end="38776" title="Javier Clemente" label="Javier Clemente"/>
<link wikidata="Q552767" start="39055" end="39068" title="John Sheridan (footballer)" label="John Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="39228" end="39240" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627756" start="39242" end="39253" title="Jimmy Quinn (footballer, born 1959)" label="Jimmy Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720209" start="39327" end="39342" title="Alan McLoughlin" label="Alan McLoughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q929577" start="39547" end="39560" title="Jimmy Nicholl" label="Jimmy Nicholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403344" start="39610" end="39625" title="Maurice Setters" label="Maurice Setters"/>
<link wikidata="Q863023" start="39720" end="39733" title="Billy Bingham" label="Billy Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q455972" start="39867" end="39877" title="Gary Kelly (footballer, born 1974)" label="Gary Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q174615" start="39879" end="39888" title="Phil Babb" label="Phil Babb"/>
<link wikidata="Q703414" start="39893" end="39906" title="Jason McAteer" label="Jason McAteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="40005" end="40011" title="The Football Association" label="the FA"/>
<link wikidata="Q204238" start="40028" end="40044" title="England national under-21 football team" label="England under-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="40175" end="40182" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312855" start="40214" end="40229" title="1994 FIFA World Cup Group E" label="the group stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q375365" start="40276" end="40290" title="Giants Stadium" label="Giants Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="40379" end="40385" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q199359" start="40393" end="40420" title="Camping World Stadium" label="Florida Citrus Bowl Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="40725" end="40729" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="40763" end="40769" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q185389" start="40897" end="40912" title="Dennis Bergkamp" label="Dennis Bergkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q219248" start="40953" end="40966" title="Marc Overmars" label="Marc Overmars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711003" start="40998" end="41010" title="Terry Phelan" label="Terry Phelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q352236" start="41016" end="41024" title="Wim Jonk" label="Wim Jonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500824" start="41185" end="41214" title="Freedom of the City of Dublin" label="Freedom of the City of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645132" start="41226" end="41236" title="Lord Mayor of Dublin" label="Lord Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q454213" start="41237" end="41253" title="Tomás Mac Giolla" label="Tomás Mac Giolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q837987" start="41359" end="41366" title="UEFA Euro 1996 qualifying" label="qualify"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="41371" end="41378" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="Euro 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864367" start="41406" end="41415" title="UEFA Euro 1996 qualifying Group 6" label="the group"/>
<link wikidata="Q188632" start="41695" end="41704" title="Roy Keane" label="Roy Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q527899" start="41706" end="41719" title="Andy Townsend" label="Andy Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q316717" start="41739" end="41753" title="Steve Staunton" label="Steve Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="41788" end="41796" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186690" start="41849" end="41862" title="Liechtenstein national football team" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="41951" end="41958" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q189322" start="42024" end="42030" title="Latvia national football team" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="42067" end="42073" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="42263" end="42270" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q189686" start="42332" end="42348" title="Patrick Kluivert" label="Patrick Kluivert"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="42708" end="42713" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q619505" start="42754" end="42765" title="Elland Road" label="Elland Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="42795" end="42804" title="fishing" label="fisherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944976" start="42822" end="42834" title="Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom" label="field sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="42864" end="42873" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098407" start="42910" end="42926" title="Anti-Nazi League" label="Anti-Nazi League"/>
<link wikidata="Q918544" start="42975" end="43008" title="UK miners&amp;#x27; strike (1984–85)" label="UK miners&amp;#x27; strike of 1984-85"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480879" start="43072" end="43079" title="Picketing" label="pickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="43102" end="43121" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q326914" start="43179" end="43207" title="The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" label="The Adventures of Tom Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215410" start="43224" end="43254" title="Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" label="Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="43264" end="43274" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="43390" end="43407" title="This Is Your Life (British TV series)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778021" start="43447" end="43461" title="Eamonn Andrews" label="Eamonn Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="43484" end="43526" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871362" start="43540" end="43561" title="1974 Birthday Honours" label="1974 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259221" start="43587" end="43613" title="List of honorary citizens of Ireland" label="honorary Irish citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="43748" end="43755" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="43771" end="43777" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="43796" end="43811" title="Honorary degree" label="Honorary degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="43815" end="43832" title="Doctor of Science" label="Doctor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q573954" start="43848" end="43870" title="University of Limerick" label="University of Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023512" start="44023" end="44040" title="deputy lieutenant" label="deputy lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="44044" end="44058" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="44091" end="44120" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345361" start="44223" end="44235" title="Cork Airport" label="Cork Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="44310" end="44316" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911692" start="44938" end="44999" title="BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award" label="BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q202348" start="45063" end="45072" title="Ashington" label="Ashington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="45073" end="45087" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="45142" end="45150" title="lymphoma" label="lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="45155" end="45163" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="45199" end="45211" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="45225" end="45237" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q277533" start="45281" end="45296" title="Pablo Hernández (footballer, born 1985)" label="Pablo Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262078" start="45552" end="45579" title="Put &amp;#x27;Em Under Pressure" label="Put &amp;#x27;Em Under Pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="45612" end="45654" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q151867" start="45897" end="45904" title="UEFA Euro 1988" label="Euro 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="45952" end="45962" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="USA (1994)"/>
<link wikidata="Q191492" start="46046" end="46057" title="Bobby Moore" label="Bobby Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q310058" start="46066" end="46075" title="Alan Ball Jr." label="Alan Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q712408" start="46084" end="46097" title="John Connelly (footballer, born 1938)" label="John Connelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q532442" start="46106" end="46119" title="Ron Springett" label="Ron Springett"/>
<link wikidata="Q959780" start="46128" end="46139" title="Gerry Byrne (footballer, born 1938)" label="Gerry Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q124495" start="46148" end="46162" title="Jimmy Armfield" label="Jimmy Armfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q249912" start="46171" end="46181" title="Ray Wilson (English footballer)" label="Ray Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213879" start="46190" end="46202" title="Gordon Banks" label="Gordon Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q505028" start="46211" end="46224" title="Martin Peters" label="Martin Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q344902" start="46233" end="46246" title="Peter Bonetti" label="Peter Bonetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q430746" start="46258" end="46271" title="Norman Hunter (footballer)" label="Norman Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q171583" start="46292" end="46306" title="Bobby Charlton" label="Bobby Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="46605" end="46635" title="Football League First Division" label="Football League First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822886" start="46637" end="46644" title="1968–69 Football League First Division" label="1968–69"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="46646" end="46677" title="Football League Second Division" label="Football League Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808921" start="46679" end="46686" title="1963–64 Football League Second Division" label="1963–64"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="46688" end="46694" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316358" start="46696" end="46703" title="1971–72 FA Cup" label="1971–72"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020807" start="46716" end="46723" title="1964–65 FA Cup" label="1964–65"/>
<link wikidata="Q279787" start="46725" end="46732" title="1969–70 FA Cup" label="1969–70"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="46734" end="46753" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833038" start="46755" end="46762" title="1967–68 Football League Cup" label="1967–68"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="46764" end="46781" title="FA Charity Shield" label="FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736648" start="46783" end="46787" title="1969 FA Charity Shield" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q245375" start="46789" end="46811" title="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup" label="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q924308" start="46813" end="46820" title="1967–68 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup" label="1967–68"/>
<link wikidata="Q585907" start="46822" end="46829" title="1970–71 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="46840" end="46854" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="46856" end="46860" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q919472" start="46862" end="46887" title="British Home Championship" label="British Home Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093161" start="46889" end="46896" title="1964–65 British Home Championship" label="1964–65"/>
<link wikidata="Q952318" start="46898" end="46905" title="1965–66 British Home Championship" label="1965–66"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092798" start="46907" end="46914" title="1967–68 British Home Championship" label="1967–68"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094020" start="46916" end="46923" title="1968–69 British Home Championship" label="1968–69"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="46925" end="46951" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q182201" start="46965" end="46969" title="UEFA Euro 1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750244" start="47041" end="47067" title="FWA Footballer of the Year" label="FWA Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="47075" end="47104" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276089" start="47112" end="47115" title="Professional Footballers&amp;#x27; Association" label="PFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444780" start="47217" end="47224" title="1973–74 Football League Second Division" label="1973–74"/>
<link wikidata="Q541298" start="47226" end="47244" title="Anglo-Scottish Cup" label="Anglo-Scottish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804725" start="47246" end="47253" title="1975–76 Anglo-Scottish Cup" label="1975–76"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="47276" end="47306" title="Football League Third Division" label="Football League Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252526" start="47330" end="47337" title="1979–80 Football League Third Division" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985671" start="47360" end="47389" title="Iceland Triangular Tournament" label="Iceland Triangular Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185527" start="47451" end="47485" title="Philips Sports Manager of the Year" label="Philips Sports Manager of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262078" start="47532" end="47559" title="Put &amp;#x27;Em Under Pressure" label="Put &amp;#x27;Em Under Pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="47642" end="47661" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180735" wikidata="Q234668" url="?curid=180735" title="Cart">
<text>A cart or dray (Australia and New Zealand) is a vehicle designed for transport, using two wheels and normally pulled by draught animals such as horses, donkeys, mules and oxen, or even smaller animals such as goats or large dogs.

A handcart is pulled or pushed by one or more people.

Over time, the word &quot;cart&quot; has expanded to mean nearly any small conveyance, including shopping carts, golf carts, go-karts, and UTVs, without regard to number of wheels, load carried, or means of propulsion.

==History==

The history of the cart is closely tied to the history of the wheel. Carts have been mentioned in literature as far back as the second millennium B.C. The first people to use the cart may have been Mesopotamians or early Eastern Europeans, such as the Yamnaya Culture (See history of the wheel for more information). Handcarts pushed by humans have been used around the world.

Carts were often used for judicial punishments, both to transport the condemned – a public humiliation in itself (in Ancient Rome defeated leaders were often carried in the victorious general&#x27;s triumph) – and even, in England until its substitution by the whipping post under Queen Elizabeth I, to tie the condemned to the &quot;cart-tail&quot; (the back part of a cart) and administer him or her a public whipping. were commonly associated with the French Revolution as a mobile stage elevating the condemned on the way to the guillotine: this was simply a continuation of earlier practice when they were used as the removable support in the gallows, before Albert Pierrepoint calculated the precise drop needed for instant severance of the spinal column.

== Human-powered carts ==

Of the cart types not animal-drawn, perhaps the most common example today is the shopping cart (British English: shopping trolley), which has also come to have a metaphorical meaning in relation to online purchases (here, British English uses the metaphor of the shopping basket). Shopping carts first made their appearance in Oklahoma City in 1937.

In golf, both manual push or pull and electric golf trolleys are designed to carry a golfer&#x27;s bag, clubs and other equipment. Also, the golf cart, car, or buggy, is a powered vehicle that carries golfers and their equipment around a golf course faster and with less effort than walking.

A Porter&#x27;s trolley is a type of small, hand-propelled wheeled platform. This can also be called a baggage cart.

Autocarts are a type of small, hand-propelled wheeled utility carts having a pivoting base for collapsible storage in vehicles. They eliminate the need for plastic or paper shopping bags and are also used by tradespersons to carry tools, equipment or supplies.

A soap-box cart (also known as a billy cart, go-cart, trolley etc.) is a popular children&#x27;s construction project on wheels, usually pedaled, but also intended for a test race. Similar, but more sophisticated are modern-day pedal cart toys used in general recreation and racing.

The term &quot;go-kart&quot; (also shortened as &quot;kart&quot;, an alternative spelling of &quot;cart&quot;), has existed since 1959, and refers to a tiny race car with a frame and two-stroke engine. The old term &quot;go-cart&quot; originally meant a sedan chair or an infant walker.

Other carts:
* Rickshaw: Transport for humans.
* Pushcart: a cart that is pushed by one or more persons.
* AV cart: a cart used to traditionally used to transport audiovisual equipment such as televisions. In more recent years, has been used as a standing desk, especially in school administration.
* Baggage cart: pushed by travelers to carry individual luggage
* Serving cart: also known as &quot;pushcart&quot; or &quot;go-cart&quot;, is a handcart used for serving:
* Food cart: a mobile kitchen that is set up on the street to facilitate the sale and marketing of street food to people from the local pedestrian traffic.
* Food service cart: also named &quot;serving trolley&quot;, for serving the food in a restaurant
* Pastry cart: for serving pastry
* Tea cart: also named &quot;teacart or Chai Cart&quot;, &quot;tea trolley&quot; and &quot;tea wagon&quot;, for serving tea or other drinks

== Animal-powered carts ==

Larger carts may be drawn by animals, such as horses, mules, and oxen. They have been in continuous use since the invention of the wheel, in the 4th millennium BC. Carts may be named for the animal that pulls them, such as &quot;horsecart&quot; or &quot;oxcart&quot;. In modern times, horsecarts are used in competition while draft horse showing. A &quot;dogcart&quot;, however, is usually a cart designed to &quot;carry&quot; hunting dogs: an open cart with two cross-seats back to back; the dogs could be penned between the rear-facing seat and the back end.

The term &quot;cart&quot; (synonymous in this sense with &quot;chair&quot;) is also used for various kinds of lightweight, two-wheeled carriages, some of them &quot;sprung carts&quot; (or &quot;spring carts&quot;), especially those used as open pleasure or sporting vehicles. They could be drawn by a horse, pony or dog. Examples include:

* Cocking cart: short-bodied, high, two-wheeled, seat for a groom behind the box; for tandem driving
* Dogcart: light, usually one horse, commonly two-wheeled and high, two transverse seats set back to back
* Donkey cart: underslung axle, two lengthwise seats; also called &quot;pony cart, tub-cart&quot;
* Float: a dropped axle to give an especially low load bed, for carrying heavy or unstable items such as milk churns. The name survives today as a milkfloat.
* Governess cart: light, two-wheeled, entered from the rear, body partly or wholly of wickerwork, seat for two persons along each side; also called &quot;governess car, tub-cart&quot;
* Ralli car: light, two-wheeled, horse-drawn, for two persons facing forward, or four, two facing forward and two rearward. The seat is adjustable fore-and-aft to keep the vehicle balanced for two or four people.
* Stolkjaerre: two-wheeled, front seat for two, rear seat for the driver; used in Norway
* Tax cart: spring cart, formerly subject to a small tax in England; also called &quot;taxed cart&quot;
* Whitechapel cart: spring cart, light, two-wheeled, especially for family or light delivery service

The builder of a cart may be known as a &quot;cartwright&quot;; the surname &quot;Carter&quot; also derives from the occupation of transporting goods by cart or wagon.

Carts have many different shapes, but the basic idea of transporting material (or maintaining a collection of materials in a portable fashion) remains. Carts may have a pair of shafts, one along each side of the draught animal that supports the forward-balanced load in the cart. The shafts are supported by a saddle on the horse. Alternatively (and normally where the animals are oxen or buffalo), the cart may have a single pole between a pair of animals. The draught traces attach to the axle of the vehicle or to the shafts. The traces are attached to a collar (on horses), to a yoke (on other heavy draught animals) or to a harness on dogs or other light animals.

Traces are made from a range of materials depending on the load and frequency of use. Heavy draught traces are made from iron or steel chain. Lighter traces are often leather and sometimes hemp rope, but plaited horse-hair and other similar decorative materials can be used.

The dray is often associated with the transport of barrels.

==See also==
; Pulled carts
* Bicycle trailer – pulled by bicycles
* Bullock cart – pulled by oxen
* Dog cart – pulled by dogs
* Rickshaw – pulled by humans
* Horse-drawn vehicles – pulled by horses

; Horse-drawn
* Carriage
* Chariot
* Float
* Hansom cab
* Sled/sleigh
* Sulky
* Wagon

; Human powered push-carts
* Hand truck
* Wheelbarrow
* Baggage cart
* Shopping cart
* Serving cart

; Miscellaneous
* 
* 
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234668" start="2" end="6" title="Cart" label="cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q234668" start="10" end="14" title="Cart" label="dray"/>
<link wikidata="Q228534" start="120" end="134" title="draught animal" label="draught animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q234668" start="233" end="241" title="Cart" label="handcart"/>
<link wikidata="Q796894" start="383" end="396" title="shopping cart" label="shopping cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431095" start="399" end="408" title="golf cart" label="golf cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q15037754" start="411" end="418" title="go-kart" label="go-kart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079858" start="425" end="429" title="Side by Side (UTV)" label="UTVs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="566" end="586" title="Wheel#History" label="history of the wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="717" end="730" title="Mesopotamians" label="Mesopotamians"/>
<link wikidata="Q426737" start="771" end="786" title="Yamnaya Culture" label="Yamnaya Culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="792" end="812" title="Wheel#History" label="history of the wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1014" end="1026" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="1096" end="1103" title="Roman triumph" label="triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q10682443" start="1158" end="1171" title="pillory" label="whipping post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="1178" end="1195" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q945914" start="1561" end="1579" title="Albert Pierrepoint" label="Albert Pierrepoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="1644" end="1657" title="spinal column" label="spinal column"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="1783" end="1798" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="1849" end="1857" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="2014" end="2027" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431095" start="2085" end="2097" title="golf trolley" label="golf trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509714" start="2333" end="2354" title="Porter (carrier)" label="Porter&amp;#x27;s trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277552" start="2434" end="2446" title="baggage cart" label="baggage cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588761" start="2657" end="2669" title="tradesperson" label="tradesperson"/>
<link wikidata="Q655882" start="2713" end="2726" title="soap-box cart" label="soap-box cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="3152" end="3160" title="race car" label="race car"/>
<link wikidata="Q152323" start="3178" end="3195" title="two-stroke engine" label="two-stroke engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q476850" start="3249" end="3260" title="sedan chair" label="sedan chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529372" start="3267" end="3280" title="infant walker" label="infant walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16337999" start="3298" end="3306" title="Pulled rickshaw" label="Rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416733" start="3530" end="3543" title="standing desk" label="standing desk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056391" start="3559" end="3580" title="school administration" label="school administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277552" start="3584" end="3596" title="Baggage cart" label="Baggage cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803899" start="3648" end="3660" title="Serving cart" label="Serving cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465449" start="3755" end="3764" title="Food cart" label="Food cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304773" start="4536" end="4555" title="draft horse showing" label="draft horse showing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952403" start="4565" end="4572" title="dogcart" label="dogcart"/>
<link wikidata="Q38774" start="4637" end="4648" title="hunting dog" label="hunting dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q25039821" start="4937" end="4948" title="sprung cart" label="sprung cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752317" start="5198" end="5204" title="tandem" label="tandem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952403" start="5215" end="5222" title="Dogcart" label="Dogcart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459827" start="5419" end="5424" title="Float (horse-drawn)" label="Float"/>
<link wikidata="Q201573" start="5522" end="5532" title="milk churn" label="milk churn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935273" start="5564" end="5573" title="milkfloat" label="milkfloat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588649" start="5577" end="5591" title="Governess cart" label="Governess cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081013" start="5661" end="5671" title="wickerwork" label="wickerwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287040" start="5761" end="5770" title="Ralli car" label="Ralli car"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="7300" end="7304" title="rope" label="rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289" start="7433" end="7439" title="barrel" label="barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392524" start="7473" end="7488" title="Bicycle trailer" label="Bicycle trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190777" start="7512" end="7524" title="Bullock cart" label="Bullock cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006229" start="7544" end="7552" title="Dogcart (dog-drawn)" label="Dog cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q182634" start="7572" end="7580" title="Rickshaw" label="Rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112950" start="7602" end="7622" title="Horse-drawn vehicles" label="Horse-drawn vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q235356" start="7659" end="7667" title="Carriage" label="Carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="7670" end="7677" title="Chariot" label="Chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459827" start="7680" end="7685" title="Float (horse-drawn)" label="Float"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583962" start="7688" end="7698" title="Hansom cab" label="Hansom cab"/>
<link wikidata="Q181388" start="7701" end="7705" title="Sled" label="Sled"/>
<link wikidata="Q222902" start="7715" end="7720" title="Sulky" label="Sulky"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="7723" end="7728" title="Wagon" label="Wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q384580" start="7759" end="7769" title="Hand truck" label="Hand truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q175334" start="7772" end="7783" title="Wheelbarrow" label="Wheelbarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277552" start="7786" end="7798" title="Baggage cart" label="Baggage cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q796894" start="7801" end="7814" title="Shopping cart" label="Shopping cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803899" start="7817" end="7829" title="Serving cart" label="Serving cart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180738" wikidata="Q81520" url="?curid=180738" title="Pierce Brosnan">
<text>Pierce Brendan Brosnan (born 16 May 1953) is an Irish actor and film producer. He was the fifth actor to play the fictional secret agent James Bond in the James Bond film series, starring in four films from 1995 to 2002 (&quot;GoldenEye&quot;, &quot;Tomorrow Never Dies&quot;, &quot;The World Is Not Enough&quot;, and &quot;Die Another Day&quot;) and in multiple video games, such as &quot;GoldenEye 007&quot;.

After leaving school at age 16, Brosnan began training in commercial illustration and went on to attend the Drama Centre in London for three years. Following a stage acting career, he rose to popularity in the television series &quot;Remington Steele&quot; (1982–1987). After the conclusion of the series, Brosnan appeared in films such as the Cold War spy film &quot;The Fourth Protocol&quot; (1987) and the comedy &quot;Mrs. Doubtfire&quot; (1993). After achieving worldwide fame for his role as James Bond, Brosnan took the lead in other major films including the epic disaster adventure film &quot;Dante&#x27;s Peak&quot; (1997) and the remake of the heist film &quot;The Thomas Crown Affair&quot; (1999). Since leaving the role of Bond, he has starred in films such as the political thriller &quot;The Ghost Writer&quot; (2010), the action fantasy &quot;Percy Jackson &amp; the Olympians: The Lightning Thief&quot; (2010), the action spy thriller &quot;The November Man&quot; (2014), the comedy musical &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; (2008), its sequel &quot;Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again&quot; (2018), and &quot;Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga&quot; (2020). In 2022, Brosnan played Kent Nelson / Doctor Fate in the DC Extended Universe film &quot;Black Adam&quot;.

Brosnan has received two Golden Globe Award nominations, for the miniseries &quot;Nancy Astor&quot; (1982) and for the dark comedy film &quot;The Matador&quot; (2005). In 1996, he and the American film producer Beau St. Clair founded the Los Angeles–based production company Irish DreamTime. He is also known for his charitable work and environmental activism. In 1997, Brosnan received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the film industry. In 2020, he was listed at No. 15 on &quot;The Irish Times&quot;″ list of the greatest Irish film actors.

== Early life ==
Brosnan was born on 16 May 1953 in Drogheda, County Louth, the only child of May () and Thomas Brosnan, a carpenter. He has the same name as his grandfather, Pierce Brosnan, whose first name was in honour of his mother Margaret Pierce. For 12 years, he lived in Navan, County Meath, and said in 1999 that he considers it to be his hometown. His father abandoned the family when Brosnan was an infant. When he was four years old, his mother moved to London to work as a nurse. From then on, he was largely brought up by his maternal grandparents, Philip and Kathleen Smith. After their deaths, he lived with an aunt and then an uncle, but was subsequently sent to live in a boarding house run by a woman named Eileen. He later said, &quot;Childhood was fairly solitary. I never knew my father. He left when I was an infant. [...] To be Irish Catholic in the 1950s, and have a marriage which was not there, a father who was not there [...] the mother, the wife suffered greatly. My mother was very courageous. She took the bold steps to go away and be a nurse in England. Basically wanting a better life for her and myself. My mother came home once a year, twice a year.&quot;

Brosnan was brought up in a Catholic family, and educated in a local school run by the De La Salle Brothers while serving as an altar boy. He left Ireland on 12 August 1964 and went to Scotland to be reunited with his mother and her new husband, William Carmichael, at their home in Longniddry. Carmichael took Brosnan to see a James Bond film for the first time (&quot;Goldfinger&quot;) at the age of 11. They later moved back to London, where Brosnan was educated at Elliott School in Putney, now known as Ark Putney Academy. When discussing his transition from Ireland to England, he said, &quot;When you go to a very large city, a metropolis like London, as an Irish boy of 10, life suddenly moves pretty fast. [...] And you&#x27;re Irish. And they make you feel it; the British have a wonderful way of doing that, and I had a certain deep sense of being an outsider.&quot; His nickname at school was simply &quot;Irish&quot;.

After leaving school at 16, Brosnan decided to be a painter and began training in commercial illustration at Saint Martin&#x27;s School of Art in London. While attending a rehearsal for a workshop at the Ovalhouse, he saw a fire eater teaching people how to eat fire and decided to join in. He trained for three years as an actor at the Drama Centre London. Describing the feeling of becoming an actor and the influence it had on his life, he said, &quot;When I found acting, or when acting found me, it was a liberation. It was a stepping stone into another life, away from a life that I had, and acting was something I was good at, something which was appreciated. That was a great satisfaction in my life.&quot;

== Career ==
===Early career===
Graduating from the Drama Centre in 1975, Brosnan began working as an acting assistant stage manager at the York Theatre Royal, making his acting debut in &quot;Wait Until Dark&quot;. Within six months, he was selected by the playwright Tennessee Williams to play the role of McCabe in the British première of &quot;The Red Devil Battery Sign&quot; (billed as &quot;Pierce Brosman&quot;). His performance caused a stir in London and Brosnan still has the telegram sent by Williams, stating only &quot;Thank God for you, my dear boy&quot;. In 1977, he was picked by Franco Zeffirelli to appear in the play &quot;Filumena&quot; by Eduardo De Filippo opposite Joan Plowright and Frank Finlay.

Brosnan continued his career making brief appearances in films such as &quot;The Long Good Friday&quot; (1980) and &quot;The Mirror Crack&#x27;d&quot; (1980), as well as early television performances in &quot;The Professionals&quot;, &quot;Murphy&#x27;s Stroke&quot;, and &quot;Play for Today&quot;. He became a television star in the United States with his leading role in the popular miniseries &quot;Manions of America&quot;. He followed this in 1982 with the BBC&#x27;s nine-part miniseries &quot;Nancy Astor&quot; (which aired in America on &quot;Masterpiece Theatre&quot;) that dramatised the life of Lady Astor, the first woman to sit in the British Parliament. His portrayal of Robert Gould Shaw II garnered him a 1985 Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor.

In 1982, Brosnan moved to Southern California and rose in popularity in the United States playing the title role in the NBC romantic, often-comedic detective series &quot;Remington Steele&quot;. The &quot;Washington Post&quot; noted that same year that Brosnan &quot;could make it as a young James Bond.&quot; After &quot;Remington Steele&quot; ended in 1987, Brosnan went on to appear in, among other projects, &quot;The Fourth Protocol&quot; (1987), a Cold War thriller in which he starred alongside Michael Caine, &quot;The Deceivers&quot;, the mini-series James Clavell&#x27;s &quot;Noble House&quot; (both 1988), and &quot;The Lawnmower Man&quot; (1992). In 1992, he shot a pilot for NBC called &quot;Running Wilde&quot;, playing a reporter for &quot;Auto World&quot; magazine with Jennifer Love Hewitt playing his daughter, which never aired. In 1993, he played a supporting role in the comedy film &quot;Mrs. Doubtfire&quot;. He appeared in several television films, including &quot;Victim of Love&quot; (1991), &quot;Death Train&quot; (1993) and &quot;Night Watch&quot; (1995), a spy thriller set in Hong Kong. In 2003, Brosnan was awarded the Irish Film and Television Academy Lifetime Achievement Award for his contribution to Irish Film.

=== James Bond ===
====1987 offer====
Brosnan first met James Bond film producer Albert R. Broccoli on the sets of &quot;For Your Eyes Only&quot;, as his first wife, Cassandra Harris, had been cast as Countess Lisl von Schlaf, mistress to Milos Columbo. Broccoli said, &quot;if he can act ... he&#x27;s my guy&quot; to inherit the role of Bond from Roger Moore. It was reported by both &quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot; and the &quot;National Enquirer&quot; that Brosnan was going to inherit another role of Moore&#x27;s, that of Simon Templar in &quot;The Saint&quot;. Brosnan denied the rumours in July 1993 but added, &quot;it&#x27;s still languishing there on someone&#x27;s desk in Hollywood.&quot;

In 1986, NBC cancelled &quot;Remington Steele&quot;. As Brosnan was offered the role of James Bond, the publicity improved &quot;Remington Steele&quot;″s ratings and it was renewed, contractually requiring Brosnan to return to the show. This caused Eon Productions to have to look elsewhere for the new 007. The producers instead hired Timothy Dalton for &quot;The Living Daylights&quot; (1987) and &quot;Licence to Kill&quot; (1989). While Brosnan was reluctant to discuss losing the Bond role, in part because Dalton was a friend, he appeared in Diet Coke commercials portraying what the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; described as &quot;a dashing Bond-like character&quot;, and NBC advertised &quot;Noble House&quot; with Brosnan dressed in a Bond-like tuxedo.

====Being Bond====
Legal disputes between the Bond producers and the studio over distribution rights resulted in the cancellation of a proposed third Dalton film in 1991 and put the Bond series on a hiatus for several years. After the legal issues had been resolved, Dalton decided not to return for a third film. On 7 June 1994, Brosnan was announced as the fifth actor to play Bond.

Brosnan was signed for a three-film Bond deal with the option of a fourth. The first, 1995&#x27;s &quot;GoldenEye&quot;, grossed US$350 million worldwide, the fourth-highest worldwide gross of any film in 1995, making it the most successful Bond film since &quot;Moonraker&quot;, adjusted for inflation. It holds a 78% rating on Rotten Tomatoes, while &quot;Metacritic&quot; holds it at 65%. In the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot;, Roger Ebert gave the film 3 stars out of 4, saying that Brosnan&#x27;s Bond was &quot;somehow more sensitive, more vulnerable, more psychologically complete&quot; than the previous ones, also commenting on Bond&#x27;s &quot;loss of innocence&quot; since previous films. James Berardinelli described Brosnan as &quot;a decided improvement over his immediate predecessor&quot; with a &quot;flair for wit to go along with his natural charm&quot;, but added that &quot;fully one-quarter of &quot;Goldeneye&quot; is momentum-killing padding.&quot;

In 1996, Brosnan formed a film production company called Irish DreamTime along with producing partner and longtime friend Beau St. Clair. Brosnan and St. Clair released Irish DreamTime&#x27;s first production, &quot;The Nephew&quot;, in 1998. One year later, the company&#x27;s second studio project, &quot;The Thomas Crown Affair&quot;, was released and met both critical and box office success.

Brosnan returned in 1997&#x27;s &quot;Tomorrow Never Dies&quot; and 1999&#x27;s &quot;The World Is Not Enough&quot;, which were also successful. In 2002, Brosnan appeared for the fourth time as Bond in &quot;Die Another Day&quot;, receiving mixed reviews similarly to the former two, but was a success at the box office. Brosnan himself subsequently criticised many aspects of his fourth Bond movie. During the promotion, he mentioned that he would like to continue his role as James Bond: &quot;I&#x27;d like to do another, sure. Connery did six. Six would be a number, then never come back.&quot; Brosnan asked Eon Productions, when accepting the role, to be allowed to work on other projects between Bond films. The request was granted, and for every Bond film, Brosnan appeared in at least two other mainstream films, including several he produced, playing a wide range of roles, ranging from a scientist in Tim Burton&#x27;s &quot;Mars Attacks!&quot;, to the title role in &quot;Grey Owl&quot;, which documents the life of Englishman Archibald Stansfeld Belaney, one of Canada&#x27;s first conservationists.

Shortly after the release of &quot;Die Another Day&quot;, the media began questioning whether or not Brosnan would reprise the role for a fifth time. At that time, Brosnan was approaching his 50th birthday. Brosnan kept in mind that both fans and critics were very unhappy with Roger Moore playing the role until the age of 57, but he was receiving popular support from both critics and the franchise fanbase for a fifth instalment. For this reason, he remained enthusiastic about reprising his role. In October 2004, Brosnan said he considered himself dismissed from the role. Although Brosnan had frequently been rumoured as still in the running to play Bond, he had denied it several times, and in February 2005 he posted on his website that he was finished with the role. Daniel Craig took over the role on 14 October 2005. In an interview with &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;, Brosnan was asked what he thought of Craig as the new James Bond. He replied, &quot;I&#x27;m looking forward to it like we&#x27;re all looking forward to it. Daniel Craig is a great actor and he&#x27;s going to do a fantastic job.&quot; He re-affirmed this support in an interview to the &quot;International Herald Tribune&quot;, stating that &quot;[Craig&#x27;s] on his way to becoming a memorable Bond.&quot; Brosnan later admitted that he was hurt by the end of his tenure; &quot;Barbara [Broccoli] and Michael [Wilson] were on the line – &#x27;We&#x27;re so sorry.&#x27; She was crying, Michael was stoic and he said, &#x27;You were a great James Bond. Thank you very much,&#x27; and I said, &#x27;Thank you very much. Goodbye.&#x27; That was it. I was utterly shocked and just kicked to the kerb with the way it went down.&quot;

During his tenure in the James Bond films, Brosnan also took part in the James Bond video games. In 2002, Brosnan&#x27;s likeness was used as the face of Bond in the James Bond video game &quot;007: Nightfire&quot; (voiced by Maxwell Caulfield). In 2004, Brosnan starred in the Bond game &quot;James Bond 007: Everything or Nothing&quot;, contracting for his likeness to be used as well as doing the voice-work for the character. He starred along with Jamie Lee Curtis and Geoffrey Rush in &quot;The Tailor of Panama&quot; in 2001, and lent his voice to &quot;The Simpsons&quot; episode &quot;Treehouse of Horror XII&quot; as a machine.

=== After James Bond ===
Since 2004, Brosnan has talked of backing a film about Caitlin Macnamara, wife of poet Dylan Thomas, the title role to be played by Miranda Richardson. Brosnan&#x27;s first post-Bond role was that of Daniel Rafferty in 2004&#x27;s &quot;Laws of Attraction&quot;. Garreth Murphy, of entertainment.ie, described Brosnan&#x27;s performance as &quot;surprisingly effective, gently riffing off his James Bond persona and supplementing it with a raffish energy&quot;. In the same year, Brosnan starred in &quot;After the Sunset&quot; alongside Salma Hayek and Woody Harrelson. The film received generally negative reviews and was a box office flop. Brosnan&#x27;s next film was 2005&#x27;s &quot;The Matador&quot;. He starred as Julian Noble, a jaded, neurotic assassin who meets a travelling salesman (Greg Kinnear) in a Mexican bar. The film garnered generally positive reviews. Roger Ebert for the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; called Brosnan&#x27;s performance the best of his career. Brosnan was nominated for a Golden Globe award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy, but lost to Joaquin Phoenix for &quot;Walk the Line&quot;. In 2006, Brosnan narrated &quot;The Official Film of the 2006 FIFA World Cup&quot;, directed by Michael Apted.

In 2007, Brosnan appeared in the film &quot;Seraphim Falls&quot; alongside fellow Irishman Liam Neeson. The film opened in limited released on 26 January 2007 to average reviews. Kevin Crust of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; noted that Brosnan and Neeson made &quot;fine adversaries&quot;; Michael Rechtshaffen of &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; thought that they were &quot;hard-pressed to inject some much-needed vitality into their sparse lines&quot;. During the same year, Brosnan spoke of making a western with fellow Irish actors Gabriel Byrne and Colm Meaney. In that same year Brosnan starred as Tom Ryan in &quot;Butterfly on a Wheel&quot;. The film was released in the United States under the name of &quot;Shattered&quot; and in Europe as &quot;Desperate Hours&quot;.

In 2008, Brosnan joined Meryl Streep in the film adaptation of the ABBA musical &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot;. He played Sam Carmichael, one of three men believed to be the father of Sophie (Amanda Seyfried), while Streep played Sophie&#x27;s mother. Judy Craymer, producer of the film, said &quot;Pierce brings a certain smooch factor, and we think he&#x27;ll have great chemistry with Meryl in a romantic comedy.&quot; Brosnan&#x27;s preparation in singing for the role included walking up and down the coast and singing karaoke to his own voice for about six weeks, followed by rehearsals in New York, which he noted &quot;sounded dreadful&quot;. Brosnan&#x27;s singing in the film was generally disparaged by critics, with his singing compared in separate reviews to the sound of a water buffalo, a donkey, and a wounded raccoon. Brosnan provided as a guest star narrator for the &quot;Thomas &amp; Friends&quot; movie &quot;The Great Discovery&quot; (2008). He was originally set to narrate for both UK and US dubs from Series 12 to Series 16, but withdrew from it for unknown reasons.
In Roman Polanski&#x27;s 2010 political thriller &quot;The Ghost Writer&quot;, Brosnan played a disgraced British Prime Minister. The film won a Silver Bear at the Berlin International Film Festival. He starred as Charles Hawkins in the film &quot;Remember Me&quot; and as Chiron in &quot;Percy Jackson &amp; the Olympians: The Lightning Thief&quot;, both released in the same year. In 2012, Brosnan played the role of Philip in the Danish romantic comedy &quot;Love Is All You Need&quot;.

In 2013, Brosnan was awarded honorary patronage of Dublin University Players at Trinity College Dublin. He also starred opposite Owen Wilson in &quot;No Escape&quot;, playing a &quot;heroic government agent&quot;. Brosnan was slated to star in &quot;Last Man Out&quot;, a crime film adapted from Stuart Neville&#x27;s novel titled &quot;The Twelve&quot; (released as &quot;Ghosts of Belfast&quot; in the US) by Craig Ferguson and Ted Mulkerin, with director Terry Loan at the helm. However, it never came to fruition after years in development, and Brosnan is no longer attached to the production.

In 2013, Brosnan appeared in television commercials as a tongue-in-cheek version of himself to promote the launch of Sky Broadband in Ireland. In 2014, Brosnan starred in &quot;The November Man&quot;, an adaptation of Bill Granger&#x27;s action novel, &quot;There Are No Spies&quot;, playing a retired CIA operative called Devereaux, alongside co-star Olga Kurylenko in a supporting role. The project had been in development limbo for almost a decade. The film was received negatively, with a 34% on Rotten Tomatoes and a 38/100 on Metacritic. In 2015, he appeared alongside Milla Jovovich in a suspense thriller movie written by Phil Shelby, called &quot;Survivor&quot;, with Charles and Irwin Winkler producing, and James McTeigue directing. Brosnan later starred in a revenge thriller called &quot;I.T.&quot; (2016), which opened in limited release through video on demand.

Brosnan replaced actor Sam Neill in the role of Eli McCullough in a television adaptation of Philipp Meyer&#x27;s novel &quot;The Son&quot;, with Kevin Murphy serving as both executive producer and showrunner of the series, which aired for two seasons from 2017 to 2019. In 2017, Brosnan starred in &quot;The Foreigner&quot;, opposite Jackie Chan, as a former IRA man turned government official, Liam Hennessy. &quot;The Foreigner&quot; was filmed in London, and was directed by Martin Campbell, who previously worked with Brosnan on his debut James Bond film, &quot;GoldenEye&quot;. It was noted that Brosnan&#x27;s character bore a strong resemblance to Sinn Féin leader Gerry Adams.

A third collaboration with director Martin Campbell would have seen Brosnan starring in a film adaptation of Ernest Hemingway&#x27;s 1950 novel &quot;Across the River and into the Trees&quot;. However, the reluctance of investors to finance the production along with several delays led both Brosnan and Campbell to drop out of the project. Paula Ortiz was later brought on to direct the film and Liev Schreiber replaced Brosnan in the lead role.

In 2018, Brosnan co-starred with Guy Pearce and Minnie Driver in a mystery thriller film called &quot;Spinning Man&quot;, based on George Harrar&#x27;s novel of the same name. He later reprised his role as Sam Carmichael in the sequel to Catherine Johnson&#x27;s &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot;, entitled &quot;Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again&quot;, along with the rest of the cast members from the first film. He also had a supporting role in the action thriller headlined by Dave Bautista in &quot;Final Score&quot;.

In 2021, Brosnan executive produced and starred in the heist caper entitled &quot;The Misfits&quot; directed by Renny Harlin from a screenplay by Robert Henry and Kurt Wimmer. The film was released to poor reception from critics. He also appeared in A24&#x27;s horror film &quot;False Positive&quot; opposite Ilana Glazer, who co-wrote and co-produced it, as well. The film was a moderate success.

Brosnan played Doctor Fate/Kent Nelson in the 2022 DC Extended Universe film, &quot;Black Adam&quot;. He joined Adam Devine in the Netflix action-comedy film &quot;The Out-Laws&quot; (2023) directed by Tyler Spindel. Also that year, Brosnan starred as King Louis XIV in the family adventure film &quot;The King&#x27;s Daughter&quot; based on the 1997 novel &quot;The Moon and the Sun&quot; by Vonda N. McIntyre.

Brosnan led the 2023 hitman thriller film &quot;Fast Charlie&quot; directed by Phillip Noyce.

=== Upcoming roles ===

Brosnan was set to star opposite Jamie Dornan and Cillian Murphy in a film based on the events of The Maze Prison Escape titled &quot;H-Block&quot; with Jim Sheridan at the helm. Initially, filming was to begin sometime in August 2017 before its postponement to March 2018 due to scheduling conflicts with cast members. As of today, preliminary production on the film is yet to commence.

Alongside Jesse Eisenberg and Vanessa Redgrave, Brosnan is set to appear in a historical period piece based on a novel by Jonathan Miles titled &quot;The Wreck of The Medusa&quot;, set against the backdrop of the early 19th-century during King Louis XVIII&#x27;s reign in France, with the film to be directed by Peter Webber. During an interview in October 2020, Webber claimed that the lack of interest in &quot;films about artists&quot; in the market earned the project several setbacks, and as such still remains in development.

== Philanthropy and activism ==
Brosnan has been an Ambassador for UNICEF Ireland since 2001—following in the footsteps of Bond actor Roger Moore, who had been a Goodwill Ambassador from 1991 until his death in 2017—and recorded a special announcement to mark the launch of UNICEF&#x27;s &quot;Unite for Children, Unite against AIDS&quot; Campaign with Liam Neeson. Brosnan supported John Kerry in the 2004 presidential election and is a vocal supporter of same-sex marriage.

Brosnan first became aware of the nuclear arms race in 1962, at the age of nine, when worldwide condemnation of U.S. nuclear testing in Nevada made international headlines. During the 1990s, he participated in news conferences in Washington, D.C., to help Greenpeace draw attention to the campaign to bring an end to nuclear testing with a Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Brosnan boycotted the French premiere of &quot;GoldenEye&quot; in support of Greenpeace&#x27;s protest against the French nuclear testing program.

From 1997 to 2000, Brosnan and wife Keely Shaye Smith worked with the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) and International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) to stop a proposed salt factory from being built at Laguna San Ignacio. The couple with Halle Berry, Cindy Crawford, and Daryl Hannah successfully fought the Cabrillo Port Liquefied Natural Gas facility that was proposed off the coast of Malibu; the State Lands Commission eventually denied the lease to build the terminal. In May 2007, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger vetoed the facility.

In May 2007, Brosnan and Smith donated $100,000 to help replace a playground on the Hawaiian island of Kauai, where they own a house. On 7 July 2007, Brosnan presented a film at Live Earth in London; he also recorded a television advertisement for the cause.

Brosnan is also listed as a member of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society&#x27;s Board of Advisors. In 2004, he was named &#x27;Best-dressed Environmentalist&#x27; by the Sustainable Style Foundation.

Brosnan also raises money for charitable causes through sales of his paintings. After Brosnan left school, he pursued a career in art and began working as an illustrator. &quot;I always wanted to be an artist, a painter. I started as a Trainee Artist in a small studio in South London.&quot; A colleague suggested that Pierce attend a theatre workshop, and eventually he abandoned his artwork to pursue a career in acting. Brosnan took up painting again in the late 1980s during his first wife&#x27;s illness as he found it therapeutic. &quot;Sometimes dramatic moments affect the way you see yourself in the world…from a very hard time in my life, I started painting again and out came every colour I could imagine.&quot; Citing his influences as Picasso, Matisse, Bonnard, and Kandinsky, Brosnan spends much of his free time between film shoots in front of his easel. &quot;I am self taught, an enthusiastic painter as a friend of mine likes to say.&quot; He has continued painting since then, using spare time on set and at home. Profits from sales of giclée prints of his works are given to a trust to benefit &quot;environmental, children&#x27;s and women&#x27;s health charities.&quot; Since Harris&#x27; death, Brosnan has been an advocate for cancer awareness and, in 2006, he served as spokesperson for Lee National Denim Day, a breast cancer fundraiser which raises millions of dollars and raises more money in a single day than any other breast cancer fundraiser.

In 2021, Brosnan launched his first-ever NFT collection of digital artworks entitled &quot;Big Noise&quot; – on a digital platform focusing on artist empowerment, sustainability, and technical innovation – inspired by his painting &quot;Earplugs&quot;, which he painted while filming the James Bond film &quot;GoldenEye&quot;, incorporating abstract movement, self-recorded sound elements, including his voice, and bespoke visuals.

== Personal life ==

Brosnan has married twice, having been widowed once, and has five children and four grandchildren. He met Australian actress Cassandra Harris through David Harris, the nephew of Richard Harris, shortly after leaving drama school. On meeting her, he said, &quot;What a beautiful-looking woman. I never for an instant thought she was someone I&#x27;d spend 17 years of my life with. I didn&#x27;t think of wooing her, or attempting to woo her; I just wanted to enjoy her beauty and who she was.&quot; They began dating and bought a house in Wimbledon. They married in December 1980 and had one son together, Sean, who was born on 13 September 1983 and later became an actor. They also raised Harris&#x27; two children from her prior marriage, Charlotte (1971–2013) and Chris. Brosnan adopted them after their father Dermot Harris died in 1986; they subsequently took his surname. Early in their relationship, Brosnan worked in West End plays and television films. After Harris appeared in the James Bond film &quot;For Your Eyes Only&quot; in 1981, they secured a bank loan and moved to Southern California, where Brosnan was cast in the title role of the TV series &quot;Remington Steele&quot;, easing their financial worries.

An episode of &quot;Remington Steele&quot; that was filmed in Ireland generated significant publicity. This led to Brosnan meeting his father, who had left when Brosnan was an infant, at his hotel. He expected to see a &quot;very tall man&quot; but instead described his father as &quot;a man of medium stature, pushed-back silver hair, flinty eyes, and a twizzled jaw&quot; who &quot;had a very strong Kerry accent&quot;. He was regretful that they met under such public circumstances and wished for a more private arrangement.

While filming &quot;The Deceivers&quot; in Rajasthan in 1987, Harris became seriously ill. She was later diagnosed with ovarian cancer and died on 28 December 1991. Brosnan struggled to cope with her death: &quot;When your partner gets cancer, then life changes. Your timetable and reference for your normal routines and the way you view life, all this changes. Because you&#x27;re dealing with death. You&#x27;re dealing with the possibility of death and dying. And it was that way through the chemotherapy, through the first-look operation, the second look, the third look, the fourth look, the fifth look. Cassie was very positive about life. I mean, she had the most amazing energy and outlook on life. It was and is a terrible loss, and I see it reflected, from time to time, in my children.&quot; Harris had always wanted Brosnan to play James Bond; in 1995, four years after her death, Brosnan secured the role. His adopted daughter Charlotte also died of ovarian cancer, on 28 June 2013.

In 1994, Brosnan met American journalist Keely Shaye Smith in Mexico. They were married in 2001 at Ballintubber Abbey in Ireland. They have two sons together named Dylan and Paris. They reside primarily in Malibu, California, with a second American home in Hawaii and Irish residences in Dublin and County Meath. On 11 February 2015, the $18 million Malibu home caught fire and sustained $1 million in damages. During the 30 minutes it took firefighters to extinguish the fire, flames destroyed the contents of the garage, including Brosnan&#x27;s 2002 Aston Martin V12 Vanquish, and spread to a bedroom above it; no injuries were sustained.

In July 2003, Queen Elizabeth II made Brosnan an Honorary Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) for his &quot;outstanding contribution to the British film industry&quot;. As an Irish citizen, he is only an honorary appointee of the Order and ineligible to receive the full honour, which is awarded only to a citizen of the Commonwealth realms, but he is still allowed the letters &quot;OBE&quot; after his name. In 2002, he was also awarded an honorary degree from the Dublin Institute of Technology and, a year later, the University College Cork. On 23 September 2004, he became an American citizen while retaining his Irish citizenship. He said, &quot;My Irishness is in everything I do. It&#x27;s the spirit of who I am, as a man, an actor, a father. It&#x27;s where I come from.&quot; When asked by a fan if it annoyed him when people confused his nationality because of his fairly neutral accent, he said, &quot;It amuses me in some respects that they should confuse me with an Englishman when I&#x27;m a dyed-in-the-wool, born and bred Irishman... I don&#x27;t necessarily fly under any flag, but no, it doesn&#x27;t bother me.&quot;

Brosnan has expressed contempt for his Christian Brothers education, but commented in 2013, &quot;It always helps to have a bit of prayer in your back pocket. At the end of the day, you have to have something and for me that is God, Jesus, my Catholic upbringing, my faith... God has been good to me. My faith has been good to me in the moments of deepest suffering, doubt and fear. It is a constant, the language of prayer. I might not have got my sums right from the Christian Brothers or might not have got the greatest learning of literature from them, but I certainly got a strapping amount of faith.&quot; He attends Mass but also adheres to other spiritual beliefs, stating in 2008 that he loves &quot;the teachings of Buddhist philosophy&quot;, which he referred to as his &quot;own private faith&quot;. He elaborated, &quot;I don&#x27;t preach it, but it&#x27;s a faith that is a comfort to me when the night is long.&quot;

== Filmography ==
=== Film ===
=== Television ===
=== Video games ===
==Notes==

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81520" start="0" end="22" title="Pierce Brosnan" label="Pierce Brendan Brosnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129980" start="137" end="147" title="Portrayal of James Bond in film" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q151472" start="155" end="177" title="List of James Bond films" label="James Bond film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q19089" start="227" end="236" title="GoldenEye" label="GoldenEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q207916" start="250" end="269" title="Tomorrow Never Dies" label="Tomorrow Never Dies"/>
<link wikidata="Q212145" start="283" end="306" title="The World Is Not Enough" label="The World Is Not Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q30931" start="324" end="339" title="Die Another Day" label="Die Another Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635372" start="354" end="374" title="James Bond in video games" label="multiple video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q369086" start="390" end="403" title="GoldenEye 007 (1997 video game)" label="GoldenEye 007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255631" start="520" end="532" title="Drama Centre" label="Drama Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="536" end="542" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q676371" start="646" end="662" title="Remington Steele" label="Remington Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="756" end="764" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171720" start="780" end="799" title="The Fourth Protocol (film)" label="The Fourth Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q483852" start="834" end="848" title="Mrs. Doubtfire" label="Mrs. Doubtfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q914247" start="1014" end="1031" title="Dante&amp;#x27;s Peak" label="Dante&amp;#x27;s Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216770" start="1084" end="1107" title="The Thomas Crown Affair (1999 film)" label="The Thomas Crown Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q157879" start="1215" end="1231" title="The Ghost Writer (film)" label="The Ghost Writer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1271" end="1325" title="Percy Jackson &amp;amp; the Olympians: The Lightning Thief" label="Percy Jackson &amp;amp; the Olympians: The Lightning Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q14117444" start="1370" end="1386" title="The November Man" label="The November Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q188850" start="1426" end="1436" title="Mamma Mia! (film)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q36951175" start="1468" end="1495" title="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again" label="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1520" end="1567" title="Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga" label="Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q11897821" start="1606" end="1631" title="Doctor Fate (Kent Nelson)" label="Kent Nelson / Doctor Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18281265" start="1639" end="1659" title="DC Extended Universe" label="DC Extended Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28657013" start="1671" end="1681" title="Black Adam (film)" label="Black Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="1715" end="1733" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q106091317" start="1772" end="1783" title="Nancy Astor (TV series)" label="Nancy Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q697672" start="1832" end="1843" title="The Matador" label="The Matador"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022742" start="1901" end="1915" title="Beau St. Clair" label="Beau St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="2091" end="2113" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="2200" end="2215" title="The Irish Times" label="The Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q207223" start="2316" end="2338" title="Drogheda" label="Drogheda, County Louth"/>
<link wikidata="Q217845" start="2543" end="2562" title="Navan" label="Navan, County Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2730" end="2736" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558858" start="2954" end="2968" title="boarding house" label="boarding house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="3116" end="3130" title="Irish Catholic" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q138579" start="3544" end="3564" title="De La Salle Brothers" label="De La Salle Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q139627" start="3585" end="3594" title="Altar server" label="altar boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016963" start="3740" end="3750" title="Longniddry" label="Longniddry"/>
<link wikidata="Q106440" start="3827" end="3837" title="Goldfinger (film)" label="Goldfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365721" start="3926" end="3940" title="Elliott School (London)" label="Elliott School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465220" start="3944" end="3950" title="Putney" label="Putney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653795" start="3965" end="3983" title="Ark Putney Academy" label="Ark Putney Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15274445" start="4498" end="4531" title="Saint Martin&amp;#x27;s School of Art" label="Saint Martin&amp;#x27;s School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113221" start="4593" end="4602" title="Ovalhouse" label="Ovalhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q493624" start="4613" end="4623" title="fire eater" label="fire eater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255631" start="4726" end="4745" title="Drama Centre London" label="Drama Centre London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572609" start="5245" end="5263" title="York Theatre Royal" label="York Theatre Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050101" start="5298" end="5313" title="Wait Until Dark" label="Wait Until Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="5374" end="5392" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759858" start="5453" end="5479" title="The Red Devil Battery Sign" label="The Red Devil Battery Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q53040" start="5702" end="5719" title="Franco Zeffirelli" label="Franco Zeffirelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246987" start="5748" end="5756" title="Filumena" label="Filumena"/>
<link wikidata="Q332632" start="5766" end="5784" title="Eduardo De Filippo" label="Eduardo De Filippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q230035" start="5794" end="5808" title="Joan Plowright" label="Joan Plowright"/>
<link wikidata="Q738521" start="5813" end="5825" title="Frank Finlay" label="Frank Finlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055796" start="5905" end="5925" title="The Long Good Friday" label="The Long Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543979" start="5949" end="5972" title="The Mirror Crack&amp;#x27;d" label="The Mirror Crack&amp;#x27;d"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215536" start="6037" end="6054" title="The Professionals (TV series)" label="The Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528583" start="6068" end="6088" title="Gay Future" label="Murphy&amp;#x27;s Stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562040" start="6106" end="6120" title="Play for Today" label="Play for Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749797" start="6231" end="6249" title="Manions of America" label="Manions of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="6291" end="6294" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q106091317" start="6329" end="6340" title="Nancy Astor (TV series)" label="Nancy Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297878" start="6380" end="6399" title="Masterpiece Theatre" label="Masterpiece Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q195013" start="6435" end="6445" title="Lady Astor" label="Lady Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="6477" end="6495" title="British Parliament" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344895" start="6514" end="6534" title="Robert Gould Shaw II" label="Robert Gould Shaw II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="6555" end="6573" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6589" end="6610" title="List of Golden Globe Awards: Mini-series, Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="6639" end="6658" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="6733" end="6736" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q676371" start="6784" end="6800" title="Remington Steele" label="Remington Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="6818" end="6833" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171720" start="7031" end="7050" title="The Fourth Protocol (film)" label="The Fourth Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="7067" end="7075" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="7115" end="7128" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171430" start="7136" end="7149" title="The Deceivers (film)" label="The Deceivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q316802" start="7173" end="7186" title="James Clavell" label="James Clavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994901" start="7200" end="7211" title="Noble House (miniseries)" label="Noble House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196384" start="7241" end="7258" title="The Lawnmower Man (film)" label="The Lawnmower Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="7302" end="7305" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q175104" start="7400" end="7420" title="Jennifer Love Hewitt" label="Jennifer Love Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q483852" start="7524" end="7538" title="Mrs. Doubtfire" label="Mrs. Doubtfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925589" start="7603" end="7617" title="Victim of Love (1991 film)" label="Victim of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181267" start="7638" end="7649" title="Death Train" label="Death Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q4187089" start="7673" end="7684" title="Night Watch (1995 film)" label="Night Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q71612940" start="7765" end="7798" title="Irish Film and Television Academy" label="Irish Film and Television Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q72652" start="7944" end="7962" title="Albert R. Broccoli" label="Albert R. Broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q332330" start="7984" end="8002" title="For Your Eyes Only (film)" label="For Your Eyes Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q455177" start="8029" end="8045" title="Cassandra Harris" label="Cassandra Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q134333" start="8212" end="8223" title="Roger Moore" label="Roger Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055086" start="8255" end="8276" title="Entertainment Tonight" label="Entertainment Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814777" start="8297" end="8314" title="National Enquirer" label="National Enquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q388271" start="8393" end="8406" title="Simon Templar" label="Simon Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248868" start="8416" end="8425" title="The Saint (TV series)" label="The Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="8577" end="8580" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q41233" start="8904" end="8918" title="Timothy Dalton" label="Timothy Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q272064" start="8929" end="8949" title="The Living Daylights" label="The Living Daylights"/>
<link wikidata="Q309086" start="8973" end="8988" title="Licence to Kill" label="Licence to Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815345" start="9116" end="9125" title="Diet Coke" label="Diet Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="9164" end="9181" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q19089" start="9822" end="9831" title="GoldenEye" label="GoldenEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q334780" start="9981" end="9990" title="Moonraker (film)" label="Moonraker"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="10047" end="10062" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="10076" end="10086" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="10123" end="10140" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="10148" end="10159" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q711909" start="10418" end="10436" title="James Berardinelli" label="James Berardinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022742" start="10814" end="10828" title="Beau St. Clair" label="Beau St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198273" start="10908" end="10918" title="The Nephew" label="The Nephew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216770" start="10999" end="11022" title="The Thomas Crown Affair (1999 film)" label="The Thomas Crown Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q207916" start="11128" end="11147" title="Tomorrow Never Dies" label="Tomorrow Never Dies"/>
<link wikidata="Q212145" start="11176" end="11199" title="The World Is Not Enough" label="The World Is Not Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q30931" start="11298" end="11313" title="Die Another Day" label="Die Another Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="11621" end="11628" title="Sean Connery" label="Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q219135" start="11703" end="11718" title="Eon Productions" label="Eon Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="12002" end="12012" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q271690" start="12026" end="12039" title="Mars Attacks!" label="Mars Attacks!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240641" start="12074" end="12082" title="Grey Owl (film)" label="Grey Owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377706" start="12129" end="12156" title="Archibald Stansfeld Belaney" label="Archibald Stansfeld Belaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547" start="12980" end="12992" title="Daniel Craig" label="Daniel Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="13059" end="13077" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q100294968" start="13379" end="13407" title="International Herald Tribune" label="International Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635372" start="14086" end="14107" title="James Bond in video games" label="James Bond video game"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14114" end="14128" title="007: Nightfire" label="007: Nightfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306100" start="14146" end="14163" title="Maxwell Caulfield" label="Maxwell Caulfield"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14214" end="14251" title="James Bond 007: Everything or Nothing" label="James Bond 007: Everything or Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q106997" start="14372" end="14388" title="Jamie Lee Curtis" label="Jamie Lee Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166272" start="14393" end="14406" title="Geoffrey Rush" label="Geoffrey Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q548303" start="14416" end="14436" title="The Tailor of Panama (film)" label="The Tailor of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="14480" end="14492" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455114" start="14513" end="14536" title="Treehouse of Horror XII" label="Treehouse of Horror XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405200" start="14638" end="14655" title="Caitlin Thomas" label="Caitlin Macnamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q191023" start="14670" end="14682" title="Dylan Thomas" label="Dylan Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q229241" start="14715" end="14733" title="Miranda Richardson" label="Miranda Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q819109" start="14820" end="14838" title="Laws of Attraction" label="Laws of Attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380437" start="14865" end="14881" title="entertainment.ie" label="entertainment.ie"/>
<link wikidata="Q389151" start="15088" end="15104" title="After the Sunset" label="After the Sunset"/>
<link wikidata="Q125106" start="15121" end="15132" title="Salma Hayek" label="Salma Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q201279" start="15137" end="15152" title="Woody Harrelson" label="Woody Harrelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q697672" start="15273" end="15284" title="The Matador" label="The Matador"/>
<link wikidata="Q269869" start="15380" end="15392" title="Greg Kinnear" label="Greg Kinnear"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="15458" end="15469" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="15484" end="15501" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="15594" end="15606" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181883" start="15617" end="15650" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy" label="Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185140" start="15664" end="15679" title="Joaquin Phoenix" label="Joaquin Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q154077" start="15690" end="15703" title="Walk the Line" label="Walk the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631590" start="15743" end="15787" title="List of official FIFA World Cup films" label="The Official Film of the 2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q350717" start="15807" end="15820" title="Michael Apted" label="Michael Apted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354162" start="15867" end="15881" title="Seraphim Falls" label="Seraphim Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="15914" end="15925" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="16027" end="16044" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="16146" end="16168" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q296616" start="16365" end="16378" title="Gabriel Byrne" label="Gabriel Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q313671" start="16383" end="16394" title="Colm Meaney" label="Colm Meaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q967489" start="16451" end="16471" title="Butterfly on a Wheel" label="Butterfly on a Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="16633" end="16645" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q188850" start="16649" end="16668" title="Mamma Mia! (film)" label="the film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="16676" end="16680" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q686861" start="16695" end="16705" title="Mamma Mia! (musical)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q189226" start="16793" end="16808" title="Amanda Seyfried" label="Amanda Seyfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304401" start="16853" end="16865" title="Judy Craymer" label="Judy Craymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q229345" start="17125" end="17132" title="karaoke" label="karaoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q42710" start="17388" end="17401" title="water buffalo" label="water buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="17405" end="17411" title="donkey" label="donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="17427" end="17434" title="raccoon" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q501663" start="17492" end="17512" title="Thomas &amp;amp; Friends" label="Thomas &amp;amp; Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251905" start="17531" end="17550" title="The Great Discovery" label="The Great Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795411" start="17627" end="17636" title="Thomas &amp;amp; Friends (series 12)" label="Series 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795412" start="17640" end="17649" title="Thomas &amp;amp; Friends (series 16)" label="Series 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="17696" end="17710" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q157879" start="17748" end="17764" title="The Ghost Writer (film)" label="The Ghost Writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="17799" end="17821" title="British Prime Minister" label="British Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="17838" end="17849" title="Silver Bear" label="Silver Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="17857" end="17891" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q632680" start="17941" end="17952" title="Remember Me (2010 film)" label="Remember Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q183417" start="17966" end="17972" title="Chiron" label="Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17982" end="18036" title="Percy Jackson &amp;amp; the Olympians: The Lightning Thief" label="Percy Jackson &amp;amp; the Olympians: The Lightning Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q196103" start="18155" end="18175" title="Love Is All You Need" label="Love Is All You Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600652" start="18235" end="18260" title="Dublin University Players" label="Dublin University Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="18264" end="18286" title="Trinity College Dublin" label="Trinity College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161916" start="18313" end="18324" title="Owen Wilson" label="Owen Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15272134" start="18334" end="18343" title="No Escape (2015 film)" label="No Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q72867" start="18595" end="18609" title="Craig Ferguson" label="Craig Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537260" start="18900" end="18913" title="Sky Broadband" label="Sky Broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q14117444" start="18960" end="18976" title="The November Man" label="The November Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909198" start="19001" end="19013" title="Bill Granger (author)" label="Bill Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q164730" start="19135" end="19149" title="Olga Kurylenko" label="Olga Kurylenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081312" start="19196" end="19213" title="development limbo" label="development limbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170576" start="19358" end="19372" title="Milla Jovovich" label="Milla Jovovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q15715647" start="19439" end="19447" title="Survivor (film)" label="Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960460" start="19460" end="19467" title="Charles Winkler" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q950428" start="19472" end="19485" title="Irwin Winkler" label="Irwin Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q456008" start="19501" end="19515" title="James McTeigue" label="James McTeigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136246" start="19584" end="19588" title="I.T. (film)" label="I.T."/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="19643" end="19658" title="video on demand" label="video on demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q214309" start="19684" end="19693" title="Sam Neill" label="Sam Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087069" start="19754" end="19767" title="Philipp Meyer" label="Philipp Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25205646" start="19787" end="19794" title="The Son (TV series)" label="The Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397054" start="19807" end="19819" title="Kevin Murphy (screenwriter)" label="Kevin Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22252048" start="19966" end="19979" title="The Foreigner (2017 film)" label="The Foreigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q36970" start="19996" end="20007" title="Jackie Chan" label="Jackie Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="20021" end="20024" title="Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q282033" start="20140" end="20155" title="Martin Campbell" label="Martin Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19089" start="20228" end="20237" title="GoldenEye" label="GoldenEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="20317" end="20326" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76139" start="20334" end="20345" title="Gerry Adams" label="Gerry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="20457" end="20473" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q330996" start="20498" end="20533" title="Across the River and into the Trees" label="Across the River and into the Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q621836" start="20688" end="20699" title="Paula Ortiz" label="Paula Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q298368" start="20744" end="20758" title="Liev Schreiber" label="Liev Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q223745" start="20828" end="20838" title="Guy Pearce" label="Guy Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q229056" start="20843" end="20856" title="Minnie Driver" label="Minnie Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q47500766" start="20897" end="20909" title="Spinning Man" label="Spinning Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q467766" start="21033" end="21050" title="Catherine Johnson (playwright)" label="Catherine Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188850" start="21064" end="21074" title="Mamma Mia! (film)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q36951175" start="21097" end="21124" title="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again" label="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q44158" start="21259" end="21272" title="Dave Bautista" label="Dave Bautista"/>
<link wikidata="Q27703274" start="21282" end="21293" title="Final Score (2018 film)" label="Final Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121393" start="21384" end="21395" title="The Misfits (2021 film)" label="The Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q318712" start="21414" end="21426" title="Renny Harlin" label="Renny Harlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165760" start="21465" end="21476" title="Kurt Wimmer" label="Kurt Wimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248298" start="21552" end="21555" title="A24" label="A24"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087118" start="21581" end="21595" title="False Positive (film)" label="False Positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730037" start="21611" end="21623" title="Ilana Glazer" label="Ilana Glazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11897821" start="21716" end="21739" title="Doctor Fate (Kent Nelson)" label="Doctor Fate/Kent Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18281265" start="21752" end="21772" title="DC Extended Universe" label="DC Extended Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28657013" start="21785" end="21795" title="Black Adam (film)" label="Black Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q111972952" start="21865" end="21877" title="The Out-Laws (film)" label="The Out-Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q111145321" start="21903" end="21916" title="Tyler Spindel" label="Tyler Spindel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="21953" end="21967" title="Louis XIV" label="King Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q17379618" start="22003" end="22027" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Daughter (2022 film)" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210153" start="22064" end="22084" title="The Moon and the Sun" label="The Moon and the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q242162" start="22094" end="22111" title="Vonda N. McIntyre" label="Vonda N. McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q114843114" start="22162" end="22174" title="Fast Charlie" label="Fast Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q543563" start="22193" end="22206" title="Phillip Noyce" label="Phillip Noyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q976022" start="22266" end="22278" title="Jamie Dornan" label="Jamie Dornan"/>
<link wikidata="Q202589" start="22283" end="22297" title="Cillian Murphy" label="Cillian Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798401" start="22331" end="22353" title="The Maze Prison Escape" label="The Maze Prison Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q55429" start="22386" end="22398" title="Jim Sheridan" label="Jim Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219512" start="22632" end="22647" title="Jesse Eisenberg" label="Jesse Eisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q347879" start="22652" end="22668" title="Vanessa Redgrave" label="Vanessa Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273914" start="22744" end="22758" title="Jonathan Miles (novelist)" label="Jonathan Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="22861" end="22877" title="King Louis XVIII" label="King Louis XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q935794" start="22934" end="22946" title="Peter Webber" label="Peter Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011349" start="23222" end="23236" title="UNICEF Ireland" label="UNICEF Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="23508" end="23519" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="23539" end="23549" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="23557" end="23583" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q550452" start="23666" end="23683" title="nuclear arms race" label="nuclear arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q783764" start="23744" end="23764" title="List of United States&amp;#x27; nuclear weapons tests" label="U.S. nuclear testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344605" start="23768" end="23774" title="Nevada Test Site" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="23862" end="23878" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="23888" end="23898" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="23949" end="23964" title="nuclear testing" label="nuclear testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="23972" end="24009" title="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty" label="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q975058" start="24126" end="24148" title="French nuclear testing" label="French nuclear testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q841895" start="24229" end="24269" title="Natural Resources Defense Council" label="Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666594" start="24274" end="24318" title="International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW)" label="International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414296" start="24371" end="24389" title="Laguna San Ignacio" label="Laguna San Ignacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033016" start="24407" end="24418" title="Halle Berry" label="Halle Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q199801" start="24420" end="24434" title="Cindy Crawford" label="Cindy Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q207596" start="24440" end="24452" title="Daryl Hannah" label="Daryl Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24477" end="24512" title="List of LNG terminals#United States and Gulf of Mexico" label="Cabrillo Port Liquefied Natural Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="24557" end="24563" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="24665" end="24686" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q201026" start="24812" end="24817" title="Kauai" label="Kauai"/>
<link wikidata="Q233398" start="24887" end="24897" title="Live Earth" label="Live Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q731200" start="25011" end="25044" title="Sea Shepherd Conservation Society" label="Sea Shepherd Conservation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523078" start="26228" end="26234" title="giclée" label="giclée"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088805" start="26485" end="26507" title="Lee National Denim Day" label="Lee National Denim Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648452" start="26690" end="26693" title="Non-fungible token" label="NFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q19089" start="26959" end="26968" title="GoldenEye" label="GoldenEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q455177" start="27228" end="27244" title="Cassandra Harris" label="Cassandra Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q106775" start="27281" end="27295" title="Richard Harris" label="Richard Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="27642" end="27651" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332330" start="28116" end="28134" title="For Your Eyes Only (film)" label="For Your Eyes Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="28188" end="28207" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q676371" start="28273" end="28289" title="Remington Steele" label="Remington Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q184469" start="28733" end="28738" title="County Kerry" label="Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171430" start="28880" end="28893" title="The Deceivers (film)" label="The Deceivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="28903" end="28912" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172341" start="28980" end="28994" title="ovarian cancer" label="ovarian cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="29355" end="29367" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194619" start="29898" end="29915" title="Keely Shaye Smith" label="Keely Shaye Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q805274" start="29956" end="29974" title="Ballintubber Abbey" label="Ballintubber Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="30063" end="30081" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="30114" end="30120" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="30145" end="30151" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183544" start="30156" end="30168" title="County Meath" label="County Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q750019" start="30410" end="30435" title="Aston Martin V12 Vanquish" label="Aston Martin V12 Vanquish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="30514" end="30532" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="30549" end="30600" title="Honorary Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Honorary Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="30834" end="30852" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098071" start="30980" end="31010" title="Dublin Institute of Technology" label="Dublin Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574185" start="31034" end="31057" title="University College Cork" label="University College Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q783988" start="31691" end="31709" title="Congregation of Christian Brothers" label="Christian Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="32275" end="32279" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="32378" end="32386" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180740" wikidata="Q477993" url="?curid=180740" title="IHeartMedia">
<text>iHeartMedia, Inc., or CC Media Holdings, Inc., is an American mass media corporation headquartered in San Antonio, Texas. It is the holding company of iHeartCommunications, Inc., formerly Clear Channel Communications, Inc., a company founded by Lowry Mays and Red McCombs in 1972, and later taken private by Bain Capital and Thomas H. Lee Partners in a leveraged buyout in 2008. 

As a result of the 2008 buyout, Clear Channel Communications, Inc. became a wholly owned subsidiary of CC Media Holdings, Inc. On September 16, 2014, CC Media Holdings, Inc. was rebranded iHeartMedia, Inc., and Clear Channel Communications, Inc., became iHeartCommunications, Inc.

==Overview==
iHeartMedia, Inc. specializes in radio broadcasting, podcasting, digital and live events through division iHeartMedia (sans &quot;Inc.&quot; suffix; formerly Clear Channel Media and Entertainment, Clear Channel Radio, et al.) and subsidiary iHeartMedia and Entertainment, Inc. (formerly Clear Channel Broadcasting, Inc.); the company owns more than 860 full-power AM and FM radio stations in the U.S., making it the country&#x27;s largest owner of radio stations. The company has also been involved in internet radio and podcasting via the digital platform iHeartRadio (from which the company derives its current name).

In the past, the company was also involved in live events and out-of-home advertising. The company spun off these businesses in 2005 and 2019 respectively, as the present-day Live Nation Entertainment and Clear Channel Outdoor.

==History==
===20th century===

Clear Channel Communications purchased its first FM station in San Antonio, Texas in 1972. The company purchased the second &quot;clear channel&quot; AM station WOAI in 1975. In 1976, the company purchased its first stations outside of San Antonio. KXXO (now KAKC) and KMOD-FM in Tulsa were acquired under the name &quot;San Antonio Broadcasting&quot; (same as KEEZ). Stations were also added in Port Arthur, Texas (KPAC-AM-FM, now KDEI and KTJM, from Port Arthur College), and El Paso, Texas (KELP, now KQBU) from John Walton Jr. 

In 1992, the U.S. Congress relaxed radio ownership rules slightly, allowing the company to acquire more than two stations per market. By 1995, Clear Channel owned 43 radio stations and 16 television stations. When the Telecommunications Act of 1996 became law, the act deregulated media ownership, allowing a company to own more stations than previously allowed. Clear Channel went on a subsequent buying spree, purchasing more than 70 other media companies and individual stations.

In a few cases, following purchase of a competitor, Clear Channel was forced to divest some of its stations, as it was above the legal thresholds in some cities. In 2005, the courts ruled that Clear Channel must also divest itself of some &quot;border blaster&quot; radio stations in international border cities, such as the alternative rock radio station XETRA-FM (&quot;91X&quot;) in Tijuana/San Diego.

In 1997, Clear Channel expanded and diversified its business, purchasing Eller Media, a billboard media company led by Karl Eller.

In 1998, it made its first move outside of the US when it acquired the leading UK outdoor advertising company More Group plc, which was led by Roger Parry; Clear Channel went on to buy many other outdoor advertising, radio broadcasting, and live events companies around the world, which were then re-branded Clear Channel International. These included a 51% stake in Clear Media Ltd. in China.
R. Steven Hicks and Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst began Capstar Broadcasting in 1996, and a year later had become the largest owner of radio stations in the country, with 243 stations in total. In August 1997, Capstar and Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst announced plans to acquire SFX Broadcasting, with the resulting company owning 314 stations in 79 markets and ranking as the third-largest radio group by income. A year later, Chancellor Media Corporation and Capstar Broadcasting Corporation announced a merger that would result in Chancellor Media owning 463 stations in 105 markets when the deal was completed in second quarter 1999. Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst owned 59 percent of Capstar, with 355 stations in 83 markets, and was the largest single owner of Chancellor (which had 108 stations in 22 markets), with 15 percent of the stock. Chancellor Media later became AMFM Inc., which was acquired by Clear Channel in a deal announced October 3, 1999, and valued at $17.4 billion. The resulting company would own 830 radio stations, 19 television stations, and over 425,000 outdoor displays in 32 countries.

In 1999, the company acquired Jacor Communications, a radio corporation based in Cincinnati. The company also made an investment in the new satellite radio service XM Satellite Radio, giving it the rights to program a selection of stations on the service (which would be drawn from some of its stations and syndicated output).

===21st century===
In 2000, Clear Channel acquired Robert F. X. Sillerman&#x27;s SFX Entertainment, a concert promoter that had focused on consolidation of regional promoters under a national operation. In 2005, Clear Channel spun off its entertainment and live events business as Live Nation.

On November 16, 2006, Clear Channel announced plans to go private, being bought out by two private-equity firms, Thomas H. Lee Partners and Bain Capital Partners for $26.7 billion, which included their assumption of $8 billion in Clear Channel debt. This was just under a 10 percent premium above its closing price of $35.36 a share on November 16: the deal valued Clear Channel at $37.60 per share. 

In a separate transaction also announced on November 16, 2006, Clear Channel said it would seek buyers for all of its television stations and 539 of its smaller radio stations, because the private-equity buyers were not interested in owning television or small-market radio. Over a hundred stations were assigned to Aloha Station Trust, LLC upon the consummation of the merger. The television stations were sold to Newport Television, a broadcaster owned by Providence Equity Partners, on April 23, 2007.

Due to the credit market crunch of 2007, Clear Channel encountered difficulty selling some of its radio stations. Clear Channel&#x27;s attempt to sell off over 100 stations to GoodRadio.TV, LLC was rejected by the equity firm backing the deal. The deal then shifted to Frequency License LLC, but took longer to resolve itself as the two parties were engaged in lawsuits. On top of that, the sale of Clear Channel&#x27;s television portfolio to Newport Television had also turned uncertain, as Providence considered other options, although this transaction was ultimately completed.

On December 4, 2007, Clear Channel announced that they had extended the termination date of the buyout from December 12, 2007, to June 12, 2008. On July 24, 2008, Clear Channel held a special shareholder meeting, during which the majority of shareholders accepted a revised $36-per-share offer from Bain Capital and Thomas H. Lee Partners, revaluing the deal at $17.9 billion plus debt. Shareholders received either $36 in cash, or one share of CC Media Class A common stock for each share of Clear Channel common stock held. The company announced that it would move to more centralized programming and lay off 1,500 employees, or approximately 7% of its workforce, on January 20, 2009. The reasoning was bleak economic conditions and debt from its transition to a private company. By the completion of the restructuring in May 2009, a total of 2,440 positions were eliminated.

In early 2010, it was announced that the company was facing the possibility of bankruptcy due to its &quot;crippling debt&quot;. After 21 years, Mark Mays stepped down as president and CEO of Clear Channel on June 23, 2010. Mays remained as chairman of the board. Later that year, MTV co-founder Robert W. &quot;Bob&quot; Pittman joined the company and would eventually become CEO of CC Media Holdings.

In August 2013, Clear Channel sold its minority stake in Sirius XM for $135.5 million. This also resulted in the removal of most Clear Channel-programmed stations on the service, besides simulcasts of WHTZ and KIIS-FM.

On January 6, 2014, Clear Channel announced a marketing partnership with Robert F. X. Sillerman&#x27;s SFX Entertainment (a second incarnation of a live events company that had been sold to Clear Channel, which spun off to form Live Nation), to collaborate on electronic dance music content for its digital and terrestrial radio outlets, including a Beatport top 20 countdown show. The partnership expanded upon the company&#x27;s existing EDM-oriented outlets, including &quot;Evolution&quot;. Staff, including John Sykes, believed that the deal would help provide a higher level of national exposure to current and up and coming EDM artists.

In September 2014, it was announced that the company would be renamed from Clear Channel Communications to iHeartMedia, alluding to its iHeartRadio platform to reflect the company&#x27;s growing emphasis on digital media and internet radio. The previous name &quot;Clear Channel&quot; came from AM broadcasting, referring to a channel (frequency) on which only one station transmits. In the U.S., clear-channel stations have exclusive rights to their frequencies throughout most of the continent at night, when AM signals travel far due to skywave. CEO Bob Pittman said that the company had been &quot;doing progressive stuff&quot;, yet were still &quot;named after AM radio stations&quot;.

Beginning in 2008, iHeartMedia struggled to pay down more than $20 billion in debt the company assumed from its leveraged buyout. Various media outlets, including Bloomberg News, Reuters, &quot;Radio Ink&quot;, and iHeartMedia&#x27;s hometown newspaper the &quot;San Antonio Express-News&quot;, claimed that either bankruptcy or a major restructuring was likely. On April 20, 2017, the company warned investors that it might not survive over the following 10 months. 

In 2016, one of the company&#x27;s directors, Julia B. Donnelly, left the board of iHeartCommunications and was replaced by Laura A. Grattan, a director at Thomas H. Lee. Grattan was named to the board of managers of iHeartMedia Capital I, LLC, the direct parent of iHeartCommunications, as well as the board of directors of iHeartMedia, Inc., the indirect parent of iHeartCommunications.

On November 30, 2017, it was reported that a group of creditors had rejected iHeartMedia&#x27;s latest debt restructuring proposal, instead bringing out a deal where the company might file for bankruptcy. On March 15, 2018, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, and claimed that it reached an agreement to restructure $10 billion of its over $20 billion in debt.

In September 2018, iHeartMedia acquired HowStuffWorks&#x27; podcast network Stuff Media for $55 million. On November 19, 2018, iHeartMedia announced its intent to acquire Jelli, the provider of a programmatic advertising platform for radio stations.

In January 2019, the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of Texas approved a creditor-supported plan for iHeartMedia to exit bankruptcy, which would reduce the company&#x27;s debt from $16.1 billion to $5.75 billion. The plan included the spin-out of iHeartMedia&#x27;s 89.1% stake in its out-of-home advertising division Clear Channel Outdoor. In April 2019, the company also filed a proposed initial public offering.

iHeartMedia emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy in May 2019, with a new board of directors and the spin-out of Clear Channel Outdoor, but maintaining its existing leadership of CEO Bob Pittman and President Rich Bressler. Rather than pursue its IPO (which was estimated to potentially be valued at $1.1 billion), iHeartMedia instead received approval for a direct listing on the Nasdaq.

On January 14, 2020, iHeartMedia announced a major restructuring, as part of an effort to &quot;modernize our company to take advantage of the significant investments we have made in new technology and aligning our operating structure to match the technology-powered businesses we are now in.&quot; This included the restructuring of its Markets Group into three divisions: the Regions division for its largest markets, the Metropolitan division for other major cities, and the Communities division for smaller markets and added a multi-market partnerships unit, and announced the development of centers of excellence that would use technology investments to &quot;provide a better experience for listeners and business partners and a more efficient process for all of its employees&quot;. 

The restructuring was accompanied by a major round of layoffs and displacements, with a large number of staff members and on-air personalities impacted.

==Businesses==
iHeartMedia has purchased interest in, or outright acquired, companies in a number of media or advertising related industries. This is not an exhaustive list.
===Radio===

With 855 stations, iHeartMedia is the largest radio station group owner in the United States, both by number of stations and by revenue. The 855 stations reach more than 110 million listeners every week, and 276 million every month. According to BIA Financial Network, iHeartMedia recorded more than $3.5 billion in revenues , $1 billion more than the number-two group owner, Audacy.

In June 2012, the company announced that it would become the first U.S. radio group to partner with record labels to pay performance royalties directly to labels and musicians (in addition to songwriters and producers). The royalties are paid via revenue sharing for advertising across platforms (including digital), rather than a flat payment each time a song is played. Big Machine Label Group was announced as the first partner in this scheme. Pittman stated that the arrangement would let &quot;labels and artists participate in the revenue of broadcast radio immediately and in digital radio as it builds&quot;.

====Radio acquisitions====
iHeartMedia has purchased stations from or acquired the following radio companies:
===Outdoor advertising===

Clear Channel Outdoor (CCO) is an advertising company that was previously owned by iHeartMedia. In May 2019, it was spun out from iHeartMedia as part of its exit from bankruptcy.

===Television===
Clear Channel Television is a defunct television broadcaster and a former subsidiary of the group that was in operation, for nearly 20 years, from 1988 to 2008. It owned more than 40 stations, most of them were from the Big Six networks, a few of which are independent (non-network affiliates). It was initially headed by J. Daniel Sullivan, who set up as president of Clear Channel&#x27;s television division.

The group made its beginnings when the first television station iHeartMedia purchased as Clear Channel was WPMI in Mobile, Alabama in 1988. Later that year, Clear Channel Communications bought out KDTU-TV in Tucson, Arizona, which became Clear Channel&#x27;s second television station. On March 13, 1989, Clear Channel Television bought out KOKI-TV for $6.5 million. This was followed on July 3 of that year with the purchase of Fox affiliate WAWS-TV in Jacksonville, Florida, from Malrite Communications Group, for $8.1 million.

Eventually over time, Clear Channel Television became the second-largest independent television group, behind Sinclair Broadcast Group. In 1990, Clear Channel bought out its fifth television station, KSAS-TV in Wichita, Kansas, for $7.9 million. In 1991, Clear Channel bought out KLRT-TV in Little Rock, Arkansas for $6.6 million. In 1992, Clear Channel bought out WPTY-TV in Memphis from Chase Communications for $21 million. Later on in 1993, the company bought out KITN-TV in Minneapolis/St. Paul from Nationwide Communications, followed in 1994 by the purchase of WXXA-TV in Albany from Heritage Communications, for $25.5 million.

In 1991, Clear Channel Television jumped into the foray of local marketing agreements, starting in 1991 with WJTC, which Clear Channel operated through a LMA with WPMI, and subsequently later on in 1992, when KASN entered into a LMA with Clear Channel&#x27;s KLRT-TV. Clear Channel also entered into a deal with Providence Journal Company, who owns Fox affiliate KMSB in Tucson to operate KTTU through a local marketing agreement. Memphis also jumped onto the board when WLMT entered into a LMA with Clear Channel&#x27;s WPTY. Also in 1993, Clear Channel entered into a local marketing agreement with RDS Communications to operate KTFO-TV in Tulsa, which most of the inventory will be supplied by KOKI. Later on, in 1994, in Jacksonville, WTEV-TV entered into a local marketing agreement with WAWS, the Clear Channel television station.

In 1994, Fox shockingly announced its intentions to purchase WHBQ-TV, which displaced Clear Channel&#x27;s WPTY-TV as its Fox Memphis affiliate. Also that year, as part of a group deal involving stations acquired by SF Broadcasting, Clear Channel&#x27;s WPMI-TV in Mobile was set to be displaced as Mobile&#x27;s Fox affiliate by WALA-TV as part of a three-station deal with the other Burnham stations. These moves didn&#x27;t sit well for Clear Channel Television, whose president Dan Sullivan thought they wanted to affiliate it with the ousted networks, including NBC in Mobile, and ABC in Memphis.

In 1995, Clear Channel purchased its first Big Three network affiliate, WHP-TV in Harrisburg, for $30 million. It was subsequently followed it up when Gateway Communications, owners of WLYH-TV entered into a LMA with Clear Channel&#x27;s WHP-TV. Later on that year, J. Dan Sullivan left Clear Channel Television to start out Sullivan Broadcasting to acquire the Act III Broadcasting stations. He was then succeeded by Rip Rioridan as president. In 1996, it bought out WPRI-TV in Providence from CBS, which CBS did not keep due to slight signal overlap with WBZ-TV in Boston. Also that year, Argyle Television Holdings II, who owned WNAC-TV entered into a LMA with Clear Channel&#x27;s WPRI.

As part of the radio-TV strategy, Clear Channel acquired Jacor Communications, which incorporated WKRC-TV in Cincinnati into the Clear Channel Television branch. Once FCC relaxed its duopoly rules, Clear Channel acquired stations that were originally LMA markets outright, including WLMT in Memphis, KTFO in Tulsa, WTEV in Jacksonville, KASN in Little Rock and WJTC in Mobile. Also in 2000, Clear Channel sold WPRI to Sunrise Television for $50 million. Later on in 2001, William Moll become the president of Clear Channel Television, replacing Rioridan.

In 2001, after acquiring the stations of Chris-Craft Industries, Fox Television Stations traded WFTC to Clear Channel Television for Fox&#x27;s own TV stations KMOL-TV in San Antonio and KTVX in Salt Lake City. In 2002, Clear Channel acquired Ackerley Group, which incorporated its television holdings into the Clear Channel Television portfolio. Also that year, Clear Channel sold KTTU in Tucson to Belo outright. In 2003, Clear Channel announced that they would sell WUTR to Mission Broadcasting. In 2004, Clear Channel bought WETM outright after the death of Robert Smith, the founder of Smith Broadcasting. In 2005, Clear Channel acquired another Salt Lake City television station KUWB from Acme Communications for $18.5 million in cash. In 2006, Don Perry was then named president and CEO of Clear Channel Television.

Ever that, in the 2000s, Clear Channel began the trend of using legacy callsigns for former radio sisters as new call designated signs for existing Clear Channel TV properties, since it already owned radio stations, although WKRC-TV already used the moniker when it was under Clear Channel ownership. In 2002, San Antonio&#x27;s Clear Channel station KMOL-TV was rebranded to WOAI-TV, the original call letters that station is using from 1948 to 1974, matching up with radio sister WOAI-AM. In 2005, WOKR, the Rochester Clear Channel affiliate was rebranded to WHAM-TV, the original call letters for an unrelated Rochester station WROC-TV from 1948 to 1956, matching up for radio sister WHAM-AM. Also that year, sister station in Syracuse, WIXT was rebranded to WSYR-TV, the original call letters for WSTM-TV from 1950 to 1980, matching up for radio sister WSYR-AM.

In 2007, the company entered into an agreement to sell all its television stations to Providence Equity Partners for $1.2 billion, a deal that eventually closed in March 2008. Earlier that year, Don Perry left as president and CEO of Clear Channel Television. All former Clear Channel television stations were owned by Newport Television, while the other six were flipped to other buyers by Newport. In 2012 to mid-2013, Newport sold off all of its holdings to several other television groups, including Cox Media Group, Nexstar Media Group, and Sinclair Broadcast Group.

==== Former Clear Channel-owned stations ====
Stations are arranged alphabetically by state and by city of license.


===Music charts===
iHeartMedia owns Mediabase, which provide music charts based on songs and tracks receiving the most spins played on radio stations in the United States and Canada. A majority of stations that report to Mediabase are iHeartMedia outlets but other companies also report to the Mediabase charts. In addition, countdown shows produced by Premiere will utilize Mediabase charts for the basis of their programs.

===News and information===
* 24/7 News Source
* Operates iHeartRadio News Network and local news networks in Kentucky, West Virginia, Virginia, Ohio, Oklahoma, Alabama, Tennessee, Georgia, and Florida.
* Premiere Networks
* Acquired and later sold the Agri Broadcast Network (ABN), a farm programming provider in Ohio.
* Publishes &quot;Inside Radio&quot; magazine
* Total Traffic &amp; Weather Network reports: on-road and traffic conditions across the United States, and in Mexico City, Mexico. These are used by many GPS navigation systems. Total Traffic &amp; Weather also produce and distributes 24/7 News channel on iHeartRadio (from 2016 to 2024, iHeart/TTWN and NBC News formed a content/licensing agreement for NBC News Radio).
* Fan Radio Network: a sports radio network that serves Minnesota, South Dakota, and North Dakota. The flagship station is KFXN-FM in Minneapolis, MN.
* Your Smooth Jazz: 24-hour smooth jazz network provided under the company&#x27;s &quot;Broadcast Architecture&quot; division.

===Worldwide===
* Owns outdoor advertising companies in Brazil, Chile, Finland, France, Italy, Latvia, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Belgium and Mauritius.
* Owns L &amp; C Outdoor Comunicação Visual Ltda., of Brazil
*United Kingdom
** Large numbers of billboards (through a takeover of Adshel)
** See Clear Channel UK

====Bicycle rental systems====
Operates urban bicycle sharing systems in several European cities:
===Vertical Real Estate===
In 2003, Clear Channel created the Vertical Real Estate division and hired Scott Quitadamo to promote its tower portfolio. iHeartMedia owns and operates approximately 1,500 broadcast transmission towers across the U.S., many of which are available for co-location by third parties such as cellular and PCS companies, wireless internet, fixed wireless, and other broadcasters.

==Programming==

iHeartMedia operates the country&#x27;s largest syndication service, Premiere Networks. In addition, iHeartMedia syndicates a number of its homegrown talk and music shows without the aid of Premiere. While Premiere actively sells its shows to stations, the non-Premiere syndicated shows are often used as a cost-cutting measure and do not have a large sales staff. Those shows also do not carry network-wide advertising (unless distributed by a third party), and allow the affiliates to keep all local spots, which increases their appeal. These networks carry many program hosts of various political ideologies and distribute a variety of programs to both iHeartMedia-owned and non-iHeartMedia-owned stations.

In addition to its own syndication network, iHeartMedia offers studio space and other services to the WestStar TalkRadio Network, which is based at iHeartMedia&#x27;s studios in Phoenix, Arizona. As a result, many WestStar programs are heard on iHeartMedia stations.

Not all programming heard on iHeartMedia&#x27;s radio stations are produced in house; however, most of iHeartMedia&#x27;s stations share many similarities to each other in branding and programming.

===iHeartRadio===

iHeartRadio is a free broadcast, podcast and streaming radio platform. It is also the national umbrella brand for iHeartMedia&#x27;s radio network aggregating its over 860 local iHeartMedia radio stations across the United States, as well as hundreds of other stations from various other media.

===Alternative stations===
iHeartMedia Alternative Stations usually are branded as &quot;Radio&quot; (such as Radio 94.5 (KMYT) in Temecula, CA) or &quot;ALT&quot; (Alt 98.7 (KYSR) in Los Angeles). Others include: The Edge, The Buzz, The Project, Star, or X. &quot;The Woody Show&quot;, which originates from KYSR, serves as the anchor morning show for the iHeartMedia Alternative outlets.

===Hip-hop, Rap, R&amp;B and rhythmic stations===
Stations that carry programming catering to black Americans are a big part of many iHeartMedia clusters, particularly Philadelphia, Chicago, and Detroit. In many clusters iHeartMedia has two or more such stations. About half of these stations focus on Rap and Hip Hop along with younger rhythm and blues sounds. The other half blend some younger rhythm and blues along with some Soul from the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s along with some current product. In a cluster with multiple hip-hop, rap, R&amp;B, and rhythmic stations owned by iHeartMedia, one is focused on Rap while the other is focused on Soul. Examples include Philadelphia, with WUSL&#x27;s focus on hip hop while WDAS-FM focuses on Soul (in addition, the company also owns WGCI-FM in Chicago, which focuses on rap, while WVAZ is focused on Soul. iHeartMedia hip hop, rap, R&amp;B, and rhythmic stations are branded as &quot;Real&quot; (KRRL Los Angeles), &quot;Beat&quot; (KQBT/Houston, WBTP Tampa) or &quot;Power&quot; (WWPR-FM New York City, WUSL Philadelphia and WHEN Syracuse). In San Francisco, iHeartMedia owned more hip hop, rap, R&amp;B, and rhythmic stations such as Rhythmic Top 40 KYLD, rhythmic oldies KISQ, and rhythmic contemporary KMEL in that area (KYLD shifted to Top 40/CHR in 2015, KISQ flipped to AC in 2016), and the same happened in Detroit, where the company also owns rhythmic AC WMXD, rhythmic contemporary WJLB and former Rhythmic AC WDTW-FM (now WLLZ). iHeart also have hip hop, rap, R&amp;B, and rhythmic outlets with heritage and familiarity based on the markets they serve, like WHRK and WDIA in Memphis, and WKKV-FM in Milwaukee.

Another growing format, Classic Hip-Hop/Throwback/Old School (consisting of R&amp;B/Hip-Hop, Rap, and Rhythmic songs from the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s), can be heard full-time on iHeartRadio, as well as KATZ-FM/St. Louis and KUBT-HD2 in Honolulu. Previously, this format was originated as Rhythmic Oldies, which was launched at KCMG/Los Angeles and later spread to more markets before the former Clear Channel flipped several stations out of the format by the mid-2000s.

For the Rhythmic Top 40 format, similar brandings include &quot;The Beat&quot; (KUBT/Honolulu and WBTT/Ft. Myers), Power 102/El Paso, 104.5 Kiss FM/Beaumont, Texas, &quot;Jam&#x27;n&quot; (KXJM/Portland Oregon, KSSX/San Diego, and WJMN/Boston; a similar &quot;Jammin&#x27;&quot; is used at WSTV/Roanoke &amp; WJJX/Lynchburg). A &quot;B&quot; has been used at KBOS-FM/Fresno since the 1980s. Other Rhythmics, such as KUBE/Seattle, KDON-FM/Salinas-Monterey and KGGI/Riverside-San Bernardino, simply use the call letters and/or frequency. Most of these stations target a multicultural audience and play Rhythmic Pop, R&amp;B/Hip-Hop, and Dance tracks.

For rhythmic AC stations, they used to have the &quot;Party&quot; branding (particularly during the time when most used &quot;Wake Up with Whoopi&quot; out of WKTU as their morning show), but the two &quot;Party&quot; stations in Denver (KDHT) and Las Vegas (KYMT, the former KPLV) have since exited the Rhythmic AC format. KDHT and KYMT moved to top 40, but continue to use the &quot;Party&quot; branding (KYMT is currently mainstream rock). &quot;The Breakfast Club Morning Show&quot; out of WWPR-FM in New York and &quot;Big Boy&#x27;s Neighborhood&quot; out of KRRL in Los Angeles are iHeartMedia&#x27;s syndicated urban morning shows. In 2017, for IHM&#x27;s 3rd season they produced rhythmic AC programming.

===Smooth jazz===
IHeartMedia syndicates the Smooth Jazz Network (aka Your Smooth Jazz), which is programmed by Broadcast Architecture. Unless otherwise noted, all Smooth Jazz Network stations will carry the following schedule: Kenny G and Sandy Kovach in morning drive time, Miranda Wilson in midday, Allen Kepler in afternoon drive time, and Maria Lopez in evenings, with no disc jockeys overnight. Weekend programming consists of the &quot;Smooth Jazz Top 20&quot; with Allen Kepler, as well as the &quot;Dave Koz Radio Show&quot;.

===Dance and EDM===
The first radio programs included Electric Sound Stage, Club Phusion, Trancid, Pride Radio, PrototypeRadio, The Spin*Cycle and Classic Dance. Although they have no full-powered stations programming a Dance or EDM (Electronic Dance Music) format, iHeartMedia has FM translators and HD2 platforms broadcasting the EDM-intensive Evolution platform (KZZP/Phoenix is the flagship station, serving as a reporter on &quot;Billboard’s&quot; Dance/Mix Show Airplay panel), while the LGBT community is served by the more broader-based Pride Radio (with WFLZ/Tampa serving as the flagship station as well as a Dance/Mix Show Airplay reporter). However, iHeartMedia&#x27;s Top 40/CHR and Rhythmic Top 40 outlets incorporate a majority of Dance songs onto its playlist and set aside airtime blocks for mix shows. A weekly countdown program, &quot;America’s Dance 30&quot;, airs on Evolution and selected iHeart Top 40 and Rhythmic stations.

===Talk radio===
====News/Talk stations====
News/talk stations owned by iHeartMedia often have a standard slate of hosts. The morning show is usually local, with other time slots filled by local and syndicated hosts. Talk shows heard on many iHeartMedia talk stations include &quot;The Glenn Beck Radio Program&quot; (Beck having gotten his talk show start at iHeartMedia-owned WFLA in Tampa, which serves as its home station), &quot;The Clay Travis and Buck Sexton Show&quot; (does not have a home station but is based in Nashville), &quot;The Sean Hannity Show&quot; (based at WOR in New York), &quot;The Jesse Kelly Show&quot; (based at KPRC Houston) and &quot;Coast to Coast AM with George Noory&quot;, all of which are syndicated by Premiere Networks. &quot;The Mark Levin Show&quot; (based at WABC in New York and WMAL-FM in Washington, syndicated from Westwood One) and &quot;The Dave Ramsey Show&quot; (based in Nashville and independently syndicated) are non-Premiere shows which air on several iHeartMedia stations. 

Before his death in 2021, &quot;The Rush Limbaugh Show&quot; was almost universally carried on iHeartMedia stations in markets where the company has a news/talk station, including New York City: WOR was acquired in 2013 by Clear Channel and began carrying Limbaugh&#x27;s program in 2014 following a long relationship with now-Red Apple Media-owned WABC. In markets where iHeartMedia-owned news/talk stations are not highly-rated (such as Dallas and Atlanta), iHeartMedia has chosen to sell popular syndicated shows such as &quot;Coast to Coast AM&quot; and &quot;Sean Hannity&quot; to rival talk stations. Syndicated morning news programs like &quot;America in The Morning&quot; (from Westwood One) and &quot;This Morning, America&#x27;s First News with Gordon Deal&quot; (from Compass Media Networks) are also heard on a few iHeartMedia-owned stations. In markets where the local iHeartMedia news/talk station does not have its own local morning show, &quot;Armstrong &amp; Getty&quot; from KSTE Sacramento and &quot;The Michael DelGiorno Show&quot; from KLAC Nashville are often heard instead.

While most of iHeartMedia&#x27;s news/talk stations carry some combination of Beck, Hannity and Noory (of &quot;Coast to Coast AM&quot;), this is not always the case. Some stations, particularly in the larger markets, fill their schedules with local hosts. In some cities, iHeartMedia owns two or three talk stations. The dominant station, such as KFI Los Angeles, KOA Denver, WLW Cincinnati and WHAS Louisville, broadcast a mostly local lineup. Secondary talk stations (KEIB Los Angeles, KDFD and KHOW Denver, WKRC Cincinnati and WKJK Louisville) carry most of the syndicated offerings from Premiere Networks.

Weekend programs heard on some iHeart-owned stations and syndicated by Premiere Networks to other talk stations include &quot;At Home with Gary Sullivan&quot;, &quot;Handel on the Law with Bill Handel&quot;, &quot;The Weekend with Michael Brown&quot;, &quot;In the Garden with Ron Wilson&quot;, &quot;Rich on Tech with Rich DeMuro&quot;, &quot;The Ben Ferguson Show&quot;, &quot;Sunday Nights with Bill Cunningham&quot;, &quot;Somewhere in Time with Art Bell&quot; and &quot;The Jesus Christ Show with Neil Saavedra&quot;. Most are pre-recorded and offered to stations to air anytime on weekends they choose, although Ferguson and Cunningham do their shows live on Sunday evenings. Bell&#x27;s show is made up of recorded &quot;Coast to Coast AM&quot; programs from the late 1990s and early 2000s. He died in 2018.

iHeartMedia has been active in the national trend of simulcasting its AM news/talk outlets on full-power FM stations, hoping to preserve their long-term viability while AM radio declines. Examples include Sacramento where KGBY 92.5 became KFBK-FM, simulcasting KFBK 1530 AM. In Salt Lake City, 105.7 KTMY became KNRS-FM, simulcasting KNRS 570 AM. In the Albany-Schenectady-Troy market, WHRL 103.1 became WGY-FM, simulcasting WGY 810 AM. In Birmingham, WVVB 105.5 became WERC-FM, simulcasting WERC 960 AM. In Syracuse, WPHR 106.9 became WSYR-FM, simulcasting WSYR 570 AM. 

Some iHeartMedia news/talk stations on the AM dial are also heard on low-power FM translator stations. Even though they are powered at only a few hundred watts, the translators allow some listeners to hear WLAC Nashville, KOA Denver and WFLA Tampa on the FM dial. In Washington D.C., iHeartMedia has a translator-only news/talk station, known as &quot;Freedom 104.7 FM.&quot; It is heard on an HD Radio subchannel of WMZQ-FM 98.7. That feeds translator station W284CQ which broadcasts on 104.7 MHz. 

====Progressive talk====
Progressive talk shows had been heard on a few of iHeartMedia&#x27;s stations, primarily secondary to its main news/talk stations. These liberal-leaning stations usually featured at least one local host with some syndicated shows, mainly from Westwood One, making up the balance of the broadcast day. Air America Radio also aired on some of these stations. iHeartMedia has shown a tendency to drop liberal talk affiliations due to lack of ratings or advertiser support and replace it with sports talk or other formats. For instance, WCKY Cincinnati, KLSD San Diego, WXKS Boston, KPOJ Portland and WINZ Miami had progressive talk formats that were switched to sports. 

In one case this caused a listener protest when iHeartMedia (then Clear Channel) wanted to change WXXM in Madison, Wisconsin, to a sports format. The outcry worked temporarily. WXXM was allowed to keep its liberal-leaning talk format for a few more years. But in November 2016, due to a general lack of syndicated progressive talk programming, WXXM flipped to classic hits.

====All-News====
In the all-news radio format, iHeartMedia owns one station that airs continuous locally-anchored news around the clock, except for a few hours of talk in the evening, WBZ Boston. A few iHeartMedia stations carry all-news in drive time, such as KFBK Sacramento, KOA Denver and KOGO San Diego. For syndication and on the iHeart app, the company operates the &quot;24/7 News&quot; channel through its Total Traffic and Weather Network division. From 2016 to 2024, the service was branded as NBC News Radio after iHeart/TTWN and NBC News formed a brand licensing and content agreement.

====Black Information Network====
On June 30, 2020, iHeartMedia announced a new all-news radio brand, the Black Information Network (BIN), which is targeted towards African Americans. BIN is heard on iHeartMedia stations in dozens of cities. WBIN Atlanta is considered the flagship station.

===Sports talk stations===
Nearly all sports talk stations owned by iHeartMedia are affiliated with Fox Sports Radio. A few sports talk stations owned by iHeartMedia run programming from rival ESPN Radio. In Cincinnati, iHeart owns two sports stations with WSAI running Fox Sports and WCKY carrying ESPN. In 2020, iHeartMedia launched the iHeartSports Network.

===Adult standards===
Most of iHeartMedia&#x27;s adult standards stations were turnkey operations, running a direct feed of a satellite format such as Westwood One&#x27;s America&#x27;s Best Music or Music of Your Life, with no local DJs. The company sold off many of these stations or flipped them to sports or talk formats.

===Adult contemporary===
iHeartMedia&#x27;s Adult contemporary stations are often branded as &quot;Lite FM&quot; (e.g. WLTW New York and WLIT-FM Chicago) or &quot;Sunny&quot; (KODA Houston and KTSM-FM El Paso). A handful of stations use &quot;Magic&quot;, &quot;B&quot; or something else similar as their identifiers. As of 2018, &quot;The Breeze&quot; brought a resurgence in Soft AC, targeted towards millennial listeners. In the evening, many iHeartMedia AC stations carry &quot;Delilah&quot;, a call-in and request show syndicated by Premiere Networks and hosted by Delilah Rene. In some markets, another station has the rights to &quot;Delilah&quot;, in which case &quot;The John Tesh Radio Show&quot; is often carried in the evening. &quot;Your Weekend with Jim Brickman&quot; and &quot;The Ellen K Weekend Show&quot; are popular weekend syndicated programs on iHeartMedia adult contemporary stations. 

Nearly all iHeartMedia AC stations switch to all-Christmas music for much of November and December. Some AC stations are known for playing holiday songs as early as November 1 such as WLIT-FM Chicago. Other iHeartMedia AC stations make the switch each year in early November while WLTW New York waits until the Friday before Thanksgiving. 

Hot adult contemporary stations are usually branded as &quot;Mix&quot; (WMMX Dayton), &quot;Star&quot; (KMYI San Diego) or &quot;MYfm&quot; (KBIG Los Angeles). Some Hot AC stations lean toward modern rock while others lean toward adult hits.

===Contemporary hit radio===
iHeartMedia&#x27;s CHR stations share a number of common brands, including &quot;KISS-FM&quot; (e.g., KIIS-FM Los Angeles, WKSC-FM Chicago, WAKS Cleveland, WKFS Cincinnati, WXKS-FM Boston), &quot;Z&quot; (e.g., WHTZ New York, KKRZ Portland, WZFT Baltimore, KSLZ St. Louis), &quot;Wild&quot; (e.g., WLDI West Palm Beach, KYLD San Francisco), &quot;Power&quot; (WWPW Atlanta, WGEX Albany, Georgia), Channel (e.g., WKQI Detroit, KHTS-FM San Diego, WCHD Dayton-Springfield), or &quot;Hot&quot; (e.g., WIHT in Washington, D.C., WWHT in Syracuse, NY). Other brands, less commonly used, includes &quot;Radio Now&quot; (previously used at WNRW Louisville, now rebranded as &quot;98.9 Kiss FM&quot;), &quot;Q&quot; (WIOQ Philadelphia-102.1 FM-Q102, WQGA Waycross-Brunswick, Georgia-103.3 FM-103Q), &quot;B&quot; (WAEB-FM B 104 Allentown-Reading PA 104.1 FM), &quot;FM&quot; (WLAN-FM FM 97 96.9 FM Lancaster-Reading), &quot;V&quot; (WVRT &amp; WVRZ V-97 Williamsport-Lock Haven, Pennsylvania), &quot;Max&quot; (WHCY Max 106.3 Sussex), &quot;K.C.&quot; (WKCI-FM KC 101, 101.3 FM, Hamden, Connecticut) and &quot;X&quot; (WJMX-FM 103X, 103.3 FM Cheraw, South Carolina). 

Although a majority of these stations features a broad-based, mass appeal music presentation, several stations like KPRR El Paso and WKTU New York program more rhythmic material. WKTU has a sister station in WHTZ, so WKTU&#x27;s playlist includes more rhythmic hits to differentiate itself from Z100.

===Country music===
Country music stations owned by iHeartMedia often call themselves &quot;The Bull&quot; (WUBL Atlanta and KSD-FM St. Louis) and &quot;Big&quot; (WSIX-FM Nashville) as national brandings. They almost universally carry &quot;After Midnite with Granger Smith&quot;, a syndicated overnight program. Many also carry &quot;The Bobby Bones Show&quot; in morning drive time], based at WSIX-FM Nashville. (Some iHeartMedia country stations with popular local morning shows run Bobby Bones in the evening or weekends.)

In 2015, iHeartMedia launched the iHeartCountry franchise, including the iHeartRadio Country Festival. The Festival is a popular live music concert held each year and recorded for television.

===Classic Hits/Oldies===
iHeartMedia&#x27;s Classic Hits stations consists largely of FM stations with some AM stations. iHeartMedia uses brands such as &quot;Big&quot; and &quot;Kool&quot; on many of its stations. Nearly all of the FM stations play classic hits spanning from the late 1970s to the 1990s with a primary focus on the 1980s, with a 500-song active playlist. These stations generally have a few local live announcers; much of the time these stations are voicetracked either locally or from another market. Many air the in house syndicated &#x27;The 80s Show&#x27; with Jeff Stevens on Saturday evenings and many air Casey Kasem&#x27;s American Top 40 from the 1970s and 1980s. 

The AM oldies stations&#x27; playlists skew somewhat older and span from 1955 to about 1975. About 60 percent of the time they play 1964 to 1969 oldies, 20 percent pre 1964 oldies, and 20 percent music from the 1970s. Some of the AM stations also run adult standards several hours on the weekend as well as limited specialized programming focusing on the pre 1964 era. Most of the AM stations are in smaller markets.

===Rock===
iHeartMedia stations programming a rock format tend to play a blend of new rock and harder classic rock. Some carry &quot;Nights with Alice Cooper&quot; (out of KSLX-FM in Phoenix) in the evenings while some others aired &quot;Sixx Sense with Nikki Sixx&quot; until the show ended at the end of 2015. These stations tend to be live during the day and voicetracked at night. Some stations run &quot;Rockline&quot; with Bob Coburn and/or &quot;Little Steven&#x27;s Underground Garage&quot; as well.

While iHeartMedia classic rock stations operate under a wide variety of monikers, many are branded as &quot;The Fox&quot; or &quot;The Brew&quot;. Often, these stations will carry &quot;Bob and Tom&quot; (out of WFBQ in Indianapolis) in morning drive. In the Southern United States, &quot;John Boy and Billy&quot; (out of WRFX in Charlotte) is carried instead in most cases. (Both of the aforementioned shows are syndicated by Premiere.) Other shows include &quot;Rover&#x27;s Morning Glory&quot; out of WMMS in Cleveland. Starting with WQBW Milwaukee (now the sports formatted WRNW) and WBWR Columbus (now WXZX), several iHeartMedia stations have adopted a 1980s-centered classic rock approach called &quot;The Brew&quot;.

The company&#x27;s alternative rock stations use a standardized branding under the brand &quot;Alt&quot;.

===Spanish===
In a few markets, iHeartMedia has an FM station carrying Hispanic programming full-time. In some markets the format is a Contemporary Tropical format while in others the format carried is more of a Mexican format. In a few markets an iHeartMedia FM station carries a rap based Spanish format known as Hurban, which blends Spanish dance music with rhythm and blues hits as well as some Hip Hop. The division was run by Spanish radio executive Alfredo Alonso, who joined the company in September 2004 as senior vice president of Hispanic Radio. In September 2016, iHeartMedia brought hired Enrique Santos as chairman and chief creative officer of the newly formed iHeartLatino division.

iHeartMedia launched an annual event franchise called iHeartRadio Fiesta Latina.

===Religious===
In a few markets, iHeartMedia has a religious station on the AM band. Some of these sell blocks of time to outside organizations and have no local shows at all except where local churches buy time. These are formatted similarly to Salem Media stations.

The other type of religious format iHeartMedia uses in a few markets is a Gospel music based format. On these stations, Gospel Music appealing to black Americans airs most of the time, along with some block programming sold to religious groups. These stations are often programmed as urban stations that happen to be religious.

===Specialties===
IHeartMedia has one station in Hawaii, KDNN/Honolulu, programming a Contemporary Hawaiian Hits/Reggae format, along with an accompanying HD2 sub channel that features traditional Hawaiian music. Multicultural programming can also be heard on AM stations that iHeartMedia owns or has LMAs with. In March 2019, its Allentown, Pennsylvania outlet, WSAN, launched an all-podcast format. In November 2019, K256AS/KUCD-HD2 in Honolulu launched a variant Top 40 format with a focus on K-pop and other international pop hits.

==Criticism==

===Market share===
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the company became an object of persistent criticism. FCC regulations were relaxed following the Telecommunications Act of 1996, allowing companies to own far more radio stations than before. After spending about $30 billion, Clear Channel owned over 1,200 stations nationwide, including as many as eight stations in certain markets. Although &quot;media reform&quot; social movement organizations like Future of Music Coalition mobilized against Clear Channel, so far the company has been able to hold on to all of its stations after divesting a few following the acquisition of AMFM, although over 500 stations have since been sold or are in the process of being sold since the company announced plans to become privately held.

===September 11, 2001===

Following the September 11 attacks on New York and The Pentagon, radio stations circulated a list of songs that were deemed inappropriate for broadcast during the time of national mourning following the attacks. A small list was initially generated by the Clear Channel office on Thursday, September 13, 2001, though individual program directors added many of their own songs. A list containing about 150 songs was soon published on the Internet. Some critics suggested that Clear Channel&#x27;s political preferences played a part in the list. A number of songs were apparently placed on the list because they had specific words such as &quot;plane&quot;, &quot;fly&quot;, &quot;burn&quot;, and &quot;falling&quot; in their titles. Clear Channel denies that this was a list of banned songs, claiming it was a list of titles that should be played only after great thought. Also WOFX, Cincinnati, owned by Clear Channel at the time continued to play songs that were on the alleged list, even though radio headquarters was in Cincinnati at the time. Songs on the list included Tom Petty&#x27;s &quot;Free Fallin&#x27;&quot;, Louis Armstrong&#x27;s &quot;What a Wonderful World&quot; and the entire Rage Against the Machine discography.

===Live music recordings===
In 2004, Clear Channel acquired a key patent in the process of producing Instant Live recordings, in which a live performance is recorded directly from the sound engineer&#x27;s console during the show, and then rapidly burned on CD so that audience members can buy copies of the show as they are leaving the venue. This had been intended to provide additional revenue to the artist, venue, and promoter, as well as stifle the demand for unauthorized bootleg concert recordings made by audience members. However, some media critics, as well as smaller business rivals, believed that Clear Channel was using the patent (on the process of adding cues to the beginning and ending of tracks &quot;during recording&quot;, so that the concert is not burned as a single enormous track) to drive competitors out of business or force them to pay licensing fees, even if they do not use precisely the same process. The patent was transferred to Live Nation when Clear Channel Entertainment was spun off, but the patent was revoked on March 13, 2007, after it was found that this patent infringed on a prior patent granted for Telex.

===Indecency zero tolerance===
During the nationwide crackdown on indecent material following the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show in 2004, Clear Channel launched a &quot;self-policing&quot; effort, and declared that there would be no &quot;indecent&quot; material allowed on the air. This led to the company&#x27;s dismissal of several of their own employees, including popular and high-profile hosts in a number of cities. There were protests from free-speech advocates. During the same period, Howard Stern was dropped from six Clear Channel-owned stations in Florida, California, Pennsylvania, New York and Kentucky. By mid-year, rival Viacom (through radio division Infinity Broadcasting, and the original Viacom, not the second one) brought Stern&#x27;s show back to those six markets. In June 2004, Viacom/Infinity Broadcasting Inc./One Twelve Inc. filed a $10 million lawsuit against Clear Channel for breaking of contracts and non-payment of licensing fees due to the dropping of Stern&#x27;s show. (Viacom was Howard Stern&#x27;s employer at the time, though he has since moved to Sirius XM Satellite Radio.) The following July, Clear Channel filed a countersuit of $3 million.

===Concerts===
In the early 2000s, Clear Channel settled a lawsuit with a Denver, Colorado concert promoter, Nobody In Particular Presents (NIPP). In the lawsuit, NIPP alleged that Clear Channel halted airplay on its local stations for (NIPP) clients, and that Clear Channel would not allow NIPP to publicize its concerts on the air. The lawsuit was settled in 2004 when Clear Channel agreed to pay NIPP a confidential sum. However, a systematic analysis of concert ticket prices found no evidence that Clear Channel was cross-leveraging its radio interests with its (now divested) concert promotion interests.

===Production of local programming===
iHeartMedia uses the RCS Nex-Gen automation system throughout their properties. Like most contemporary automation systems, Nex-Gen allows a DJ from anywhere in the country to sound as if he or she is broadcasting from anywhere else in the country, on any other station. A technological outgrowth of earlier, tape-based automation systems dating back to the 1960s, this method—known as voice-tracking—allows for smaller market stations to be partially or completely staffed by &quot;cyber-jocks&quot; who may never have visited the town from which they are broadcasting. This practice may also result in local on-air positions being reduced or eliminated. It has been stated that iHeartMedia maintains a majority of its staff in hourly-paid, part-time positions. Beginning in the early 2020s, many of its stations have added a disclaimer with their station identification sequence noting that the voicetracked content is pre-recorded.

===Lack of local staff during emergency===

Clear Channel was criticized for a situation that occurred in Minot, North Dakota, on the morning of January 18, 2002. At around 2:30 a.m., a Canadian Pacific Railway train derailed and leaked of toxic anhydrous ammonia, releasing a cloud of caustic, poisonous gas over the city. At the time, Clear Channel owned six commercial radio stations out of nine in the Minot area. City officials attempted to contact the local Clear Channel office by telephone to spread warnings of the danger using its radio stations, but it was several critical hours before the station manager was finally reached at his home. In the meantime, 9-1-1 operators were advising panicked callers to tune to KCJB for emergency instructions, but the station was not broadcasting any such information.

The ammonia spill was the largest of its kind in the United States, with one person killed, and over 1,000 seeking medical attention. Clear Channel claimed no responsibility for its failure to warn residents, maintaining that the city should have used the Emergency Alert System to trigger automatic equipment in place at all U.S. radio stations. The EAS equipment was later found to be functional at the time, but had not been activated by city, state or regional authorities. Other critical systems throughout Minot were either inoperable or had failed, including the public siren system, electricity in parts of the town, and the 9-1-1 telephone system, which became overloaded.

===Rejection of advertising images===

In June 2010, Clear Channel Outdoor rejected without comment two digital billboard images submitted by St. Pete Pride, an LGBT organization that sponsors gay pride events in the St. Petersburg, Florida area, leading the group to cancel its contract with Clear Channel. St. Pete Pride has stated that throughout its eight-year history, Clear Channel has edited the organization&#x27;s advertising material, and questioned whether the rejection of these images were because they displayed same-sex couples in affectionate poses. A Clear Channel spokesperson declined to comment on the specific reasons why the images were rejected but denied that the affection being shown was an issue, saying that such images had been included in previous St. Pete Pride campaigns.

===Censorship===
iHeartMedia and its subsidiaries have been associated with censorship of state and federal candidates for public office, elected officials and various political viewpoints.

iHeartMedia has been criticized in the past for censoring opinions critical of the Republican Party. &quot;Magic&quot;, the 2007 release from Bruce Springsteen which contained songs that were subtly critical of then-president George W. Bush, a Republican, and his administration, was censored from air play on Clear Channel. After Natalie Maines, the singer of the country band Dixie Chicks, told a London audience that they were &quot;ashamed [of the fact that] the president of the United States is from Texas&quot;, the band&#x27;s radio airplay dropped precipitously. Afterwards, some iHeartMedia (then Clear Channel) stations removed The Dixie Chicks from their playlists without any noted repercussions from the company. Gail Austin, Clear Channel&#x27;s director of programming said, &quot;Out of respect for our troops, our city and our listeners, [we] have taken the Dixie Chicks off our playlists.&quot; Clear Channel was accused of orchestrating the radio blacklist by such critics as Paul Krugman; however, others claim some Clear Channel stations continued to play the band longer than some other companies.

In 2005, Clear Channel-owned KTVX was the only local television station in Salt Lake City that refused to air a paid political message of Cindy Sheehan against the war in Iraq during a visit by President Bush.

On May 8, 2014, the FCC was asked to respond to a political programming complaint made against an iHeartMedia owned broadcast licensee, Capstar TX LLC by supporters of Milwaukee mayor Tom Barrett, that year&#x27;s Democratic candidate for Governor of Wisconsin. Capstar would not offer free airtime on WISN radio (a station which only features local and national conservative talk shows) to respond to statements supporting Republican Governor Scott Walker. Walker&#x27;s supporters had received free airtime from WISN for political purposes. Barrett supporters based their complaint on WISN&#x27;s violation of the Zapple doctrine. The FCC responded by rescinding the Zapple doctrine as a no longer enforceable component of the Fairness Doctrine.

===Use of paid actors posing as callers===
iHeartMedia, through its subsidiary, Premiere Radio Networks, auditions and hires actors to call in to talk radio shows and pose as listeners in order to provide shows, carried by iHeartMedia and other broadcasters, with planned content in the form of stories and opinions. The custom caller service provided by Premiere Radio assures its clients they won&#x27;t hear the same actor&#x27;s voice for at least two months in order to appear authentic to listeners who might otherwise catch on.

===iHeartMedia and rock radio===
iHeartMedia had ended several long-running rock formats in several markets due to the decline of the format and shifts in overall market demographics, to negative listener reception, including:
* KSJO San Jose (formerly an iHeart station) – flipped to Spanish-language oldies on October 28, 2004, after 35 years as a rock station
* KLOL Houston – flipped to Spanish-language pop on November 12, 2004, after 34 years as a rock station (the station was sold to CBS Radio a few years later)
* WFNX Boston – flipped to adult hits on July 24, 2012, after 29 years as an alternative rock station
* WKLS Atlanta – flipped to mainstream top 40 on August 29, 2012, after 38 years as a rock station
* KZEP-FM San Antonio – flipped to rhythmic hot AC on August 8, 2014, after 25 years as a classic rock station and 45 years of some form of rock music on the frequency (the classic rock format was moved to low-powered translator K227BH)
* KDGE Dallas–Fort Worth – flipped to Christmas music on November 16, 2016, then Mainstream AC on December 26 after 27 years (11 years on 94.5 before moving to 102.1 in 2000, and 16 years on 102.1) as an alternative rock station.

==See also==

* iHeartMedia radio stations
* Clear Channel UK
* List of radio stations owned by iHeartMedia
* List of songs deemed inappropriate by Clear Channel following the September 11, 2001 attacks
* TuneIn

==References==
==Further reading==
# Eric Boehlert, &quot;Radio&#x27;s big bully&quot;, salon.com, April 30, 2001
# Eric Boehlert, &quot;Tough company&quot;, salon.com, May 30, 2001
# &quot;Group sues over anti-war billboard&quot;, CNN, July 12, 2004
# Salon.com article on Clear Channel

==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="0" end="17" title="IHeartMedia" label="iHeartMedia, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="22" end="45" title="IHeartMedia" label="CC Media Holdings, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="62" end="72" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="102" end="113" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="132" end="147" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="151" end="177" title="IHeartMedia" label="iHeartCommunications, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="188" end="222" title="IHeartMedia" label="Clear Channel Communications, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6694168" start="245" end="255" title="Lowry Mays" label="Lowry Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304577" start="260" end="271" title="Red McCombs" label="Red McCombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q803873" start="308" end="320" title="Bain Capital" label="Bain Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790296" start="325" end="347" title="Thomas H. Lee Partners" label="Thomas H. Lee Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058381" start="353" end="369" title="leveraged buyout" label="leveraged buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="470" end="480" title="subsidiary" label="subsidiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="709" end="727" title="radio broadcasting" label="radio broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="729" end="736" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076968" start="741" end="748" title="Digital media" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q334453" start="773" end="781" title="Division (business)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="1040" end="1042" title="AM broadcasting" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="1047" end="1049" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="1178" end="1192" title="internet radio" label="internet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="1197" end="1204" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q793699" start="1233" end="1244" title="iHeartRadio" label="iHeartRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q587743" start="1359" end="1382" title="out-of-home advertising" label="out-of-home advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061903" start="1472" end="1497" title="Live Nation Entertainment" label="Live Nation Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130656" start="1502" end="1523" title="Clear Channel Outdoor" label="Clear Channel Outdoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="1621" end="1639" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130615" start="1682" end="1707" title="Clear-channel station" label="&amp;quot;clear channel&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953729" start="1719" end="1723" title="WOAI (AM)" label="WOAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325014" start="1817" end="1821" title="KAKC" label="KAKC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333759" start="1827" end="1834" title="KMOD-FM" label="KMOD-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q45400" start="1954" end="1972" title="Port Arthur, Texas" label="Port Arthur, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327736" start="1990" end="1994" title="KDEI" label="KDEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338778" start="1999" end="2003" title="KTJM" label="KTJM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480921" start="2010" end="2029" title="Port Arthur College" label="Port Arthur College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="2036" end="2050" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336107" start="2062" end="2066" title="KQBU (AM)" label="KQBU"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="2104" end="2117" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778694" start="2309" end="2339" title="Telecommunications Act of 1996" label="Telecommunications Act of 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200733" start="2655" end="2661" title="Divestment" label="divest"/>
<link wikidata="Q773067" start="2820" end="2834" title="border blaster" label="border blaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="2900" end="2916" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041914" start="2931" end="2939" title="XETRA-FM" label="XETRA-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q124739" start="2961" end="2968" title="Tijuana" label="Tijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="2969" end="2978" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371747" start="3100" end="3110" title="Karl Eller" label="Karl Eller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358769" start="3256" end="3267" title="Roger Parry" label="Roger Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614815" start="3507" end="3522" title="Steven Hicks" label="R. Steven Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635109" start="3527" end="3556" title="HM Capital Partners" label="Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp;amp; Furst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344232" start="3786" end="3802" title="Robert F. X. Sillerman" label="SFX Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120009" start="4655" end="4675" title="Jacor" label="Jacor Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="4706" end="4716" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090081" start="4765" end="4780" title="satellite radio" label="satellite radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q492058" start="4789" end="4807" title="XM Satellite Radio" label="XM Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344232" start="5004" end="5026" title="Robert F. X. Sillerman" label="Robert F. X. Sillerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922927" start="5055" end="5071" title="Tour promoter" label="concert promoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186164" start="5179" end="5187" title="Corporate spin-off" label="spun off"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960819" start="5234" end="5245" title="Live Nation (events promoter)" label="Live Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="5339" end="5353" title="private equity" label="private-equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790296" start="5361" end="5383" title="Thomas H. Lee Partners" label="Thomas H. Lee Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q803873" start="5388" end="5400" title="Bain Capital" label="Bain Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734200" start="5966" end="5990" title="Aloha Station Trust, LLC" label="Aloha Station Trust, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019023" start="6065" end="6083" title="Newport Television" label="Newport Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113908" start="6108" end="6134" title="Providence Equity Partners" label="Providence Equity Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582408" start="6332" end="6349" title="GoodRadio.TV, LLC" label="GoodRadio.TV, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q803873" start="7038" end="7050" title="Bain Capital" label="Bain Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790296" start="7055" end="7077" title="Thomas H. Lee Partners" label="Thomas H. Lee Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="7899" end="7902" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348924" start="7914" end="7947" title="Robert Pittman (media executive)" label="Robert W. &amp;quot;Bob&amp;quot; Pittman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277465" start="8079" end="8088" title="Sirius XM" label="Sirius XM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355524" start="8223" end="8227" title="WHTZ" label="WHTZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582014" start="8232" end="8239" title="KIIS-FM" label="KIIS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344232" start="8315" end="8337" title="Robert F. X. Sillerman" label="Robert F. X. Sillerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841887" start="8345" end="8362" title="SFX Entertainment" label="SFX Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="8502" end="8524" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q813240" start="8592" end="8600" title="Beatport" label="Beatport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259862" start="8754" end="8764" title="John Sykes (American businessman)" label="John Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q793699" start="9023" end="9034" title="iHeartRadio" label="iHeartRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="9112" end="9126" title="internet radio" label="internet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130615" start="9284" end="9305" title="clear-channel station" label="clear-channel station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639901" start="9427" end="9434" title="skywave" label="skywave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348924" start="9440" end="9451" title="Robert Pittman (media executive)" label="Bob Pittman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="9742" end="9756" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg News"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="9758" end="9765" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280852" start="9773" end="9782" title="Radio Ink" label="Radio Ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946733" start="9842" end="9866" title="San Antonio Express-News" label="San Antonio Express-News"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="9894" end="9904" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376796" start="9916" end="9929" title="restructuring" label="restructuring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790296" start="10204" end="10217" title="Thomas H. Lee Partners" label="Thomas H. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720134" start="10849" end="10862" title="HowStuffWorks" label="HowStuffWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="10869" end="10876" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176843" start="10980" end="10985" title="Jelli" label="Jelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q587743" start="11361" end="11384" title="out-of-home advertising" label="out-of-home advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130656" start="11394" end="11415" title="Clear Channel Outdoor" label="Clear Channel Outdoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="11466" end="11489" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="11870" end="11876" title="Nasdaq" label="Nasdaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q55397258" start="13388" end="13394" title="Audacy" label="Audacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="13518" end="13539" title="performance royalties" label="performance royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902300" start="13769" end="13792" title="Big Machine Label Group" label="Big Machine Label Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130656" start="14152" end="14173" title="Clear Channel Outdoor" label="Clear Channel Outdoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954380" start="14868" end="14872" title="WPMI-TV" label="WPMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="14876" end="14882" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="14884" end="14891" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339204" start="14958" end="14965" title="KTTU (TV)" label="KDTU-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="14969" end="14984" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334959" start="15102" end="15109" title="KOKI-TV" label="KOKI-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="15190" end="15193" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946863" start="15204" end="15211" title="WFOX-TV" label="WAWS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="15215" end="15236" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134015" start="15243" end="15271" title="Raycom Media" label="Malrite Communications Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288792" start="15402" end="15426" title="Sinclair Broadcast Group" label="Sinclair Broadcast Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337455" start="15492" end="15499" title="KSAS-TV" label="KSAS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="15503" end="15518" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333004" start="15572" end="15579" title="KLRT-TV" label="KLRT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q33405" start="15583" end="15604" title="Little Rock, Arkansas" label="Little Rock, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954520" start="15657" end="15664" title="WATN-TV" label="WPTY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="15668" end="15675" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949521" start="15760" end="15767" title="WFTC" label="KITN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="15771" end="15782" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="15783" end="15791" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110934" start="15797" end="15822" title="Nationwide Communications" label="Nationwide Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707706" start="15860" end="15867" title="WXXA-TV" label="WXXA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="15871" end="15877" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108877" start="15987" end="16012" title="local marketing agreement" label="local marketing agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951403" start="16037" end="16041" title="WJTC" label="WJTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954380" start="16091" end="16095" title="WPMI-TV" label="WPMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325330" start="16137" end="16141" title="KASN" label="KASN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333004" start="16187" end="16194" title="KLRT-TV" label="KLRT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522349" start="16240" end="16266" title="The Providence Journal" label="Providence Journal Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="16277" end="16280" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191458" start="16291" end="16295" title="KMSB" label="KMSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339204" start="16317" end="16321" title="KTTU (TV)" label="KTTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952353" start="16399" end="16403" title="WLMT" label="WLMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954520" start="16449" end="16453" title="WATN-TV" label="WPTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334072" start="16559" end="16566" title="KMYT-TV" label="KTFO-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956143" start="16667" end="16674" title="WJAX-TV" label="WTEV-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946863" start="16721" end="16725" title="WFOX-TV" label="WAWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950088" start="16827" end="16834" title="WHBQ-TV" label="WHBQ-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954520" start="16873" end="16880" title="WATN-TV" label="WPTY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954380" start="17020" end="17027" title="WPMI-TV" label="WPMI-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946530" start="17096" end="17103" title="WALA-TV" label="WALA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="17333" end="17336" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="17352" end="17355" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906538" start="17412" end="17429" title="Big Three (television networks)" label="Big Three network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950357" start="17441" end="17447" title="WHP-TV" label="WHP-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25280" start="17451" end="17461" title="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania" label="Harrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952594" start="17554" end="17561" title="WXBU" label="WLYH-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950357" start="17607" end="17613" title="WHP-TV" label="WHP-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676621" start="17731" end="17751" title="Act III Broadcasting" label="Act III Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954442" start="17837" end="17844" title="WPRI-TV" label="WPRI-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="17848" end="17858" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="17864" end="17867" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="17875" end="17878" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947559" start="17926" end="17932" title="WBZ-TV" label="WBZ-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="17936" end="17942" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040485" start="17960" end="17989" title="Hearst Television" label="Argyle Television Holdings II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953225" start="18001" end="18008" title="WNAC-TV" label="WNAC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954442" start="18054" end="18058" title="WPRI-TV" label="WPRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120009" start="18118" end="18138" title="Jacor" label="Jacor Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716868" start="18159" end="18166" title="WKRC-TV" label="WKRC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="18170" end="18180" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952353" start="18344" end="18348" title="WLMT" label="WLMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="18352" end="18359" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334072" start="18361" end="18365" title="KMYT-TV" label="KTFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="18369" end="18374" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956143" start="18376" end="18380" title="WJAX-TV" label="WTEV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="18384" end="18396" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325330" start="18398" end="18402" title="KASN" label="KASN"/>
<link wikidata="Q33405" start="18406" end="18417" title="Little Rock, Arkansas" label="Little Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951403" start="18422" end="18426" title="WJTC" label="WJTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="18430" end="18436" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954442" start="18471" end="18475" title="WPRI-TV" label="WPRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105654" start="18658" end="18680" title="Chris-Craft Industries" label="Chris-Craft Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476982" start="18682" end="18705" title="Fox Television Stations" label="Fox Television Stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949521" start="18713" end="18717" title="WFTC" label="WFTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953728" start="18777" end="18784" title="WOAI-TV" label="KMOL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="18788" end="18799" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339292" start="18804" end="18808" title="KTVX" label="KTVX"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="18812" end="18826" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674236" start="18860" end="18874" title="Ackerley Group" label="Ackerley Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339204" start="18999" end="19003" title="KTTU (TV)" label="KTTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="19007" end="19013" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q729754" start="19017" end="19021" title="Belo Corporation" label="Belo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956703" start="19086" end="19090" title="WUTR" label="WUTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113870" start="19094" end="19114" title="Mission Broadcasting" label="Mission Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949072" start="19146" end="19150" title="WETM-TV" label="WETM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545214" start="19208" end="19226" title="Smith Media" label="Smith Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339487" start="19302" end="19306" title="KUCW" label="KUWB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650706" start="19312" end="19331" title="ACME Communications" label="Acme Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716868" start="19666" end="19673" title="WKRC-TV" label="WKRC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953728" start="19817" end="19824" title="WOAI-TV" label="WOAI-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953729" start="19923" end="19930" title="WOAI (AM)" label="WOAI-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950046" start="20002" end="20009" title="WHAM-TV" label="WHAM-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955213" start="20072" end="20079" title="WROC-TV" label="WROC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707660" start="20128" end="20135" title="WHAM (AM)" label="WHAM-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956030" start="20203" end="20210" title="WSYR-TV" label="WSYR-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955942" start="20242" end="20249" title="WSTM-TV" label="WSTM-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956032" start="20298" end="20305" title="WSYR (AM)" label="WSYR-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113908" start="20394" end="20420" title="Providence Equity Partners" label="Providence Equity Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019023" start="20627" end="20645" title="Newport Television" label="Newport Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179898" start="20812" end="20827" title="Cox Media Group" label="Cox Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020906" start="20829" end="20848" title="Nexstar Media Group" label="Nexstar Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288792" start="20854" end="20878" title="Sinclair Broadcast Group" label="Sinclair Broadcast Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545675" start="20980" end="20995" title="city of license" label="city of license"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806006" start="21035" end="21044" title="Mediabase" label="Mediabase"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="21174" end="21180" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="21534" end="21542" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="21544" end="21557" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="21559" end="21567" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="21569" end="21573" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="21575" end="21583" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="21585" end="21592" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="21594" end="21603" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="21605" end="21612" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="21618" end="21625" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240379" start="21629" end="21646" title="Premiere Networks" label="Premiere Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693835" start="21677" end="21699" title="Agri Broadcast Network" label="Agri Broadcast Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="21901" end="21912" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="21914" end="21920" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="21945" end="21948" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475123" start="21949" end="21966" title="navigation system" label="navigation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877626" start="22145" end="22159" title="NBC News" label="NBC News Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329367" start="22285" end="22292" title="KFXN-FM" label="KFXN-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="22296" end="22307" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="22309" end="22311" title="Minnesota" label="MN"/>
<link wikidata="Q831354" start="22341" end="22352" title="smooth jazz" label="smooth jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="22635" end="22644" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="22708" end="22722" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130654" start="22792" end="22808" title="Clear Channel UK" label="Clear Channel UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358919" start="22856" end="22879" title="Bicycle-sharing system" label="bicycle sharing systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="23224" end="23232" title="cellular network" label="cellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187511" start="23237" end="23240" title="Personal Communications Service" label="PCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408468" start="23271" end="23285" title="fixed wireless" label="fixed wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240379" start="23398" end="23415" title="Premiere Networks" label="Premiere Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="24218" end="24234" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="24559" end="24566" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="24571" end="24586" title="Internet radio" label="streaming radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q241317" start="24587" end="24595" title="Computing platform" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="24742" end="24755" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334074" start="24932" end="24942" title="KMYT (FM)" label="Radio 94.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6342047" start="24987" end="24995" title="KYSR" label="Alt 98.7"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="25523" end="25530" title="Hip hop music" label="Hip Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="25550" end="25566" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956684" start="25901" end="25905" title="WUSL" label="WUSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948273" start="25936" end="25943" title="WDAS-FM" label="WDAS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688180" start="25996" end="26003" title="WGCI-FM" label="WGCI-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956742" start="26044" end="26048" title="WVAZ" label="WVAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682582" start="26159" end="26163" title="KRRL" label="KRRL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332088" start="26196" end="26200" title="KQBT" label="KQBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948129" start="26210" end="26214" title="WBTP (FM)" label="WBTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="26215" end="26220" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957424" start="26244" end="26251" title="WWPR-FM" label="WWPR-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956684" start="26267" end="26271" title="WUSL" label="WUSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="26272" end="26284" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950143" start="26289" end="26293" title="WHEN (AM)" label="WHEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="26294" end="26302" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331110" start="26437" end="26441" title="KISQ" label="KISQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333459" start="26469" end="26473" title="KMEL" label="KMEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="26578" end="26585" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953166" start="26627" end="26631" title="WMXD" label="WMXD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321976" start="26633" end="26654" title="Rhythmic adult contemporary" label="rhythmic contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951258" start="26655" end="26659" title="WJLB" label="WJLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948605" start="26696" end="26700" title="WLLZ (FM)" label="WLLZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950397" start="26832" end="26836" title="WHRK" label="WHRK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118627" start="26841" end="26845" title="WDIA" label="WDIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951735" start="26862" end="26869" title="WKKV-FM" label="WKKV-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333633" start="27087" end="27094" title="KATZ-FM" label="KATZ-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330162" start="27109" end="27117" title="KUBT" label="KUBT-HD2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330162" start="27436" end="27440" title="KUBT" label="KUBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947464" start="27454" end="27458" title="WBTT" label="WBTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335850" start="27471" end="27480" title="KPRR" label="Power 102"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331985" start="27490" end="27503" title="KKMY" label="104.5 Kiss FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q128282" start="27504" end="27519" title="Beaumont, Texas" label="Beaumont, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341247" start="27545" end="27549" title="KXJM" label="KXJM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338218" start="27567" end="27571" title="KSSX" label="KSSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951295" start="27587" end="27591" title="WJMN (FM)" label="WJMN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951231" start="27646" end="27650" title="WSTV (FM)" label="WSTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25001519" start="27665" end="27669" title="WJJX" label="WJJX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326108" start="27715" end="27722" title="KBOS-FM" label="KBOS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339462" start="27772" end="27776" title="KUBE (FM)" label="KUBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328006" start="27786" end="27793" title="KDON-FM" label="KDON-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682578" start="27815" end="27819" title="KGGI" label="KGGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960985" start="28132" end="28151" title="Wake Up with Whoopi" label="Wake Up with Whoopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951963" start="28165" end="28169" title="WKTU" label="WKTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="28236" end="28242" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q14684791" start="28244" end="28248" title="KDHT (FM)" label="KDHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="28254" end="28263" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335668" start="28265" end="28269" title="KYMT" label="KYMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867371" start="28455" end="28473" title="The Breakfast Club (radio show)" label="The Breakfast Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957424" start="28500" end="28507" title="WWPR-FM" label="WWPR-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q295777" start="28949" end="28956" title="Kenny G" label="Kenny G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173262" start="29229" end="29237" title="Dave Koz" label="Dave Koz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357502" start="29311" end="29331" title="Electric Sound Stage" label="Electric Sound Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136344" start="29333" end="29345" title="Club Phusion" label="Club Phusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833384" start="29347" end="29354" title="Trancid" label="Trancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242794" start="29356" end="29367" title="Pride Radio" label="Pride Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765866" start="29385" end="29399" title="The Spin*Cycle" label="The Spin*Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149736" start="29603" end="29612" title="Evolution (radio network)" label="Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628528" start="29710" end="29732" title="Dance/Mix Show Airplay" label="Dance/Mix Show Airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242794" start="29802" end="29813" title="Pride Radio" label="Pride Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568683" start="30488" end="30516" title="The Glenn Beck Radio Program" label="The Glenn Beck Radio Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949349" start="30584" end="30588" title="WFLA (AM)" label="WFLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="30592" end="30597" title="Tampa" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q107694829" start="30640" end="30676" title="The Clay Travis and Buck Sexton Show" label="The Clay Travis and Buck Sexton Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682076" start="30747" end="30768" title="The Sean Hannity Show" label="The Sean Hannity Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564763" start="30785" end="30788" title="WOR (AM)" label="WOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742782" start="30809" end="30829" title="The Jesse Kelly Show" label="The Jesse Kelly Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710728" start="30846" end="30850" title="KPRC (AM)" label="KPRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="30851" end="30858" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933766" start="30870" end="30887" title="Coast to Coast AM" label="Coast to Coast AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356377" start="30893" end="30905" title="George Noory" label="George Noory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240379" start="30944" end="30961" title="Premiere Networks" label="Premiere Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q557699" start="30973" end="30983" title="Mark Levin" label="Mark Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322074" start="31005" end="31009" title="WABC (AM)" label="WABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564709" start="31026" end="31033" title="WMAL-FM" label="WMAL-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270455" start="31065" end="31077" title="Westwood One" label="Westwood One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729101" start="31089" end="31109" title="The Dave Ramsey Show (radio program)" label="The Dave Ramsey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="31126" end="31135" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761874" start="31266" end="31288" title="The Rush Limbaugh Show" label="The Rush Limbaugh Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322074" start="31583" end="31587" title="WABC (AM)" label="WABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329378" start="31673" end="31679" title="KFXR (AM)" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949947" start="31684" end="31691" title="WBIN (AM)" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338374" start="31885" end="31907" title="America in The Morning" label="America in The Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937690" start="31944" end="32000" title="This Morning, America&amp;#x27;s First News with Gordon Deal" label="This Morning, America&amp;#x27;s First News with Gordon Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156100" start="32013" end="32035" title="Compass Media Networks" label="Compass Media Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793912" start="32194" end="32215" title="Armstrong &amp;amp; Getty" label="Armstrong &amp;amp; Getty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338236" start="32227" end="32231" title="KSTE" label="KSTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="32232" end="32242" title="Sacramento" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829785" start="32253" end="32279" title="Michael DelGiorno" label="The Michael DelGiorno Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332358" start="32291" end="32295" title="KLAC" label="KLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="32296" end="32305" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933766" start="32444" end="32461" title="Coast to Coast AM" label="Coast to Coast AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328988" start="32680" end="32683" title="KFI" label="KFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="32684" end="32695" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334770" start="32697" end="32700" title="KOA (AM)" label="KOA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="32701" end="32707" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698486" start="32709" end="32712" title="WLW" label="WLW"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="32713" end="32723" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950053" start="32728" end="32732" title="WHAS (AM)" label="WHAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="32733" end="32743" title="Louisville" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338833" start="32803" end="32807" title="KEIB" label="KEIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332235" start="32821" end="32825" title="KDFD" label="KDFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330284" start="32830" end="32834" title="KHOW" label="KHOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951878" start="32843" end="32847" title="WKRC (AM)" label="WKRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951704" start="32863" end="32867" title="WKJK" label="WKJK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812337" start="33070" end="33096" title="At Home with Gary Sullivan" label="At Home with Gary Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909288" start="33110" end="33144" title="Bill Handel" label="Handel on the Law with Bill Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q336303" start="33158" end="33188" title="Michael D. Brown" label="The Weekend with Michael Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364546" start="33202" end="33231" title="In the Garden with Ron Wilson" label="In the Garden with Ron Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768225" start="33245" end="33274" title="The Tech Guy" label="Rich on Tech with Rich DeMuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885632" start="33288" end="33309" title="Ben Ferguson" label="The Ben Ferguson Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908639" start="33323" end="33357" title="Bill Cunningham (talk show host)" label="Sunday Nights with Bill Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355602" start="33371" end="33402" title="Art Bell" label="Somewhere in Time with Art Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743151" start="33419" end="33459" title="The Jesus Christ Show" label="The Jesus Christ Show with Neil Saavedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933770" start="33813" end="33822" title="simulcast" label="simulcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="33965" end="33975" title="Sacramento" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328885" start="33999" end="34006" title="KFBK-FM" label="KFBK-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682569" start="34021" end="34025" title="KFBK (AM)" label="KFBK"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="34038" end="34052" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334528" start="34072" end="34079" title="KNRS-FM" label="KNRS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334530" start="34094" end="34098" title="KNRS (AM)" label="KNRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="34114" end="34120" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q331380" start="34121" end="34132" title="Schenectady, New York" label="Schenectady"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="34133" end="34137" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950013" start="34164" end="34170" title="WGY-FM" label="WGY-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950020" start="34185" end="34188" title="WGY (AM)" label="WGY"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="34200" end="34210" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949017" start="34230" end="34237" title="WERC-FM" label="WERC-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949020" start="34252" end="34256" title="WERC (AM)" label="WERC"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="34268" end="34276" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956031" start="34296" end="34303" title="WSYR-FM" label="WSYR-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956032" start="34318" end="34322" title="WSYR (AM)" label="WSYR"/>
<link wikidata="Q357742" start="34412" end="34425" title="FM translator" label="FM translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563454" start="34727" end="34735" title="HD Radio" label="HD Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276171" start="34736" end="34746" title="digital subchannel" label="subchannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953218" start="34750" end="34757" title="WMZQ-FM" label="WMZQ-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248875" start="34859" end="34875" title="Progressive talk" label="Progressive talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270455" start="35102" end="35114" title="Westwood One" label="Westwood One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828179" start="35160" end="35177" title="Air America Radio" label="Air America Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947865" start="35392" end="35396" title="WCKY (AM)" label="WCKY"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682618" start="35409" end="35413" title="KLSD" label="KLSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957716" start="35425" end="35429" title="WXKS (AM)" label="WXKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335765" start="35438" end="35442" title="KPOJ" label="KPOJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="35443" end="35451" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950805" start="35456" end="35460" title="WINZ (AM)" label="WINZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="35461" end="35466" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957906" start="35626" end="35630" title="WXXM" label="WXXM"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="35634" end="35652" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128242" start="35888" end="35900" title="classic hits" label="classic hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416935" start="35927" end="35941" title="all-news radio" label="all-news radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947580" start="36087" end="36090" title="WBZ (AM)" label="WBZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="36091" end="36097" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259376" start="36144" end="36154" title="drive time" label="drive time"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682569" start="36164" end="36168" title="KFBK (AM)" label="KFBK"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="36169" end="36179" title="Sacramento" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334770" start="36181" end="36184" title="KOA (AM)" label="KOA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="36185" end="36191" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334891" start="36196" end="36200" title="KOGO (AM)" label="KOGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="36201" end="36210" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q97188925" start="36609" end="36634" title="Black Information Network" label="Black Information Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="36668" end="36685" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949947" start="36745" end="36749" title="WBIN (AM)" label="WBIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="36750" end="36757" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q21503440" start="36895" end="36911" title="Fox Sports Radio" label="Fox Sports Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046168" start="36988" end="36998" title="ESPN Radio" label="ESPN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955469" start="37052" end="37056" title="WSAI" label="WSAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947865" start="37080" end="37084" title="WCKY (AM)" label="WCKY"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685936" start="37206" end="37221" title="adult standards" label="adult standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270455" start="37308" end="37320" title="Westwood One" label="Westwood One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742507" start="37328" end="37353" title="America&amp;#x27;s Best Music" label="America&amp;#x27;s Best Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q113997659" start="37357" end="37375" title="Music of Your Life" label="Music of Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="37528" end="37546" title="Adult contemporary music" label="Adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952516" start="37603" end="37607" title="WLTW" label="WLTW"/>
<link wikidata="Q176847" start="37621" end="37628" title="WLIT-FM" label="WLIT-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334820" start="37660" end="37664" title="KODA" label="KODA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339148" start="37677" end="37684" title="KTSM-FM" label="KTSM-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="37685" end="37692" title="El Paso" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="37861" end="37868" title="Soft adult contemporary" label="Soft AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253981" start="37966" end="37973" title="Delilah (radio host)" label="Delilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182586" start="38160" end="38184" title="John Tesh" label="The John Tesh Radio Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q947301" start="38230" end="38260" title="Jim Brickman" label="Your Weekend with Jim Brickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21174042" start="38277" end="38301" title="Ellen K" label="The Ellen K Weekend Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443316" start="38443" end="38458" title="Christmas music" label="Christmas music"/>
<link wikidata="Q176847" start="38578" end="38585" title="WLIT-FM" label="WLIT-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="38719" end="38731" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="38735" end="38757" title="Hot adult contemporary" label="Hot adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952946" start="38807" end="38811" title="WMMX" label="WMMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="38812" end="38818" title="Dayton" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682652" start="38839" end="38843" title="KMYI" label="KMYI"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="38844" end="38853" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325884" start="38876" end="38880" title="KBIG" label="KBIG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037693" start="38928" end="38939" title="modern rock" label="modern rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510800" start="38965" end="38975" title="adult hits" label="adult hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331116" start="39088" end="39095" title="KISS-FM (brand)" label="KISS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582014" start="39109" end="39116" title="KIIS-FM" label="KIIS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951907" start="39130" end="39137" title="WKSC-FM" label="WKSC-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946523" start="39147" end="39151" title="WAKS" label="WAKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951644" start="39163" end="39167" title="WKFS" label="WKFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957715" start="39180" end="39187" title="WXKS-FM" label="WXKS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355524" start="39218" end="39222" title="WHTZ" label="WHTZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332092" start="39233" end="39237" title="KKRZ" label="KKRZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958285" start="39248" end="39252" title="WZFT" label="WZFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337909" start="39264" end="39268" title="KSLZ" label="KSLZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686553" start="39305" end="39309" title="WLDI" label="WLDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812320" start="39327" end="39331" title="KYLD" label="KYLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957430" start="39367" end="39371" title="WWPW" label="WWPW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949731" start="39381" end="39385" title="WGEX" label="WGEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951858" start="39419" end="39423" title="WKQI" label="WKQI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330380" start="39433" end="39440" title="KHTS-FM" label="KHTS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947776" start="39452" end="39456" title="WCHD" label="WCHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950672" start="39504" end="39508" title="WIHT" label="WIHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957288" start="39530" end="39534" title="WWHT" label="WWHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953580" start="39638" end="39642" title="WNRW" label="WNRW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950833" start="39714" end="39718" title="WIOQ" label="WIOQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954649" start="39747" end="39751" title="WQGA" label="WQGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946362" start="39811" end="39818" title="WAEB-FM" label="WAEB-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952102" start="39873" end="39880" title="WLAN-FM" label="WLAN-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957002" start="39930" end="39934" title="WVRT" label="WVRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957007" start="39941" end="39945" title="WVRZ" label="WVRZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950117" start="40008" end="40012" title="WHCY" label="WHCY"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951559" start="40050" end="40057" title="WKCI-FM" label="WKCI-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q755271" start="40076" end="40095" title="Hamden, Connecticut" label="Hamden, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951304" start="40116" end="40123" title="WJMX-FM" label="WJMX-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070214" start="40139" end="40161" title="Cheraw, South Carolina" label="Cheraw, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335850" start="40282" end="40286" title="KPRR" label="KPRR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="40287" end="40294" title="El Paso" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951963" start="40299" end="40303" title="WKTU" label="WKTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295388" start="40326" end="40334" title="rhythmic contemporary" label="rhythmic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355524" start="40374" end="40378" title="WHTZ" label="WHTZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569406" start="40395" end="40403" title="playlist" label="playlist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="40488" end="40501" title="Country music" label="Country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956547" start="40576" end="40580" title="WUBL" label="WUBL"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="40581" end="40588" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337564" start="40593" end="40599" title="KSD (FM)" label="KSD-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="40600" end="40609" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955684" start="40632" end="40639" title="WSIX-FM" label="WSIX-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="40640" end="40649" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980979" start="40710" end="40742" title="Granger Smith" label="After Midnite with Granger Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934795" start="40804" end="40824" title="The Bobby Bones Show" label="The Bobby Bones Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259376" start="40842" end="40852" title="drive time" label="drive time"/>
<link wikidata="Q20011172" start="41070" end="41098" title="iHeartRadio Country Festival" label="iHeartRadio Country Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047230" start="41821" end="41832" title="Casey Kasem" label="Casey Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q467079" start="41840" end="41855" title="American Top 40" label="American Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034033" start="42435" end="42459" title="Nights with Alice Cooper" label="Nights with Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337905" start="42474" end="42481" title="KSLX-FM" label="KSLX-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q362516" start="42540" end="42566" title="Sixx Sense with Nikki Sixx" label="Sixx Sense with Nikki Sixx"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148173" start="42711" end="42719" title="Rockline" label="Rockline"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148173" start="42731" end="42741" title="Bob Coburn" label="Bob Coburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883638" start="42755" end="42794" title="Little Steven&amp;#x27;s Underground Garage" label="Little Steven&amp;#x27;s Underground Garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718943" start="42997" end="43008" title="Bob and Tom" label="Bob and Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949197" start="43023" end="43027" title="WFBQ" label="WFBQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="43070" end="43092" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222736" start="43100" end="43118" title="John Boy and Billy" label="John Boy and Billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955015" start="43133" end="43137" title="WRFX" label="WRFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371670" start="43275" end="43301" title="Rover&amp;#x27;s Morning Glory" label="Rover&amp;#x27;s Morning Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564728" start="43315" end="43319" title="WMMS" label="WMMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955205" start="43389" end="43393" title="WRNW" label="WRNW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947516" start="43418" end="43422" title="WXZX" label="WXZX"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="43555" end="43571" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146346" start="43958" end="43964" title="Hurban" label="Hurban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723696" start="44099" end="44113" title="Alfredo Alonso" label="Alfredo Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q18176410" start="44397" end="44422" title="iHeartRadio Fiesta Latina" label="iHeartRadio Fiesta Latina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431118" start="44672" end="44683" title="Salem Media" label="Salem Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="44769" end="44781" title="Gospel music" label="Gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="45073" end="45079" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q15230029" start="45081" end="45085" title="KDNN" label="KDNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q487704" start="45086" end="45094" title="Honolulu County, Hawaii" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="45355" end="45364" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="45366" end="45378" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955472" start="45387" end="45391" title="WSAN" label="WSAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6324412" start="45443" end="45449" title="K256AS" label="K256AS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15231777" start="45450" end="45454" title="KUCD" label="KUCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="45520" end="45525" title="K-pop" label="K-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778694" start="45727" end="45757" title="Telecommunications Act of 1996" label="Telecommunications Act of 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510829" start="46033" end="46058" title="Future of Music Coalition" label="Future of Music Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="46401" end="46421" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="46438" end="46450" title="The Pentagon" label="The Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q635067" start="46715" end="46731" title="program director" label="program director"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="46824" end="46832" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="47462" end="47471" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499835" start="47485" end="47502" title="Free Fallin&amp;#x27;" label="Free Fallin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="47510" end="47525" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q944632" start="47539" end="47561" title="What a Wonderful World" label="What a Wonderful World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601775" start="47583" end="47619" title="Rage Against the Machine discography" label="Rage Against the Machine discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857367" start="47723" end="47735" title="Instant Live" label="Instant Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="47880" end="47882" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q558325" start="48101" end="48108" title="Bootleg recording" label="bootleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061903" start="48585" end="48596" title="Live Nation" label="Live Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960819" start="48602" end="48629" title="Clear Channel Entertainment" label="Clear Channel Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697179" start="48766" end="48771" title="Telex Communications" label="Telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q541283" start="48872" end="48912" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy" label="Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q348603" start="49271" end="49283" title="Howard Stern" label="Howard Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088127" start="49414" end="49420" title="Viacom (1952–2006)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022995" start="49445" end="49466" title="CBS Radio" label="Infinity Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q214346" start="49501" end="49511" title="Viacom (2005–2019)" label="second one"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277465" start="49865" end="49890" title="Sirius XM" label="Sirius XM Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="50037" end="50043" title="Denver, Colorado" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="50045" end="50053" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280740" start="50634" end="50645" title="Radio Computing Services" label="RCS Nex-Gen"/>
<link wikidata="Q675431" start="50998" end="51012" title="voice-tracking" label="voice-tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671825" start="51461" end="51483" title="station identification" label="station identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q487201" start="51654" end="51673" title="Minot, North Dakota" label="Minot, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="51734" end="51758" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="51794" end="51811" title="anhydrous ammonia" label="anhydrous ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q533806" start="52216" end="52221" title="9-1-1" label="9-1-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326856" start="52274" end="52278" title="KCJB" label="KCJB"/>
<link wikidata="Q561323" start="52623" end="52645" title="Emergency Alert System" label="Emergency Alert System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276042" start="53154" end="53171" title="digital billboard" label="digital billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="53211" end="53215" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q51406" start="53243" end="53252" title="gay pride" label="gay pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q49236" start="53267" end="53281" title="St. Petersburg, Florida" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="53283" end="53290" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="54129" end="54145" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q653981" start="54153" end="54158" title="Magic (Bruce Springsteen album)" label="Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="54188" end="54205" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="54272" end="54286" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q242605" start="54377" end="54391" title="Natalie Maines" label="Natalie Maines"/>
<link wikidata="Q142636" start="54424" end="54436" title="Dixie Chicks" label="Dixie Chicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339292" start="55197" end="55201" title="KTVX" label="KTVX"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="55243" end="55257" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q463417" start="55306" end="55319" title="Cindy Sheehan" label="Cindy Sheehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644969" start="55332" end="55343" title="war in Iraq" label="war in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="55547" end="55556" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q955542" start="55563" end="55574" title="Tom Barrett (Wisconsin politician)" label="Tom Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112727" start="55618" end="55639" title="Governor of Wisconsin" label="Governor of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950930" start="55681" end="55691" title="WISN (AM)" label="WISN radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q553254" start="55823" end="55835" title="Scott Walker (politician)" label="Scott Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417328" start="55995" end="56010" title="Zapple doctrine" label="Zapple doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393367" start="56108" end="56125" title="Fairness Doctrine" label="Fairness Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240379" start="56208" end="56231" title="Premiere Radio Networks" label="Premiere Radio Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17039336" start="56893" end="56897" title="KSJO" label="KSJO"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="56898" end="56906" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332913" start="57029" end="57033" title="KLOL" label="KLOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="57034" end="57041" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948808" start="57187" end="57191" title="WBWL (FM)" label="WFNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="57192" end="57198" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957430" start="57289" end="57293" title="WWPW" label="WKLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="57294" end="57301" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6342297" start="57388" end="57395" title="KZEP-FM" label="KZEP-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="57396" end="57407" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151046" start="57615" end="57621" title="K227BH" label="K227BH"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710568" start="57625" end="57629" title="KDGE" label="KDGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="57630" end="57636" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="57637" end="57647" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338033" start="57761" end="57765" title="KZMJ" label="94.5"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57870" end="57896" title=":Category:iHeartMedia radio stations" label="iHeartMedia radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130654" start="57899" end="57915" title="Clear Channel UK" label="Clear Channel UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608301" start="57918" end="57961" title="List of radio stations owned by iHeartMedia" label="List of radio stations owned by iHeartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q434710" start="57964" end="58056" title="List of songs deemed inappropriate by Clear Channel following the September 11, 2001 attacks" label="List of songs deemed inappropriate by Clear Channel following the September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305253" start="58059" end="58065" title="TuneIn" label="TuneIn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180741" wikidata="Q123450" url="?curid=180741" title="Johannes Oecolampadius">
<text>Johannes Oecolampadius (also Œcolampadius, in German also Oekolampadius, Oekolampad; 1482 – 24 November 1531) was a German Protestant reformer in the Calvinist tradition from the Electoral Palatinate. He was the leader of the Protestant faction in the Baden Disputation of 1526, and he was one of the founders of Protestant theology, engaging in disputes with Erasmus, Huldrych Zwingli, Martin Luther and Martin Bucer. Calvin adopted his view on the Eucharist dispute (against Luther).

His German surname was &quot;Hussgen&quot; (or &quot;Heussgen&quot;, &quot;Huszgen&quot;), which he etymologized to &quot;Hausschein&quot; (&quot;house-shine&quot;) and graecized (as was the custom at the time) to Οἰκολαμπάδιος(&quot;Oikolampádios&quot;, from οἶκος &quot;oîkos&quot;, &quot;house,&quot; and λαμπάς &quot;lampás&quot;, &quot;torch, lamp&quot;, and -ιος, &quot;-ios&quot;, &quot;pertaining to&quot;; this was then Latinised as &quot;Oecolampadius&quot;).

==Life==
He was born as Johannes Heussgen (variously written as Husschyn, Hussgen, Huszgen or Hausschein) in Weinsberg, then part of the Electorate of the Palatinate. He attended school at Weinsberg and Heilbronn, and then, intending to study law, he went to Bologna, but soon returned to Heidelberg and took up theology. Enthusiastic about the new learning, he passed from the study of Greek to that of Hebrew, taking his bachelor&#x27;s degree in 1503. He became cathedral preacher at Basel in 1515, serving under Christoph von Utenheim, the evangelical bishop of Basel. In Basel, Oecolampadius became an editorial assistant and Hebrew consultant to Erasmus&#x27; first edition of the Greek New Testament, and wrote that edition&#x27;s epilogue in praise of his master.

==Career==
From the beginning the sermons of Oecolampadius centred on atonement, and his first reformatory zeal showed itself in a protest (&quot;De risu paschali&quot;, 1518) against the introduction of humorous stories into Easter sermons. In 1518 he published his &quot;Greek Grammar&quot;. Two years later, he received an invitation to become preacher in the high church in Augsburg. Germany was ablaze with the questions raised by Martin Luther&#x27;s theses, and Oecolampadius&#x27;s introduction into this environment, when he championed Luther&#x27;s position, especially in his anonymous &quot;Canonici indocti&quot; (1519), seems to have compelled him to severe self-examination, which ended in his becoming a monk. A short experience convinced him that this was not the ideal Christian life (&quot;amisi monachum, inveni Christianum&quot; — &quot;I have lost the monk; I have found the Christian&quot;). His position as priest in Augsburg was filled by Urbanus Rhegius.

In February 1522 he made his way to Ebernburg, near Creuznach, where he acted as chaplain to a little group of men holding the new opinions who had settled there under the leadership of Franz von Sickingen.
Oecolampadius returned to Basel in November 1522, as vicar of St Martin&#x27;s, and (in 1523) reader of the Holy Scripture at the University of Basel. Lecturing on &quot;Isaiah,&quot; he condemned current ecclesiastical abuses, and in a public disputation (20 August 1523) gained such success that Erasmus writing to Zürich said, &quot;Oecolampadius has the upper hand amongst us.&quot; He became Huldrych Zwingli&#x27;s loyal friend and ally, and after more than a year of earnest preaching and four public disputations in which the popular verdict went in favour of Oecolampadius and his friends, the authorities of Basel began to see the need for Reformation.

At last Oecolampadius was able to refrain from some practices he believed to be superstitious. Basel was slow to accept the Reformation; the news of the Peasants&#x27; War of 1524-1525 and the inroads of Anabaptists prevented progress; but by 1525 it seemed as if the authorities were resolved to listen to schemes for restoring the purity of worship and teaching. In the midst of these hopes and difficulties Oecolampadius married, in the beginning of 1528, Wibrandis Rosenblatt, the widow of Ludwig Keller, who proved a suitable wife. After his death she married Wolfgang Fabricius Capito, and, when Capito died, Martin Bucer. She died in 1564.

In January 1528 Oecolampadius and Zwingli took part in the Bern Disputation which led to the adoption of the new faith in that canton, and in the following year to the discontinuance of the Mass at Basel. In 1529 he became officially the &quot;Antistes&quot; of the Reformed Church in Basel. The Anabaptists claimed Oecolampadius for their views, but in a disputation with them he dissociated himself from most of their positions. In October of 1530 he was visited by Michael Servetus who stayed for about ten months. At first Oecolampadius was impressed by the younger man’s intelligence and scholarship, but eventually he became dismayed by Servetus’ anti-trinitarian theology.

Oecolampadius died on 24 November 1531.

==Theology==

Oecolampadius, a Protestant theologian, conversed with notables such as Johannes Eck and Philipp Melanchthon, and was Professor of theology at the University of Basel. As a theologian, he lacked the glamour of Luther, Zwingli and Calvin, but nonetheless became a trusted religious leader. He was respected even among Catholic scholars of his time and was quoted over forty years after his death by the Jesuit St. Peter Canisius in his work &quot;De Maria Virgine.&quot; With Zwingli he represented the Swiss at the Marburg Colloquy. His views on the Eucharist upheld the metaphorical against the literal interpretation of the word &quot;body,&quot; but he asserted that believers partook of the sacrament more for the sake of others than for their own, though later he emphasized it as a means of grace for the Christian life. To Luther&#x27;s doctrine of the ubiquity of Christ&#x27;s body he opposed that of the presence and activity of the Holy Spirit in the church. His views on the Eucharist prompted Luther to publish several sermons on the subject in his 1526 &quot;The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ—Against the Fanatics&quot;. He did not minutely analyse the doctrine of predestination as Luther, Calvin and Zwingli did, contenting himself with the summary &quot;Our Salvation is of God, our perdition of ourselves.&quot;

Theologically he was considered to be close to Zwingli, with whom he shared a friendly attitude towards Mary and Marian veneration. He is considered an example of Protestant Marian piety of his time, largely in light of his sermons. He calls Mary the mediatrix or mediator (&quot;Mittlerin&quot;) of all graces, to whom the Lord had entrusted the treasure of Grace &quot;Thesaurus gratiarum.&quot; Oecolampadius borrowed from Radulfus Ardens (d. 1200) and others the image of Mary as the &quot;neck&quot; who mediates all graces of Christ (the Head) to his mystical body, the church. This view was defended in the 20th century by Gabriel Roschini, and more generally, by Pope Pius XII in his encyclical &quot;Mystici corporis&quot; as official doctrine of the Catholic Church.

In &quot;De laudando in Maria Deo&quot; given in Augsburg 1521, he states that God cannot be praised more in any creature than through Mary. His gifts and graces are expressed in her. God honoured her by becoming human through her. Mary surpassed Abraham with her faith, Isaac with her patience and Joseph with her chastity. She is queen of all heavenly powers. Yet, according to Oecolampadius, Catholic veneration of Mary went too far, because of the numerous titles given to Mary: they surpass in number and content the veneration of Christ himself. The rosary is cited as an example with its 150 Hail Marys and only ten prayers to God. He is also critical of popular customs, by which every Saturday is solemnly observed in her honour, with abstinence from wine and sexual relations, while the following Lord’s day is characterized by heavy drinking and varied entertainments. Throughout his life, Oecolampadius preached the perpetual virginity of Mary, who through her life and her works gave a shining example of Christian virtues. Mary’s life was a life of service and compassion as documented in her visit to Elizabeth.

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
*
* This work in turn cites:
** J. J. Herzog, &quot;Leben Joh. Oecolampads und die Reformation der Kirche in Basel&quot; (1843)
** K. R. Hagenbach, &quot;Johann Oecolampad und Oswald Myconius, die Reformatoren Basels&quot; (1859)
** W. Hadorn&#x27;s article in Herzog-Hauck&#x27;s &quot;Realencyklopädie für prot. Rel. u. Kirche.&quot;
* 

===Further reading===

* Mattox, Mickey. &quot;Ioannes Oecolampadius, An Exposition of Genesis.&quot; Marquette University Press, 2013.
* Poythress, Diane. &quot;Reformer of Basel: The Life, Thought, and Influence of Johannes Oecolampadius.&quot; Reformation Heritage Books, 2011.
* Johannes Oecolampadius, &quot;Sermons on the First Epistle of John (A Handbook for the Christian Life).&quot; Translated, introduced, and annotated by Timothy Matthew Slemmons, 2017.
* Stähelin, Theophil. &quot;John Oecolampadius: The Reformer of Basel.&quot; Translated, Annotated, and Introduced by Timothy Matthew Slemmons, 2016.
*Demura, Akira, &quot;Church Discipline According to Johannes Oecolampadius in the Setting of His Life and Thought,&quot; Princeton Theological Seminary, 1983.

==External links==
*Lighthouse of the Reformation - John Dyck 
* Works by Johannes Oecolampadius in digital library Polona</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q123450" start="0" end="22" title="Johannes Oecolampadius" label="Johannes Oecolampadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="46" end="52" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q123450" start="58" end="71" title="Johannes Oecolampadius" label="Oekolampadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q123450" start="73" end="83" title="Johannes Oecolampadius" label="Oekolampad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="116" end="122" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="123" end="133" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="134" end="142" title="Protestant Reformation" label="reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="150" end="159" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="179" end="199" title="Electorate of the Palatinate" label="Electoral Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q96400329" start="313" end="332" title="Protestant theology" label="Protestant theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="360" end="367" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="369" end="385" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Huldrych Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="387" end="400" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q318622" start="405" end="417" title="Martin Bucer" label="Martin Bucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134873" start="450" end="467" title="Real presence of Christ in the Eucharist" label="Eucharist dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405824" start="469" end="483" title="Eucharist in Lutheranism" label="against Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q62977751" start="491" end="505" title="German surname" label="German surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="656" end="665" title="Hellenization" label="graecized"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="747" end="752" title=":wikt:οἶκος" label="οἶκος"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="795" end="801" title=":wikt:λαμπάς" label="λαμπάς"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="851" end="855" title=":wikt:-ιος" label="-ιος"/>
<link wikidata="Q466126" start="916" end="925" title="Romanization of Greek" label="Latinised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584" start="1067" end="1076" title="Weinsberg" label="Weinsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="1095" end="1123" title="Electorate of the Palatinate" label="Electorate of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q715" start="1161" end="1170" title="Heilbronn" label="Heilbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="1217" end="1224" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="1247" end="1257" title="University of Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="1270" end="1278" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13604283" start="1303" end="1315" title="new learning" label="new learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1362" end="1368" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="1445" end="1450" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086255" start="1474" end="1496" title="Christoph von Utenheim" label="Christoph von Utenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q650165" start="1514" end="1529" title="bishop of Basel" label="bishop of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="1610" end="1617" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526516" start="1645" end="1664" title="Novum Instrumentum omne" label="Greek New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="1801" end="1810" title="Atonement in Christianity" label="atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="1957" end="1963" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="2109" end="2117" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="2167" end="2180" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q157506" start="2188" end="2194" title="95 theses" label="theses"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="2451" end="2455" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q72662" start="2695" end="2710" title="Urbanus Rhegius" label="Urbanus Rhegius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2749" end="2758" title="Ebernburg" label="Ebernburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047" start="2765" end="2774" title="Kreuznach" label="Creuznach"/>
<link wikidata="Q143108" start="2899" end="2918" title="Franz von Sickingen" label="Franz von Sickingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="2946" end="2951" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="3028" end="3042" title="Holy Scripture" label="Holy Scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q372608" start="3050" end="3069" title="University of Basel" label="University of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131458" start="3090" end="3096" title="Book of Isaiah" label="Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="3237" end="3243" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="3317" end="3333" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Huldrych Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="3570" end="3581" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154031" start="3737" end="3755" title="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="3788" end="3799" title="Anabaptists" label="Anabaptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q120460" start="4043" end="4063" title="Wibrandis Rosenblatt" label="Wibrandis Rosenblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368362" start="4149" end="4174" title="Wolfgang Fabricius Capito" label="Wolfgang Fabricius Capito"/>
<link wikidata="Q318622" start="4199" end="4211" title="Martin Bucer" label="Martin Bucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q824562" start="4291" end="4307" title="Bern Disputation" label="Bern Disputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="4359" end="4365" title="cantons of Switzerland" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="4422" end="4426" title="Mass (Liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q352719" start="4476" end="4484" title="Antistes" label="Antistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="4498" end="4513" title="Reformed Church" label="Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="4528" end="4538" title="Anabaptist" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q185914" start="4700" end="4716" title="Michael Servetus" label="Michael Servetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60298" start="5040" end="5052" title="Johannes Eck" label="Johannes Eck"/>
<link wikidata="Q76325" start="5057" end="5076" title="Philipp Melanchthon" label="Philipp Melanchthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="5198" end="5204" title="John Calvin" label="Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="5370" end="5376" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="5377" end="5380" title="saint" label="St."/>
<link wikidata="Q44624" start="5381" end="5395" title="Peter Canisius" label="Peter Canisius"/>
<link wikidata="Q672138" start="5483" end="5499" title="Marburg Colloquy" label="Marburg Colloquy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761958" start="6041" end="6107" title="The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ—Against the Fanatics" label="The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ—Against the Fanatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251591" start="6415" end="6419" title="Protestant views of Mary" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="6424" end="6441" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Marian veneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582954" start="6562" end="6571" title="mediatrix" label="mediatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281748" start="6737" end="6752" title="Radulfus Ardens" label="Radulfus Ardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272769" start="6941" end="6957" title="Gabriel Roschini" label="Gabriel Roschini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="6982" end="6995" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244349" start="7020" end="7036" title="Mystici corporis" label="Mystici corporis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="7138" end="7146" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="7336" end="7343" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q671872" start="7360" end="7365" title="Isaac" label="Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938795" start="7484" end="7511" title="Blessed Virgin Mary (Roman Catholic)" label="Catholic veneration of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="7645" end="7651" title="rosary" label="rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q46953" start="8017" end="8036" title="perpetual virginity" label="perpetual virginity"/>
<link wikidata="Q691810" start="8196" end="8201" title="Visitation (Christianity)" label="visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q118993" start="8306" end="8318" title="Johann Jakob Herzog" label="J. J. Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q118030" start="8405" end="8420" title="Karl Rudolf Hagenbach" label="K. R. Hagenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q116363" start="8450" end="8465" title="Oswald Myconius" label="Oswald Myconius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691781" start="9507" end="9513" title="Polona" label="Polona"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180743" wikidata="Q2577114" url="?curid=180743" title="Co-cathedral">
<text>A co-cathedral is a cathedral church which shares the function of being a bishop&#x27;s seat, or &quot;cathedra&quot;, with another cathedral, often in another city (usually a former see, anchor city of the metropolitan area or the civil capital). Instances of this occurred in England before the Protestant Reformation in the dioceses of &#x27;Bath and Wells&#x27;, and of &#x27;Coventry and Lichfield&#x27;. These two dioceses were each named for both cities that served as bishop&#x27;s seats.

As of March 2020, the Catholic Church had 322 co-cathedrals, mainly in Europe (140 in Italy alone).

Many are former cathedrals, but even if still in use, those often are not granted co-cathedral status.

Often the diocese with one or more co-cathedrals also has a multiple (&quot;hyphenated&quot;) name reflecting these, but some have a co-cathedral not mentioned in the title while other former see titles may also be preserved without having a co-cathedral. Sometimes the first-named city does not have the main cathedral (actual see) but boasts another distinction such as being a national capital or having an august ecclesiastical past.

== Catholic Europe ==
=== Albania ===
In Albania, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Tirana-Durrës has a co-cathedral in Durrës, Saint Lucia co-cathedral.

=== Belgium ===

In Belgium, the cathedral of the primatial Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Mechelen-Brussels is the Metropolitan St. Rumbold&#x27;s Cathedral in Mechelen (Malines), the archiepiscopal seat. Its co-cathedral is the Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula in Brussels, the national capital. A third, larger church in Koekelberg (also in Brussels) has the status of minor basilica, without co-cathedral rank, yet it has received papal visits including a papal beatification.

=== Bulgaria ===
The Roman Catholic Diocese of Sofia and Plovdiv has, besides the Cathedral of St Louis in Plovdiv, a new co-cathedral of St. Joseph in Sofia.

=== Croatia ===

* The Metropolitan archbishop of Split-Makarska has, in Split (Dalmatia), the co-cathedral of Saint Peter the Apostle Konkatedrala sv. Petra Apostola, besides his episcopal see, Katedrala Sv. Dujma
* The Metropolitan archbishop of Đakovo-Osijek has, in Osijek (Slavonia), the co-cathedral of St Peter and St Paul Crkva svetog Petra i Pavla, besides his episcopal see, Katedrala Bazilika Svetog Petra

=== Czech Republic ===
The Roman Catholic Diocese of Ostrava-Opava has a co-cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption Co-Cathedral in Ostravian-Opavian diocese in Opava besides the Ostrava Savior cathedral.

=== France ===
* The double-titled bishopric of Aire and Dax has a Co-cathedral of Notre Dame in Dax and a Cathedral of St John the Baptist in Aire
* The Archdiocese of Chambéry–Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne–Tarentaise has its cathedral in Chambéry and co–cathedrals in Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne and in Tarentaise
* The bishop of Couserans (a see suppressed in the French Revolution) had two co-cathedral churches at Saint-Lizier
* The bishop of Sisteron (a see also suppressed) had a second throne in the church of Forcalquier, which is still called &quot;La Con-cathédrale&quot;.

=== Germany ===
* The Roman Catholic Diocese of Augsburg has a co-cathedral of Saints Peter and Paul in Dillingen and a cathedral of the Visitation of Holy Mary in Augsburg
* The Roman Catholic Diocese of Dresden-Meissen has a co-cathedral of Saint Peter in Bautzen and a cathedral of the Most Holy Trinity in Dresden
* The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Munich and Freising has a co-cathedral of Saints Mary and Korbinian in Freising and a cathedral of Our Dear Lady in Munich 
* The Roman Catholic Diocese of Rottenburg-Stuttgart has a co-cathedral of Saint Eberhard in Stuttgart and a cathedral of Saint Martin in Rottenburg am Neckar.

=== Hungary ===
The primatial Metropolitan see of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Esztergom-Budapest has its primary cathedral in the old archiepiscopal seat, the Cathedral Basilica of Esztergom, and a co-cathedral basilica in the national state capital Budapest.

=== Italy ===

* The Diocese of Adria-Rovigo has a Concattedrale di S. Stefano Papa e Martire Concattedrale dedicated to Martyr Pope Stephen I in Rovigo, which never was a diocese, besides Adria&#x27;s own Cattedrale di SS. Pietro e Paolo dedicated to Saints Peter and Paul
* The Roman Catholic Diocese of Alghero-Bosa (on Sardinia) has a Marian Co-Cathedral Concattedrale di Beata Vergine Immaculata Concattedrale di Beata Vergine Immaculata, in Bosa besides its cathedral episcopal see, the Marian Cattedrale di Beata Maria Vergine Immaculata Concezione, in Alghero
* The Diocese of Amalfi–Cava de&#x27; Tirreni has a Marian Co-Cathedral of the Visitation of Mary in Cava de&#x27; Tirreni, besides the cathedral of Apostle Andrew in Amalfi.
* The Diocese of Avezzano has its cathedral in that city and a co-cathedral in its former see Pescina
* The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Campobasso-Boiano has a cathedral in and a co-cathedral in .
* The Roman Catholic Diocese of Lucera-Troia has its cathedral in Lucera, present see; Troia&#x27;s former cathedral serves as co-cathedral
* The Diocese of Melfi–Rapolla–Venosa has a cathedral, a Marian Minor Basilica: Basilica Cattedrale di S. Maria Assunta, at Melfi, and two Co-cathedrals: Concattedrale di S. Andrea in Venosa, and Concattedrale di S. Michele Arcangelo, in Rapolla
* The Roman Catholic Diocese of Molfetta-Ruvo-Giovinazzo-Terlizzi has a cathedral in Molfetta and three co-cathedral: in Ruvo, Giovinazzo and Terlizzi
* The Roman Catholic Diocese of Pitigliano-Sovana-Orbetello has a cathedral of Peter&amp;Paul in Pitigliano and a co-cathedral of the Assumptio in Orbetello
* The Archdiocese of Rossano–Cariati has a Marian Cathedral di Maria SS. Achiropita at Rossano and a Co-Cathedral of the Archangel Michael in Cariati
* The Archdiocese of Sant&#x27;Angelo dei Lombardi-Conza-Nusco-Bisaccia has its cathedral in Sant&#x27;Angelo dei Lombardi and three co-cathedrals in absorbed former bishoprics : Conza di Campania, Nusco and Bisaccia
* The Diocese of Teggiano-Policastro has a Co-cathedral of the Assumption in Policastro Bussentino and a Marian cathedral of S. Maria Maggiore e S. Michele Arcangelo, in Teggiano 
* The Diocese of Termoli-Larino has its cathedral in Termoli and a co-cathedral in Larino

=== Malta ===

The metropolitan cathedral of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Malta is St. Paul&#x27;s Cathedral in the former capital Mdina. Since the 1820s, the former Conventual Church of St. John in Valletta has been known as St. John&#x27;s Co-Cathedral.

=== Poland ===
* the Roman Catholic Diocese of Zamość-Lubaczów has a cathedral of the Resurrection and St. Thomas the Apostle in Zamość and a co-cathedral of St. Stanislaus in Lubaczów
* The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Szczecin-Kamień has a cathedral of James the Elder in Szczecin and a co-cathedral of John the Baptist in Kamień; the same goes for both its suffragans :
** the Roman Catholic Diocese of Zielona Góra-Gorzów has a cathedral of the Virgin Mary in Gorzów and a co-cathedral of St. Jadwiga in Zielona Góra
** The Roman Catholic Diocese of Koszalin-Kołobrzeg has a cathedral in Koszalin and a co-cathedral in Kołobrzeg

=== Slovakia ===
* Co-Cathedral of St. Nicholas, Prešov

=== Spain ===
* The Diocese of Calahorra y La Calzada-Logroño has a Co-Cathedral of St Mary in Logroño besides its Cathedral of the Assumption of Our Lady in Calahorra and Cathedral of the Saviour and St Mary of Santo Domingo de la Calzada.
* The Diocese of Coria-Cáceres has a Co-Cathedral of St Mary in Cáceres besides its Cathedral of the Assumption of Our Lady in Coria.
*The Diocese of Guadix-Baza has a Co-Cathedral of Our Lady of the Incarnation (es) in Baza besides its Cathedral of the Incarnation in Guadix.
*The Archdiocese of Mérida-Badajoz has a Co-Cathedral of Saint Mary Major in Mérida besides its Cathedral of St John the Baptist in Badajoz.
*The Diocese of Mondoñedo-Ferrol has a Co-Cathedral of St Martin in Ferrol beside its Cathedral Basilica of the Assumption of Our Lady in Mondoñedo.
*The Diocese of Orihuela-Alicante has a Co-Catedral of St Nicholas of Bary in Alicante besides its Cathedral of the Saviour and St Mary in Orihuela.
*The Diocese of Osma-Soria has a Co-Cathedral of St Peter in Soria besides its Cathedral of the Assumption of Our Lady in Burgo de Osma.
*The Diocese of Segorbe-Castellón has a Co-Cathedral os St Mary in Castellón de la Plana besides its Cathedral of the Assumption of Our Lady in Segorbe.
*The Diocese of Sigüenza-Guadalajara has a Co-Cathedral of Santa María de la Fuente la Mayor in Guadalajara besides its Cathedral of St Mary in Sigüenza.
*The Diocese of Tui-Vigo has a Co-Cathedral of St Mary in Vigo besides its Cathedral of St Mary in Tui.

=== Ukraine ===
* Latin Diocese of Kyiv-Zhytomyr has a Co-Cathedral of St. Alexander, Kyiv, besides the Cathedral of St. Sophia, in Zhytomyr.
* Latin diocese of Kharkiv-Zaporizhzhia has a Co-Cathedral of the Merciful Father, Zaporizhzhia, besides the Cathedral of the Blessed Virgin Mary in Kharkiv
* The Roman Catholic Diocese of Odesa-Simferopol plans a co-cathedral in Simferopol, on Crimea, besides its Odesa cathedral, but suspended building plans after the Russian annexation

== Catholic Asia ==
=== Indonesia ===
* The Diocese of Sibolga has a co-Cathedral named The Lady of All Nations in Gunungsitoli, Nias, besides the Cathedral of Therese of Lisieux in Sibolga.

=== India ===
* The Diocese of Simla and Chandigarh has a co-Cathedral, Christ the King Cathedral, at Chandigarh, which never was a diocese, besides the cathedral episcopal see of St. Michael and St. Joseph in Shimla, the capital of Himachal Pradesh state.
*After the merger of the ecclesiastical provinces of Madras and Mylapore in 1952 to form the Archdiocese of Madras-Mylapore. The cathedral of the former Mylapore province was given Co-cathedral standard and is now known as St Mary&#x27;s Co-Cathedral.

=== Japan ===

* The co-Cathedral The Basilica of the Twenty-Six Holy Martyrs of Japan, in Nagasaki also known as Ōura Cathedral, a World Heritage Site, and the oldest church in Japan. Nearby is the Immaculate Conception Cathedral, also known as Urakami Cathedral.

=== Korea ===

* The Archdiocese of Daegu has, besides the Kyesan Cathedral, a new co-cathedral, Beomeo Cathedral.
* The Diocese of Suwon has a cathedral of Korean Martyrs in Jeongjadong and a co-cathedral of Queen of Peace in Jowon-dong

=== Philippines ===
* The Archdiocese of Lingayen-Dagupan has a cathedral in Dagupan, Pangasinan and the original cathedral, now co-cathedral, the Epiphany of Our Lord Parish Church in Lingayen.

=== Syria ===
* The Melkite Greek Catholic Archeparchy of Homs has in Yabrud (one of the two former eparchs which were title united with the diocese) the co-cathedral of Saints Constantine and Helen, besides its Cathedral of Our Lady of Peace in Homs.

=== Asian Turkey ===
* The Apostolic Vicariate of Anatolia has a Co-Cathedral of St. Anthony of Padua, in Mersin, besides the Marian episcopal see Cathedral of the Annunciation, in İskenderun (Alexandretta).

== Catholic Africa ==

=== Egypt ===
The Latin Apostolic Vicariate of Alexandria had a St. Catherine cathedral in Alexandria and two co-cathedrals: the former cathedrals of the merged-in apostolic vicariates of Heliopolis of Egypt (Our Lady, in that Cairo suburb) and of Port Said (Our Lady and St. Michael in that Sinai Canal port).

=== Ghana ===
The Diocese of Keta–Akatsi has its co-cathedral at first-named Keta, the cathedral is in second-named Akatsi.

== Catholic Central America and Antilles ==
=== Belize ===
* Our Lady of Guadalupe Co-Cathedral in Belmopan is the diocesan co-cathedral of Belize City-Belmopan since the national capital was shifted to Belmopan, which was added to the bishopric&#x27;s title, but the see and Holy Redeemer Cathedral remained in former capital Belize City.

=== Guatemala ===
* The Metropolitan Archdiocese of Los Altos Quetzaltenango-Totonicapán has a Cocatedral, San Miguel Arcángel, in Totonicapán, besides the episcopal see Catedral del Espíritu Santo, in Quetzaltenango.
* The diocese of Zacapa y Santo Cristo de Esquipulas has catedral San Pedro (dedicated to saint Peter), in Zacapa and a virtual Co-cathedral, Basílica del Cristo Negro de Esquipulas, which is officially still the cathedral of the (absorbed) Territorial Prelature of Santo Cristo de Esquipulas.

=== Martinique ===
* The Metropolitan Archdiocese of Fort-de-France–Saint-Pierre has a co-cathedral &quot;Co-cathédrale&quot; Notre Dame de l&#x27;Assomption, in Saint-Pierre, besides the cathedral Cathédrale Saint-Louis, in Fort-de-France.

=== St. Kitts and Nevis ===
* The Diocese of Saint John&#x27;s–Basseterre has a cathedral, Holy Family Cathedral, in St John&#x27;s, Antigua, and a co-cathedral, Basseterre Co-Cathedral of Immaculate Conception, in Basseterre, St. Kitts.

== Catholic South America ==
=== Brazil ===
* The bishop of Primavera do Leste–Paranatinga has a Co-Cathedral São Francisco Xavier, in Paranatinga, besides its episcopal see Catedral São Cristóvão, in Primavera do Leste.

=== Chile ===
* The Apostolic Vicariate of Aysén has an Our Lady of Sorrows Co-cathedral in Coyhaique besides its Saint Therese of Lisieux Cathedral in Puerto Aysén.

=== Peru ===
* The Roman Catholic Diocese of Tacna and Moquegua has a St. Dominic Co-cathedral in Moquegua besides its Our Lady of the Rosary Cathedral in Tacna.

=== Uruguay ===
* The Armenian Catholic Apostolic Exarchate of Latin America and Mexico has a Cathedral Catedral Armênia São Gregório Iluminador, in São Paulo, Brazil and a Co-Cathedral Nuestra Señora de Bzommar, in Montevideo, Uruguay,

== Catholic Oceania ==
=== Australia ===
* The Maronite Catholic Eparchy of Saint Maron of Sydney has Our Lady of Lebanon Co-Cathedral in Harris Park, New South Wales, besides St. Maron&#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney.
* The Roman Catholic Diocese of Wollongong has St John Vianney Co-Cathedral in Fairy Meadow, New South Wales.

=== Papua New Guinea ===
* The Archdiocese of Rabaul has besides its episcopal see -a cathedral in Vunapope- St Francis Xavier&#x27;s Co-Cathedral, in the national capital Rabaul.

=== Polynesia ===
* The Archdiocese of Samoa-Apia Co-Cathedral is Our Lady of the Rosary at Siusega, together with the Cathedral of the Immaculate Heart in the capital, Apia in Upolu.
*The Diocese of Samoa–Pago Pago has a Co-Cathedral of St. Joseph the Worker in Fagatogo besides the Cathedral of the Holy Family in Tafuna, on Tutuila Island

== United Kingdom ==

===Catholic Church===
The Archdiocese of Liverpool includes a co-cathedral on the Isle of Man, the St. Mary of the Isle Church.

=== Church of England ===
Prior to the Protestant Reformation, the dioceses of &#x27;Bath and Wells&#x27; and &#x27;Coventry and Lichfield&#x27; were the only co-cathedrals in England.

Only one diocese of the Church of England has co-cathedrals; in the Anglican Diocese of Leeds there are three co-cathedrals, Ripon, Bradford and Wakefield. The Diocese of Leeds was formed in 2014 by the merger of the former Anglican dioceses of Bradford, Ripon, and Wakefield, with all three former diocesan cathedrals given co-equal status in the new diocese.

In the case of York the collegiate churches of Beverley, Ripon and Southwell were almost in the same position, but although the archbishop had a stall in each, he had no diocesan cathedra in them. The chapters were not united with that of the metropolitan church in the direct government of the diocese, or the election of the archbishop, nor had they those other rights which were held to denote the cathedral character of a church.

=== Scottish Episcopal Church ===
The Diocese of Argyll and The Isles of the Scottish Episcopal Church has two co-cathedrals: St John&#x27;s Cathedral, Oban and Cathedral of The Isles, Millport, Cumbrae. It is the only diocese to have more than one cathedral.

== North America ==
=== Catholic Church ===
In the United States, there are several instances in which a Roman Catholic diocese maintains two episcopal see cities, each with its own cathedral or co-cathedral. Examples include:
* the Cathedral of Saint Paul and the Basilica of Saint Mary in the Archdiocese of Saint Paul and Minneapolis (Minnesota).
* the Archdiocese of Galveston–Houston (Texas).
* the Archdiocese of Anchorage-Juneau (Alaska).
* the Diocese of Altoona–Johnstown (Pennsylvania).
* the Diocese of Fort Wayne–South Bend (Indiana).
* the Diocese of Great Falls–Billings (Montana).
* the Diocese of Houma–Thibodaux (Louisiana).
* the Diocese of Kansas City–Saint Joseph (Missouri).
* the Diocese of Pensacola–Tallahassee (Florida).
* the Diocese of Springfield–Cape Girardeau (Missouri).
* the Diocese of Wheeling–Charleston (West Virginia).
* the Diocese of Winona–Rochester (Minnesota).

In some cases the co-cathedrals are in different municipalities, but the diocese&#x27;s name does not reflect the dual cathedral status. For example:
* the Diocese of Trenton (New Jersey) the cathedral, St. Mary of the Assumption in Trenton, and the co-cathedral, St. Robert Bellarmine in Freehold, 
* the Melkite Greek Catholic Eparchy of Newton with its co-cathedrals, the Annunciation Melkite Catholic Cathedral in Boston, Massachusetts on the East Coast and the St. Anne Melkite Catholic Cathedral (North Hollywood, California) on the West Coast.

There are also three instances in the United States in which a cathedral and its co-cathedral are in the same city. This usually occurs when a historically important cathedral becomes too small to serve a growing population, and a larger co-cathedral is constructed to accommodate larger services. Examples include:
* The Cathedral Basilica of Our Lady of Peace and the Co-Cathedral of Saint Theresa of the Child Jesus in the Diocese of Honolulu, Hawaii.
* The Cathedral of Mary Our Queen and the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary (originally the cathedral and now the co-cathedral) in the Archdiocese of Baltimore, Maryland.
* The Cathedral Basilica of St. James and the Co-Cathedral of St. Joseph in the Diocese of Brooklyn, New York.

Examples in Canada are:
* The Archdiocese of Halifax-Yarmouth, Nova Scotia, has the absorbed diocese&#x27;s former see, St. Ambrose Co-Cathedral in Yarmouth, besides the Metropolitan&#x27;s own cathedral minor basilica, St. Mary&#x27;s Cathedral Basilica in Halifax.
* The Cathedral of Saint-Jean-l&#x27;Évangéliste and the Co-Cathedral of Saint-Antoine-de-Padoue in the Diocese of Saint-Jean-Longueuil, Quebec.
* Our Lady of Assumption Co-Cathedral in the former Gravelbourg Diocese, and the Holy Rosary Cathedral (Regina, Saskatchewan) both now in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Regina, in the province of Saskatchewan.
* The Holy Family Cathedral and St. Paul&#x27;s Cathedral in the Diocese of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.

=== Episcopal Church (United States) ===
In the Episcopal Church in the United States, the Diocese of Iowa and the Diocese of Minnesota each have two cathedrals, both located in different cities; however, they are not styled &quot;co-cathedrals.&quot; The Diocese of Lexington maintains a second cathedral of the Cathedral Church of St. George the Martyr at their Cathedral Domain conference center and camp in Irvine, Kentucky, but they do not use the term &quot;co-cathedral&quot; to describe it.

== See also ==
* Pro-cathedral
* List of the Catholic cathedrals of the United States

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2577114" start="2" end="14" title="Co-cathedral" label="co-cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="20" end="29" title="cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="74" end="80" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138500" start="103" end="111" title="cathedra" label="cathedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="297" end="319" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="327" end="334" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="345" end="349" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q212283" start="354" end="359" title="Wells, Somerset" label="Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="380" end="388" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207371" start="393" end="402" title="Lichfield" label="Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q533794" start="1196" end="1239" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Tirana-Durrës" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Tirana-Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q83285" start="1262" end="1268" title="Durrës" label="Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q326330" start="1347" end="1356" title="primate (bishop)" label="primatial"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092186" start="1357" end="1404" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Mechelen-Brussels" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Mechelen-Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086358" start="1425" end="1453" title="St. Rumbold&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St. Rumbold&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="1457" end="1465" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q269654" start="1526" end="1565" title="Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula" label="Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1569" end="1577" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846867" start="1675" end="1689" title="minor basilica" label="minor basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563536" start="1806" end="1849" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Sofia and Plovdiv" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Sofia and Plovdiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q459" start="1892" end="1899" title="Plovdiv" label="Plovdiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="1937" end="1942" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365624" start="1995" end="2009" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Split-Makarska" label="Split-Makarska"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="2056" end="2079" title="Saint Peter the Apostle" label="Saint Peter the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q936243" start="2193" end="2206" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Đakovo-Osijek" label="Đakovo-Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="2215" end="2221" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442727" start="2275" end="2301" title="Osijek Co-cathedral" label="Crkva svetog Petra i Pavla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164263" start="2390" end="2429" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Ostrava-Opava" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Ostrava-Opava"/>
<link wikidata="Q866776" start="2604" end="2629" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Aire and Dax" label="bishopric of Aire and Dax"/>
<link wikidata="Q188878" start="2666" end="2669" title="Dax, Landes" label="Dax"/>
<link wikidata="Q408608" start="2712" end="2716" title="Aire-sur-l&amp;#x27;Adour" label="Aire"/>
<link wikidata="Q868176" start="2881" end="2900" title="bishop of Couserans" label="bishop of Couserans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="2926" end="2943" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q322771" start="2978" end="2990" title="Saint-Lizier" label="Saint-Lizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q876593" start="2997" end="3015" title="bishop of Sisteron" label="bishop of Sisteron"/>
<link wikidata="Q104431" start="3077" end="3088" title="Forcalquier" label="Forcalquier"/>
<link wikidata="Q837110" start="3166" end="3200" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Augsburg" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10417" start="3248" end="3257" title="Dillingen (district)" label="Dillingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="3308" end="3316" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q702389" start="3323" end="3364" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Dresden-Meissen" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Dresden-Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14835" start="3402" end="3409" title="Bautzen" label="Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="3454" end="3461" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q219133" start="3468" end="3517" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Munich and Freising" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Munich and Freising"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998" start="3569" end="3577" title="Freising" label="Freising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="3614" end="3620" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q835426" start="3628" end="3674" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Rottenburg-Stuttgart" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Rottenburg-Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="3715" end="3724" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078" start="3760" end="3780" title="Rottenburg am Neckar" label="Rottenburg am Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="Q734693" start="3837" end="3885" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Esztergom-Budapest" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Esztergom-Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q991832" start="3958" end="3979" title="Basilica of Esztergom" label="Basilica of Esztergom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="4039" end="4047" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q866766" start="4071" end="4094" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Adria-Rovigo" label="Diocese of Adria-Rovigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q134666" start="4178" end="4192" title="Pope Stephen I" label="Pope Stephen I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572" start="4196" end="4202" title="Rovigo" label="Rovigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34615" start="4239" end="4244" title="Adria" label="Adria"/>
<link wikidata="Q841847" start="4330" end="4368" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Alghero-Bosa" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Alghero-Bosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q385538" start="4497" end="4501" title="Bosa" label="Bosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="4610" end="4617" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363971" start="4624" end="4663" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Amalfi-Cava de&amp;#x27; Tirreni" label="Diocese of Amalfi–Cava de&amp;#x27; Tirreni"/>
<link wikidata="Q691810" start="4697" end="4715" title="Visitation of Mary" label="Visitation of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19272" start="4719" end="4740" title="Cava de&amp;#x27; Tirreni" label="Cava de&amp;#x27; Tirreni"/>
<link wikidata="Q80563" start="4785" end="4791" title="Amalfi" label="Amalfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q741144" start="4810" end="4818" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Avezzano" label="Avezzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q50122" start="4887" end="4894" title="Pescina" label="Pescina"/>
<link wikidata="Q209614" start="4901" end="4948" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Campobasso-Boiano" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Campobasso-Boiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q871439" start="4998" end="5036" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Lucera-Troia" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Lucera-Troia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51965" start="5079" end="5084" title="Troia, Apulia" label="Troia"/>
<link wikidata="Q872230" start="5138" end="5169" title="Diocese of Melfi–Rapolla–Venosa" label="Diocese of Melfi–Rapolla–Venosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30565" start="5256" end="5261" title="Melfi" label="Melfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q52691" start="5316" end="5322" title="Venosa" label="Venosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q52644" start="5370" end="5377" title="Rapolla" label="Rapolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q872480" start="5384" end="5443" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Molfetta-Ruvo-Giovinazzo-Terlizzi" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Molfetta-Ruvo-Giovinazzo-Terlizzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19300" start="5463" end="5471" title="Molfetta" label="Molfetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q51848" start="5499" end="5503" title="Ruvo di Puglia" label="Ruvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51828" start="5505" end="5515" title="Giovinazzo" label="Giovinazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51852" start="5520" end="5528" title="Terlizzi" label="Terlizzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q874285" start="5535" end="5588" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Pitigliano-Sovana-Orbetello" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Pitigliano-Sovana-Orbetello"/>
<link wikidata="Q214929" start="5626" end="5636" title="Pitigliano" label="Pitigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q214849" start="5676" end="5685" title="Orbetello" label="Orbetello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015333" start="5692" end="5722" title="Archdiocese of Rossano–Cariati" label="Archdiocese of Rossano–Cariati"/>
<link wikidata="Q53952" start="5773" end="5780" title="Rossano" label="Rossano"/>
<link wikidata="Q53850" start="5828" end="5835" title="Cariati" label="Cariati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365539" start="5842" end="5907" title="Archdiocese of Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo dei Lombardi-Conza-Nusco-Bisaccia" label="Archdiocese of Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo dei Lombardi-Conza-Nusco-Bisaccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55103" start="5929" end="5958" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo dei Lombardi" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo dei Lombardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55031" start="6015" end="6032" title="Conza di Campania" label="Conza di Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278951" start="6034" end="6039" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Nusco" label="Nusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q21556522" start="6044" end="6052" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Bisaccia" label="Bisaccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q762255" start="6059" end="6089" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Teggiano-Policastro" label="Diocese of Teggiano-Policastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q610420" start="6130" end="6151" title="Policastro Bussentino" label="Policastro Bussentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q81728" start="6223" end="6231" title="Teggiano" label="Teggiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q361714" start="6239" end="6264" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Termoli-Larino" label="Diocese of Termoli-Larino"/>
<link wikidata="Q118642" start="6286" end="6293" title="Termoli" label="Termoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q277643" start="6316" end="6322" title="Larino" label="Larino"/>
<link wikidata="Q664066" start="6373" end="6408" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Malta" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630170" start="6412" end="6437" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Mdina" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q207277" start="6460" end="6465" title="Mdina" label="Mdina"/>
<link wikidata="Q23800" start="6528" end="6536" title="Valletta" label="Valletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q613619" start="6555" end="6583" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Co-Cathedral" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Co-Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q878361" start="6607" end="6648" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Zamość-Lubaczów" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Zamość-Lubaczów"/>
<link wikidata="Q145972" start="6715" end="6721" title="Zamość" label="Zamość"/>
<link wikidata="Q931022" start="6762" end="6770" title="Lubaczów" label="Lubaczów"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365626" start="6777" end="6822" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Szczecin-Kamień" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Szczecin-Kamień"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521609" start="6967" end="7012" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Zielona Góra-Gorzów" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Zielona Góra-Gorzów"/>
<link wikidata="Q870725" start="7115" end="7159" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Koszalin-Kołobrzeg" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Koszalin-Kołobrzeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q62868" start="7179" end="7187" title="Koszalin" label="Koszalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q535980" start="7240" end="7276" title="Co-Cathedral of St. Nicholas, Prešov" label="Co-Cathedral of St. Nicholas, Prešov"/>
<link wikidata="Q867547" start="7298" end="7339" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Calahorra y La Calzada-Logroño" label="Diocese of Calahorra y La Calzada-Logroño"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627991" start="7346" end="7369" title="Co-Cathedral of Logroño" label="Co-Cathedral of St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14325" start="7373" end="7380" title="Logroño" label="Logroño"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942608" start="7393" end="7432" title="Calahorra Cathedral" label="Cathedral of the Assumption of Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q642046" start="7436" end="7445" title="Calahorra" label="Calahorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q824122" start="7450" end="7486" title="Tui, Pontevedra" label="Cathedral of the Saviour and St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q646564" start="7490" end="7517" title="Santo Domingo de la Calzada" label="Santo Domingo de la Calzada"/>
<link wikidata="Q186419" start="7525" end="7549" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Coria-Cáceres" label="Diocese of Coria-Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942653" start="7557" end="7579" title="Co-Cathedral of Cáceres" label="o-Cathedral of St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15678" start="7583" end="7590" title="Cáceres, Spain" label="Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942648" start="7603" end="7642" title="Coria Cathedral" label="Cathedral of the Assumption of Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q142778" start="7646" end="7651" title="Coria, Cáceres" label="Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q869254" start="7658" end="7680" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Guadix" label="Diocese of Guadix-Baza"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7732" end="7734" title=":es:Iglesia Mayor de Baza" label="es"/>
<link wikidata="Q490472" start="7739" end="7743" title="Baza, Granada" label="Baza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942680" start="7756" end="7784" title="Guadix Cathedral" label="Cathedral of the Incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q244324" start="7788" end="7794" title="Guadix" label="Guadix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365113" start="7801" end="7830" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Mérida-Badajoz" label="Archdiocese of Mérida-Badajoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q923396" start="7837" end="7869" title="Co-Cathedral of Saint Mary Major, Mérida" label="Co-Cathedral of Saint Mary Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q14323" start="7873" end="7879" title="Mérida, Spain" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942592" start="7892" end="7924" title="Badajoz Cathedral" label="Cathedral of St John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15679" start="7928" end="7935" title="Badajoz" label="Badajoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q610448" start="7942" end="7969" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Mondoñedo-Ferrol" label="Diocese of Mondoñedo-Ferrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942662" start="7976" end="8001" title="Ferrol Co-Cathedral" label="Co-Cathedral of St Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q485329" start="8005" end="8011" title="Ferrol, Spain" label="Ferrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942729" start="8023" end="8071" title="Mondoñedo Cathedral" label="Cathedral Basilica of the Assumption of Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q840362" start="8075" end="8084" title="Mondoñedo" label="Mondoñedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q873524" start="8091" end="8119" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Orihuela-Alicante" label="Diocese of Orihuela-Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942405" start="8126" end="8160" title="Concatedral de San Nicolás, Alicante" label="Co-Catedral of St Nicholas of Bary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11959" start="8164" end="8172" title="Alicante" label="Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942573" start="8185" end="8221" title="Orihuela Cathedral" label="Cathedral of the Saviour and St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q487786" start="8225" end="8233" title="Orihuela" label="Orihuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q873575" start="8240" end="8261" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Osma-Soria" label="Diocese of Osma-Soria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942449" start="8268" end="8292" title="Co-Cathedral of San Pedro, Soria" label="Co-Cathedral of St Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12155" start="8296" end="8301" title="Soria" label="Soria"/>
<link wikidata="Q509931" start="8314" end="8353" title="Burgo de Osma Cathedral" label="Cathedral of the Assumption of Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q485129" start="8357" end="8370" title="Burgo de Osma-Ciudad de Osma" label="Burgo de Osma"/>
<link wikidata="Q876309" start="8377" end="8405" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Segorbe-Castellón" label="Diocese of Segorbe-Castellón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942630" start="8412" end="8435" title="Castelló Cathedral" label="Co-Cathedral os St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15092" start="8439" end="8460" title="Castellón de la Plana" label="Castellón de la Plana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942814" start="8473" end="8512" title="Segorbe Cathedral" label="Cathedral of the Assumption of Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q750968" start="8516" end="8523" title="Segorbe" label="Segorbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q876525" start="8530" end="8561" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Sigüenza-Guadalajara" label="Diocese of Sigüenza-Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826864" start="8568" end="8617" title="Co-Cathedral of Guadalajara, Spain" label="Co-Cathedral of Santa María de la Fuente la Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11953" start="8621" end="8632" title="Guadalajara, Spain" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942824" start="8645" end="8665" title="Sigüenza Cathedral" label="Cathedral of St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q47475" start="8669" end="8677" title="Sigüenza" label="Sigüenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q877568" start="8684" end="8703" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Tui-Vigo" label="Diocese of Tui-Vigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942858" start="8710" end="8733" title="Co-Cathedral of Santa María, Vigo" label="Co-Cathedral of St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8745" start="8737" end="8741" title="Vigo" label="Vigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575647" start="8754" end="8774" title="Tui Cathedral" label="Cathedral of St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q824122" start="8778" end="8781" title="Tui, Pontevedra" label="Tui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093733" start="8839" end="8874" title="Co-Cathedral of St. Alexander, Kyiv" label="Co-Cathedral of St. Alexander, Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q156713" start="8916" end="8924" title="Zhytomyr" label="Zhytomyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380284" start="8972" end="9021" title="Co-Cathedral of the Merciful Father, Zaporizhzhia" label="Co-Cathedral of the Merciful Father, Zaporizhzhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q876495" start="9311" end="9329" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Sibolga" label="Diocese of Sibolga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967" start="9382" end="9394" title="Gunungsitoli" label="Gunungsitoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q505707" start="9396" end="9400" title="Nias" label="Nias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984" start="9449" end="9456" title="Sibolga" label="Sibolga"/>
<link wikidata="Q876536" start="9479" end="9510" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Simla and Chandigarh" label="Diocese of Simla and Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="9561" end="9571" title="Chandigarh" label="Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83786" start="9669" end="9675" title="Shimla" label="Shimla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="9692" end="9708" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q333313" start="9809" end="9839" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Madras and Mylapore" label="Archdiocese of Madras-Mylapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586666" start="9939" end="9966" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Co-Cathedral" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Co-Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q430626" start="10003" end="10055" title="Basilica of the Twenty-Six Holy Martyrs of Japan (Nagasaki)" label="The Basilica of the Twenty-Six Holy Martyrs of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="10060" end="10068" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="10101" end="10120" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q571980" start="10168" end="10199" title="Immaculate Conception Cathedral, Nagasaki" label="Immaculate Conception Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q489791" start="10256" end="10276" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Daegu" label="Archdiocese of Daegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583994" start="10294" end="10310" title="Our Lady of Lourdes Cathedral, Daegu" label="Kyesan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q489376" start="10356" end="10372" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Suwon" label="Diocese of Suwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122436" start="10500" end="10531" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Lingayen-Dagupan" label="Archdiocese of Lingayen-Dagupan"/>
<link wikidata="Q875070" start="10551" end="10570" title="Dagupan, Pangasinan" label="Dagupan, Pangasinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906210" start="10621" end="10655" title="Epiphany of Our Lord Parish Church" label="Epiphany of Our Lord Parish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q41978" start="10659" end="10667" title="Lingayen" label="Lingayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366013" start="10690" end="10732" title="Melkite Greek Catholic Archeparchy of Homs" label="Melkite Greek Catholic Archeparchy of Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q172251" start="10740" end="10746" title="Yabroud" label="Yabrud"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="10916" end="10920" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q620240" start="10950" end="10981" title="Apostolic Vicariate of Anatolia" label="Apostolic Vicariate of Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134291" start="11029" end="11035" title="Mersin" label="Mersin"/>
<link wikidata="Q620237" start="11179" end="11212" title="Apostolic Vicariate of Alexandria" label="Apostolic Vicariate of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23760916" start="11364" end="11372" title="Our Lady of Heliopolis Co-Cathedral" label="Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471408" start="11544" end="11548" title="Keta" label="Keta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700362" start="11583" end="11589" title="Akatsi" label="Akatsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q736339" start="11732" end="11752" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Belize City-Belmopan" label="Belize City-Belmopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043" start="11795" end="11803" title="Belmopan" label="Belmopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108223" start="11919" end="11930" title="Belize City" label="Belize City"/>
<link wikidata="Q143761" start="11970" end="12021" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Altos Quetzaltenango-Totonicapán" label="Archdiocese of Los Altos Quetzaltenango-Totonicapán"/>
<link wikidata="Q837035" start="12064" end="12075" title="Totonicapán" label="Totonicapán"/>
<link wikidata="Q334577" start="12135" end="12149" title="Quetzaltenango" label="Quetzaltenango"/>
<link wikidata="Q878299" start="12157" end="12203" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Zacapa y Santo Cristo de Esquipulas" label="diocese of Zacapa y Santo Cristo de Esquipulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q139179" start="12258" end="12264" title="Zacapa" label="Zacapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8243752" start="12293" end="12332" title="Cathedral Basilica of Esquipulas" label="Basílica del Cristo Negro de Esquipulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405493" start="12392" end="12443" title="Roman Catholic Territorial Prelature of Santo Cristo de Esquípulas" label="Territorial Prelature of Santo Cristo de Esquipulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q875435" start="12722" end="12761" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Saint John&amp;#x27;s–Basseterre" label="Diocese of Saint John&amp;#x27;s–Basseterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q36262" start="12805" end="12828" title="St John&amp;#x27;s, Antigua" label="St John&amp;#x27;s, Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868078" start="12850" end="12898" title="Basseterre Co-Cathedral of Immaculate Conception" label="Basseterre Co-Cathedral of Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q41295" start="12903" end="12913" title="Basseterre" label="Basseterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17280150" start="12987" end="13017" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Primavera do Leste–Paranatinga" label="Primavera do Leste–Paranatinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805618" start="13062" end="13073" title="Paranatinga" label="Paranatinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012361" start="13128" end="13146" title="Primavera do Leste" label="Primavera do Leste"/>
<link wikidata="Q620251" start="13169" end="13197" title="Apostolic Vicariate of Aysén" label="Apostolic Vicariate of Aysén"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810" start="13241" end="13250" title="Coyhaique" label="Coyhaique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909281" start="13301" end="13313" title="Puerto Aysén" label="Puerto Aysén"/>
<link wikidata="Q877010" start="13335" end="13379" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Tacna and Moquegua" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Tacna and Moquegua"/>
<link wikidata="Q26822930" start="13386" end="13410" title="St. Dominic Cathedral, Moquegua" label="St. Dominic Co-cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000346" start="13414" end="13422" title="Moquegua" label="Moquegua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758603" start="13435" end="13467" title="Our Lady of the Rosary Cathedral, Tacna" label="Our Lady of the Rosary Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q272795" start="13471" end="13476" title="Tacna" label="Tacna"/>
<link wikidata="Q620192" start="13501" end="13566" title="Armenian Catholic Apostolic Exarchate of Latin America and Mexico" label="Armenian Catholic Apostolic Exarchate of Latin America and Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q511379" start="13764" end="13814" title="Maronite Catholic Eparchy of Saint Maron of Sydney" label="Maronite Catholic Eparchy of Saint Maron of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635148" start="13855" end="13883" title="Harris Park, New South Wales" label="Harris Park, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q27925096" start="13893" end="13927" title="St. Maron&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney" label="St. Maron&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q878103" start="13935" end="13971" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Wollongong" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Wollongong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430967" start="14008" end="14037" title="Fairy Meadow, New South Wales" label="Fairy Meadow, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365359" start="14071" end="14092" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Rabaul" label="Archdiocese of Rabaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q875649" start="14410" end="14436" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Samoa–Pago Pago" label="Diocese of Samoa–Pago Pago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257213" start="14484" end="14492" title="Fagatogo" label="Fagatogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019488" start="14537" end="14543" title="Tafuna" label="Tafuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q269205" start="14548" end="14562" title="Tutuila Island" label="Tutuila Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364855" start="14612" end="14636" title="Archdiocese of Liverpool" label="Archdiocese of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="14668" end="14679" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q24454628" start="14685" end="14712" title="St. Mary of the Isle Church" label="St. Mary of the Isle Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="14925" end="14942" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763489" start="14969" end="14994" title="Anglican Diocese of Leeds" label="Anglican Diocese of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q638466" start="15026" end="15031" title="Ripon Cathedral" label="Ripon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454607" start="15033" end="15041" title="Bradford Cathedral" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363343" start="15046" end="15055" title="Wakefield Cathedral" label="Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397541" start="15146" end="15154" title="Diocese of Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028615" start="15156" end="15161" title="Diocese of Ripon" label="Ripon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028653" start="15167" end="15176" title="Diocese of Wakefield" label="Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="15278" end="15282" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="15287" end="15304" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q851660" start="15310" end="15318" title="Beverley Minster" label="Beverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q638466" start="15320" end="15325" title="Ripon Minster" label="Ripon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492345" start="15330" end="15339" title="Southwell Minster" label="Southwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028665" start="15736" end="15767" title="Diocese of Argyll and The Isles (Episcopal)" label="Diocese of Argyll and The Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="15775" end="15800" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Scottish Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942356" start="15824" end="15848" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Oban" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="15850" end="15854" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942897" start="15859" end="15881" title="Cathedral of The Isles" label="Cathedral of The Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q391948" start="15883" end="15900" title="Millport, Cumbrae" label="Millport, Cumbrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="16010" end="16023" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16064" end="16078" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="16101" end="16114" title="episcopal see" label="episcopal see"/>
<link wikidata="Q655014" start="16192" end="16215" title="Cathedral of Saint Paul (Minnesota)" label="Cathedral of Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q810079" start="16224" end="16246" title="Basilica of Saint Mary (Minneapolis)" label="Basilica of Saint Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365460" start="16254" end="16295" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Saint Paul and Minneapolis" label="Archdiocese of Saint Paul and Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q538791" start="16330" end="16347" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston–Houston" label="Galveston–Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363988" start="16378" end="16394" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Anchorage-Juneau" label="Anchorage-Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q526146" start="16422" end="16439" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Altoona–Johnstown" label="Altoona–Johnstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q868925" start="16473" end="16494" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne–South Bend" label="Fort Wayne–South Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q45511" start="16523" end="16543" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Great Falls–Billings" label="Great Falls–Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q869492" start="16572" end="16587" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Houma–Thibodaux" label="Houma–Thibodaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q870329" start="16618" end="16642" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Kansas City–Saint Joseph" label="Kansas City–Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q874098" start="16672" end="16693" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Pensacola–Tallahassee" label="Pensacola–Tallahassee"/>
<link wikidata="Q119608" start="16722" end="16748" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Springfield–Cape Girardeau" label="Springfield–Cape Girardeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q572044" start="16778" end="16797" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Wheeling–Charleston" label="Wheeling–Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q878090" start="16832" end="16848" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Winona–Rochester" label="Winona–Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q877475" start="17030" end="17037" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Trenton" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052412" start="17066" end="17092" title="Cathedral of St. Mary of the Assumption (Trenton, New Jersey)" label="St. Mary of the Assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="17096" end="17103" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468967" start="17127" end="17148" title="Co-Cathedral of St. Robert Bellarmine" label="St. Robert Bellarmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077969" start="17152" end="17160" title="Freehold Township, New Jersey" label="Freehold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346561" start="17169" end="17209" title="Melkite Greek Catholic Eparchy of Newton" label="Melkite Greek Catholic Eparchy of Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769775" start="17238" end="17277" title="Annunciation Melkite Catholic Cathedral" label="Annunciation Melkite Catholic Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="17281" end="17302" title="Boston" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q104866494" start="17329" end="17394" title="St. Anne Melkite Catholic Cathedral (North Hollywood, California)" label="St. Anne Melkite Catholic Cathedral (North Hollywood, California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052335" start="17737" end="17776" title="Cathedral Basilica of Our Lady of Peace" label="Cathedral Basilica of Our Lady of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137402" start="17785" end="17833" title="Co-Cathedral of Saint Theresa of the Child Jesus (Honolulu, Hawaii)" label="Co-Cathedral of Saint Theresa of the Child Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681149" start="17841" end="17860" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Honolulu" label="Diocese of Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052323" start="17876" end="17903" title="Cathedral of Mary Our Queen, Baltimore" label="Cathedral of Mary Our Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968407" start="17912" end="17988" title="Basilica of the National Shrine of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Basilica of the National Shrine of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364093" start="18048" end="18072" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Baltimore" label="Archdiocese of Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052191" start="18090" end="18121" title="Cathedral Basilica of St. James (Brooklyn)" label="Cathedral Basilica of St. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706230" start="18130" end="18156" title="Co-Cathedral of St. Joseph (Brooklyn)" label="Co-Cathedral of St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q867353" start="18164" end="18183" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn" label="Diocese of Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364577" start="18226" end="18257" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Halifax-Yarmouth" label="Archdiocese of Halifax-Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18400" end="18414" title="Basilicas in the Catholic Church#Minor basilicas" label="minor basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q908976" start="18416" end="18450" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Basilica (Halifax, Nova Scotia)" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942354" start="18469" end="18511" title="Cathedral of Saint-Jean-l&amp;#x27;Évangéliste" label="Cathedral of Saint-Jean-l&amp;#x27;Évangéliste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981227" start="18520" end="18559" title="Co-Cathedral of Saint-Antoine-de-Padoue" label="Co-Cathedral of Saint-Antoine-de-Padoue"/>
<link wikidata="Q202768" start="18567" end="18598" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Saint-Jean-Longueuil" label="Diocese of Saint-Jean-Longueuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110757" start="18610" end="18645" title="Our Lady of Assumption Co-Cathedral" label="Our Lady of Assumption Co-Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4425999" start="18689" end="18733" title="Holy Rosary Cathedral (Regina, Saskatchewan)" label="Holy Rosary Cathedral (Regina, Saskatchewan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365380" start="18750" end="18786" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Regina" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Regina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885408" start="18827" end="18848" title="Holy Family Cathedral (Saskatoon)" label="Holy Family Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942421" start="18853" end="18878" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Saskatoon)" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q876256" start="18886" end="18906" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Saskatoon" label="Diocese of Saskatoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="18971" end="18987" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383385" start="19014" end="19029" title="Episcopal Diocese of Iowa" label="Diocese of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383397" start="19038" end="19058" title="Episcopal Church in Minnesota" label="Diocese of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383388" start="19179" end="19199" title="Episcopal Diocese of Lexington" label="Diocese of Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193936" start="19334" end="19350" title="Irvine, Kentucky" label="Irvine, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649060" start="19440" end="19453" title="Pro-cathedral" label="Pro-cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642965" start="19456" end="19508" title="List of the Catholic cathedrals of the United States" label="List of the Catholic cathedrals of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180747" wikidata="Q160420" url="?curid=180747" title="Saga Prefecture">
<text>is a prefecture of Japan located on the island of Kyushu. Saga Prefecture has a population of roughly 800 thousand and has a geographic area of 2,439 km2 (942 sq mi). Saga Prefecture borders Fukuoka Prefecture to the northeast and Nagasaki Prefecture to the southwest.

Saga is the capital and largest city of Saga Prefecture, with other major cities including Karatsu, Tosu, and Imari. Saga Prefecture is located in the northwest of Kyūshū covering an isthmus-like area extending between the Sea of Japan and the Ariake Sea. Saga Prefecture&#x27;s western region is known for the production of ceramics and porcelain, particularly in the towns of Karatsu, Imari, and Arita.

==History==

In ancient times, the area composed by Nagasaki Prefecture and Saga Prefecture was called Hizen Province. The current name dates from the Meiji Restoration. Rice farming culture has prospered here since ancient times, and vestiges can be seen at the ruins of Nabatake in Karatsu and the Yoshinogari site in Yoshinogari.

===Feudal period===


From the Kamakura period to the Muromachi period, it is thought that over 100 feudal clans existed. Also exerting great influence during this time was a samurai clan operating along the Genkai Sea called the Matsuratō. Upon entering the Sengoku period, the Ryūzōji clan expanded their control to include all of Hizen and Chikugo Provinces, and part of Higo and Chikuzen Provinces. After the death of &quot;daimyō&quot; Ryūzōji Takanobu, Nabeshima Naoshige took control of the political situation, and by 1607 all of the Ryūzōji clan&#x27;s domain was under the control of the Nabeshima clan.

In the Edo period this area was called the Saga Domain (佐賀藩 &quot;Saga-han&quot;), and it included three sub-domains: the Hasunoike, Ogi and Kashima Domains. Also within the current borders of Saga Prefecture during this time were the Karatsu Domain (唐津藩 &quot;Karatsu-han&quot;) and two territories of the Tsushima-Fuchū Domain (対馬府中藩 &quot;Tsushimafuchū-han&quot;). Saga Domain and its sub-domains continued to be ruled by the Nabeshima clan, its various illegitimate family lineages and members of the former Ryūzōji clan, and politically the area was relatively stable. The cost of defending Nagasaki was increasing and, difficult from the start, the financial situation was worsened by the great Kyōhō famine and the Siebold Typhoon of 1828. Due to the large area of reclaimed land from the Ariake Sea, arable land was increased significantly and by the 1840s the annual koku of Saga Domain increased to about 670,000, twice that of 200 years before.

Around the middle of the 19th century, Naomasa Nabeshima strove to set right the domain&#x27;s financial affairs, reduce the number of government officials, and encourage local industry such as Arita porcelain, green tea, and coal. Also, thanks to the proximity of the international port of Nagasaki, new technologies were introduced from overseas, such as the reverberatory furnace and models of steam locomotives.

After the Boshin War, many people from Saga Domain assisted in the Meiji Restoration. In the Meiji era the modernization of coal mines in Kishima and Higashimatsuura districts, among others, progressed bolstered by the construction of railroads.

===Timeline===

* 6th century BC (end of the Jōmon period): Estimated date of the Nabatake ruins in Karatsu
* 1st century BC (middle of the Yayoi period): Villages flourished at what is now the Yoshinogari site
* 665: After losing the Battle of Baekgang, Kii Castle (in present-day Kiyama) amassed its defenses to protect Dazaifu.
* 733: Hizen Fudoki created.
* 1274: Battle of Bun&#x27;ei, the first invasion in the Mongol invasions of Japan
* 1281: Battle of Kōan, the second invasion in the Mongol invasions of Japan
* 1591: Construction of Nagoya Castle. After the Japanese invasions of Korea the castle fell in 1598.
* 1602: Construction of Karatsu Castle and Saga Castle.
* 1607: Control of Saga Domain moved from the Ryūzōji clan to the Nabeshima clan.
* 1771: Nijinomatsubara Uprising
* 1781: Establishment of Kōdōkan, the Saga Han school.
* 1828: Heavy damage from the Siebold typhoon, deaths estimated at over 10,000.
* 1871, July 14: Abolition of the han system. All of the han became prefectures.
* 1871, November 14: The prefectures of Saga, Hasuike, Ogi, Kashima, Karatsu and part of Tsushima merged to form one prefecture, Imari Prefecture.
* 1872, May 29: Imari Prefecture renamed Saga Prefecture.
* 1874, February: Saga Rebellion.
* 1876, April 18: Incorporated into Mizuma Prefecture.
* 1876, May and June: Parts of Mizuma Prefecture transferred to Nagasaki Prefecture.
* 1876, August 21: Mizuma Prefecture abolished. Remaining parts incorporated into Nagasaki Prefecture.
* 1883: Saga Prefecture re-established as an independent prefecture, separated from Nagasaki Prefecture.
* 1889, April 1: The city of Saga is founded.
* 1891: The Kyushu Railroad Nagasaki Line opens, beginning with a section from Tosu to Saga.
* 1895: Opening of railroad from Saga to Takeo.
* 1897: Opening of railroad from Takeo to Haiki.
* 1903: Opening of railroad from Saga to Nishi-Karatsu.
* 1932, January 1: The city of Karatsu is founded.
* 1935: The Japanese National Railways Saga Line opens.
* 1954: During the Great Showa Merger the cities of Tosu, Imari, Takeo, Kashima and Taku are formed. At this point there are 7 cities, 8 districts, 18 towns and 35 villages in Saga Prefecture.
* 1972: With the closing of the Nishiki coal mine, all coal mines in Saga are closed.
* 1975: The Genkai Nuclear Power Plant begins operation.
* 1987: The Japanese National Railways Saga Line closes.
* 1992: The Yoshinogari History Park opens to the public.
* 1998: The Saga Airport opens in Kawasoe, in what is now the city of Saga.
* 2005: As a part of the Great Heisei Merger various municipalities are reorganized.
** January 1: Karatsu and Shiroishi.
** March 1: Ogi and Miyaki.
** October 1: Saga.
* 2006: The Great Heisei Merger continues.
** January 1: Karatsu and Ureshino.
** March 1: Takeo, Yoshinogari, and Arita.
** March 20: Kanzaki.
* 2007, October 1: The towns of Higashiyoka, Kawasoe and Kubota merge with the city of Saga.
* 2011, March 12: The Kyushu Shinkansen opens.

==Geography==
Kyushu&#x27;s prefecture, Saga, is located on the northwest corner of the island, bordered by the Genkai Sea and the Tsushima Strait to the north and the Ariake Sea to the south. Saga&#x27;s proximity to mainland Asia has made it an important gateway for the transmission of culture and trade throughout Japanese history. Largely rural outside of the two largest cities of Saga and Karatsu, agricultural and forested lands comprise over 68% of the total prefectural land area. There are six prefectural parks and one quasi-national park in Saga.
* Northernmost point: Enuonohana, Kakarajima, Karatsu – 
* Easternmost point: Iida-machi, Tosu – 
* Southernmost point: Ōurakō, Tara – 
* Westernmost point: Ōse, Madarashima, Karatsu – 

===Geographical features===

====Plains====
*Saga Plains

====Mountains====
* Sefuri Mountains, Tara Mountains
* Mount Kyōga (1,076 m, the highest point in Saga), Mount Sefuri (1,056 m), Tenzan (1,046 m), Taradake (996 m ), Mount Ihara (962 m), Kinzan (957 m), Raizan (955 m), Mount Hagane (900 m)

====Rivers and lakes====
* Chikugo River (15.5 km in Saga), Kase River (57.5 km), Matsuura River (45.3 km), Rokkaku River (43.6 km)
* Hokuzan Dam, Kase River Dam

====Seas====
* East China Sea: Ariake Sea, Isahaya Bay
* Sea of Japan: Genkai Sea, Karatsu Bay, Imari Bay,

====Peninsulas====
* Higashimatsuura Peninsula, part of Kitamatsuura Peninsula

====Islands====
* Genkai Sea: Takashima, Kashiwajima, Ogawajima, Kakarajima, Matsushima, Madarajima, Kabeshima, Mukushima, Iroha Islands
* Ariake Sea: Okinoshima

====Forests====
* Niji-no-Matsubara

====Caves====
* Nanatsugama Caves

===Land use===
Total area: 2439.31 km2
* Forest, rough lands: 49.2% – 1/3 of the national average.
** Forested area: 1096.9 km2 – From 2000, 42nd in the country.
* Arable land: 39.1% – 2 times the national average.
* Residential: 6.8% – 1.4 times the national average.
* Other: 4.9% – Roughly the same as the national average.

As of March 31, 2008, 11% of the total land area of the prefecture was designated as Natural Parks, namely the Genkai Quasi-National Park and Hachimandake, Kawakami-Kinryū, Kurokamiyama, Sefuri-Kitayama, Taradake, and Tenzan Prefectural Natural Parks.

===Climate===
Saga Prefecture has a mild climate with an average temperature of about .

==Municipalities==


As of October 1, 2007, there are 10 cities, six districts, and 10 towns in Saga Prefecture, a total of 20 municipalities. As a part of the Great Heisei Merger, the number of municipalities has decreased since January 1, 2005. On March 20, 2006, the village of Sefuri merged with the city of Kanzaki, leaving Saga with no more villages.

===Cities===
Ten cities are located in Saga Prefecture:
===Towns===
These are the towns in each district:
=== Mergers ===
===Metropolitan areas===
*Karatsu-Higashimatsuura
**Karatsu, Genkai
*Kitō
**Takeo, Kashima, Ureshino, Shiroishi, Ōmachi, Kōhoku, Tara
*Saga
**Saga, Taku, Ogi, Kanzaki
*Tosu
**Tosu, Kamimine, Kiyama, Yoshinogari, Miyaki

==Economy==
Agriculture, forestry, and coastal fisheries form a large portion of the prefectural economy. Regional agricultural specialties include Saga beef, onions, and strawberries. The prefecture is the largest producer of mochigome (sticky rice) and greenhouse mandarin oranges in Japan.

According to 2002 figures, regional trade exports are focused primarily towards North America (29.3%), Western Europe (26.1%), and the Newly Industrializing Economies of South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore (19.9%). Imports come principally from North America (40.6%), the ASEAN nations (23.3%), and the People&#x27;s Republic of China (12.2%).

==Demographics==

In 2002, the census recorded a population of 873,885 in Saga. Of these, 15.9% were aged 0–14, 62.7% were aged 15–64, and 21.4% were over 65 years old. There were 3,596 foreigners (0.4%) and 307 exchange students (0.03%) living in the prefecture.

==Education==
===Universities===

*Kyushu Ryukoku Junior College
*Nishikyushu University
*Nishikyushu University Junior College (former Saga Junior College)
*Saga Prefectural Agricultural College
*Saga University
*Saga Women&#x27;s Junior College

==Transportation==
===Air===
*Saga Airport

===Rail===
Major stations in the prefecture include Saga Station, Tosu Station, Karatsu Station and Imari Station. The new Nishi Kyushu Shinkansen line stops at the Takeo-Onsen Station.
*JR Kyushu
**Chikuhi Line
**Kagoshima Main Line
**Karatsu Line
**Kyushu Shinkansen
**Nagasaki Main Line
**Nishi Kyushu Shinkansen
**Sasebo Line
*Matsuura Railway
**Nishi-Kyūshū Line
*Amagi Railway
**Amagi Line

===Road===
*National highways
**Route 34, Route 35
**Route 202, Route 203, Route 204, Route 207, Route 263, Route 264, Route 323, Route 385, Route 444, Route 498
*Tollways
**Nagasaki Expressway, Kyushu Expressway, Nishi-Kyūshū Expressway
**Nijō-Hamatama Road, Kyūragi-Taku Road, Mitsuse Tunnel

==Culture==
Arita, Imari and Karatsu are famous for the porcelain that is created there. The top porcelain houses in the country are located in these areas, including Imaemon Porcelain, Genemon Porcelain and Fukagawa Porcelain.

==Language==
Saga-ben (Saga dialect) is Saga&#x27;s own variation of Japanese.

==Festivals==

===Balloon Fiesta===
The Saga International Balloon Fiesta is held at the beginning of November every year just outside Saga City along the Kase River. This is a popular event and attracts competitors from all over the world.

===Karatsu Kunchi===
The Karatsu Kunchi is held at the beginning of November in Karatsu City. This is Saga&#x27;s largest festival and attracts around 500,000 visitors every year.

===Kashima Gatalympics===
The Kashima Gatalympics are held every May–June in the city of Kashima. This event involves playing a variety of sports in the mudflats of the Ariake Sea. The Gatalympics are not held if the weather is raining.

===Imari Ton-Ten-Ton Festival===
The Imari Ton-Ten-Ton Festival is held for 3 days every year near the end of October. Located in Imari City, the festival is one of the three great fighting festivals in Japan. In the festival a crashing battle takes place between the two huge portable shrines, the Ara-mikoshi and the Danjiri. The name &quot;Ton-Ten-Ton&quot; represents the sound of drums used in the festival.

==Sports==
===Sports teams===
Teams listed below are based in Saga Prefecture.

Football (soccer)
*Sagan Tosu (Tosu)

Volleyball
*Hisamitsu Springs (Tosu)

Basketball
*Saga Ballooners (Saga)

Baseball
*Saga Indonesia Dreams (Takeo)

==Tourism==

Karatsu, with its fine castle, is a tourist destination in Saga. The remains of a Yayoi village in Yoshinogari also attract large numbers of sightseers. Another place to visit is Yūtoku Inari Shrine, one of Japan&#x27;s three biggest Inari shrines.

The Saga prefecture helped sponsor the 2018 anime &quot;Zombie Land Saga&quot;, which has attracted tourists to various locations showcased in the series, including the museum that doubles in the series as the girls&#x27; house and Drive-In Tori Chicken.

==Notable people==

* Comedian and J-pop singer Hanawa became famous for comically singing about Saga Prefecture and its oddities.
* Former TV personality Masashi Tashiro was born in Saga Prefecture.
* World War II fighter ace Saburō Sakai was born in Saga Prefecture.
* Actress and J-pop singer Yasuko Matsuyuki and her younger brother, J-pop/rock singer Yuna Katsuki (of Lazy Knack and Red), are from Saga city.

===The Seven Wise Men of Saga===
&quot;The Seven Wise Men of Saga&quot; is the name given to these seven men from Saga, each of whom have made a significant contribution to the modernisation of Japan. Their contributions began in the last days of the Tokugawa shogunate, and continued into the Meiji Restoration. Even today, this era shines impressively in Saga&#x27;s history.

* Lord Naomasa Nabeshima, feudal lord of the Nabeshima clan, helped to bring about the development of Saga through introducing European technology and culture.
* Etō Shinpei, also once a Minister of Legal Affairs, became a Diet member and created the foundation for Japan&#x27;s judicial system.
* Ōkuma Shigenobu served two terms as Prime Minister of Japan. He also established Waseda University.
* Ōki Takatō was Minister of Civil Affairs, Education and Legal Affairs, held the position of a Diet member and made considerable contributions to the establishment of the modern education system in Japan.
* Soejima Taneomi served the roles of Diet member, Foreign Minister, Minister of Domestic Affairs and was well known for his Chinese Poetry and talented writing skills.
* Sano Tsunetami founded the Japanese Red Cross.
* Shima Yoshitake contributed to the exploration of Hokkaidō.

==See also==
* Saga Domain
* Saga Rebellion

==Notes==
==References==
* 

==External links==

* Saga City website google translate available
* Saga Prefecture website Translation available
* SagaJET website
* Hagakure
* Hagakure 1716 by Yamamoto Tsunetomo about Bushidō (Samurai Moral Code) at Wikipedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q50337" start="5" end="15" title="Prefectures of Japan" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="19" end="24" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13987" start="50" end="56" title="Kyushu" label="Kyushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q712226" start="150" end="153" title="Square kilometre" label="km2"/>
<link wikidata="Q232291" start="159" end="164" title="sq mi" label="sq mi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123258" start="191" end="209" title="Fukuoka Prefecture" label="Fukuoka Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q169376" start="231" end="250" title="Nagasaki Prefecture" label="Nagasaki Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q209766" start="270" end="274" title="Saga (city)" label="Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q738275" start="361" end="368" title="Karatsu, Saga" label="Karatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q860674" start="370" end="374" title="Tosu, Saga" label="Tosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q857266" start="380" end="385" title="Imari, Saga" label="Imari"/>
<link wikidata="Q93267" start="453" end="460" title="isthmus" label="isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27092" start="493" end="505" title="Sea of Japan" label="Sea of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49557" start="514" end="524" title="Ariake Sea" label="Ariake Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464614" start="595" end="603" title="Ceramic art" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="608" end="617" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q668427" start="668" end="673" title="Arita, Saga" label="Arita"/>
<link wikidata="Q169376" start="728" end="747" title="Nagasaki Prefecture" label="Nagasaki Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q906926" start="779" end="793" title="Hizen Province" label="Hizen Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="827" end="844" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q738275" start="960" end="967" title="Karatsu, Saga" label="Karatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049645" start="976" end="992" title="Yoshinogari site" label="Yoshinogari site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206915" start="996" end="1007" title="Yoshinogari, Saga" label="Yoshinogari"/>
<link wikidata="Q236205" start="1041" end="1056" title="Kamakura period" label="Kamakura period"/>
<link wikidata="Q334845" start="1064" end="1080" title="Muromachi period" label="Muromachi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q498047" start="1218" end="1228" title="Genkai Sea" label="Genkai Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="1269" end="1283" title="Sengoku period" label="Sengoku period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440180" start="1289" end="1301" title="Ryūzōji clan" label="Ryūzōji clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q864159" start="1353" end="1369" title="Chikugo Province" label="Chikugo Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q259705" start="1384" end="1388" title="Higo Province" label="Higo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047664" start="1393" end="1410" title="Chikuzen Province" label="Chikuzen Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="1438" end="1444" title="daimyō" label="daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076150" start="1451" end="1467" title="Ryūzōji Takanobu" label="Ryūzōji Takanobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039095" start="1469" end="1487" title="Nabeshima Naoshige" label="Nabeshima Naoshige"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101516" start="1608" end="1622" title="Nabeshima clan" label="Nabeshima clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="1632" end="1642" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975995" start="1668" end="1679" title="Saga Domain" label="Saga Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q743925" start="1860" end="1874" title="Karatsu Domain" label="Karatsu Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067698" start="1932" end="1953" title="Tsushima-Fuchū Domain" label="Tsushima-Fuchū Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="2221" end="2229" title="Nagasaki, Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145048" start="2326" end="2331" title="Kyōhō" label="Kyōhō"/>
<link wikidata="Q11308894" start="2347" end="2362" title="Siebold typhoon" label="Siebold Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49557" start="2421" end="2431" title="Ariake Sea" label="Ariake Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q855048" start="2501" end="2505" title="koku" label="koku"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2621" end="2638" title="Naomasa Nabeshima" label="Naomasa Nabeshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273242" start="2776" end="2791" title="Arita porcelain" label="Arita porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q484083" start="2793" end="2802" title="green tea" label="green tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427028" start="2943" end="2964" title="reverberatory furnace" label="reverberatory furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="2979" end="2995" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q309184" start="3009" end="3019" title="Boshin War" label="Boshin War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="3066" end="3083" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="3092" end="3101" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044239" start="3137" end="3144" title="Kishima District, Saga" label="Kishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043844" start="3149" end="3174" title="Higashimatsuura District, Saga" label="Higashimatsuura districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q52824" start="3291" end="3303" title="Jōmon period" label="Jōmon period"/>
<link wikidata="Q738275" start="3346" end="3353" title="Karatsu, Saga" label="Karatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q207858" start="3386" end="3398" title="Yayoi period" label="Yayoi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049645" start="3440" end="3456" title="Yoshinogari site" label="Yoshinogari site"/>
<link wikidata="Q608727" start="3481" end="3499" title="Battle of Baekgang" label="Battle of Baekgang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206602" start="3528" end="3534" title="Kiyama, Saga" label="Kiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q728218" start="3568" end="3575" title="Dazaifu, Fukuoka" label="Dazaifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q906926" start="3584" end="3589" title="Hizen Province" label="Hizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194534" start="3590" end="3596" title="Fudoki" label="Fudoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237386" start="3614" end="3635" title="Battle of Bun&amp;#x27;ei" label="Battle of Bun&amp;#x27;ei"/>
<link wikidata="Q208156" start="3663" end="3688" title="Mongol invasions of Japan" label="Mongol invasions of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237622" start="3697" end="3711" title="Battle of Kōan" label="Battle of Kōan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260780" start="3790" end="3803" title="Nagoya, Saga" label="Nagoya Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q576338" start="3815" end="3842" title="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)" label="Japanese invasions of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073585" start="3892" end="3906" title="Karatsu Castle" label="Karatsu Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071095" start="3911" end="3922" title="Saga Castle" label="Saga Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975995" start="3943" end="3954" title="Saga Domain" label="Saga Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440180" start="3970" end="3982" title="Ryūzōji clan" label="Ryūzōji clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101516" start="3990" end="4004" title="Nabeshima clan" label="Nabeshima clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370854" start="4014" end="4029" title="Nijinomatsubara" label="Nijinomatsubara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578015" start="4082" end="4092" title="Han school" label="Han school"/>
<link wikidata="Q11308894" start="4124" end="4139" title="Siebold typhoon" label="Siebold typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q331905" start="4191" end="4218" title="Abolition of the han system" label="Abolition of the han system"/>
<link wikidata="Q841985" start="4231" end="4234" title="han (country subdivision)" label="han"/>
<link wikidata="Q50337" start="4242" end="4253" title="Prefectures of Japan" label="prefectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446765" start="4478" end="4492" title="Saga Rebellion" label="Saga Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q169376" start="4613" end="4632" title="Nagasaki Prefecture" label="Nagasaki Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q209766" start="4871" end="4875" title="Saga (city)" label="Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452827" start="4900" end="4915" title="Kyushu Railroad" label="Kyushu Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q860674" start="4967" end="4971" title="Tosu, Saga" label="Tosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q877220" start="5022" end="5027" title="Takeo, Saga" label="Takeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q738275" start="5165" end="5172" title="Karatsu, Saga" label="Karatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q384011" start="5197" end="5223" title="Japanese National Railways" label="Japanese National Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411657" start="5260" end="5278" title="Municipal mergers and dissolutions in Japan" label="Great Showa Merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q857266" start="5299" end="5304" title="Imari, Saga" label="Imari"/>
<link wikidata="Q684494" start="5313" end="5320" title="Kashima, Saga" label="Kashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q877177" start="5325" end="5329" title="Taku, Saga" label="Taku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513575" start="5532" end="5558" title="Genkai Nuclear Power Plant" label="Genkai Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049645" start="5646" end="5670" title="Yoshinogari site" label="Yoshinogari History Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366663" start="5704" end="5716" title="Saga Airport" label="Saga Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379877" start="5726" end="5733" title="Kawasoe, Saga" label="Kawasoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411657" start="5793" end="5812" title="Municipal mergers and dissolutions in Japan" label="Great Heisei Merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q738275" start="5867" end="5874" title="Karatsu, Saga" label="Karatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206958" start="5879" end="5888" title="Shiroishi, Saga" label="Shiroishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q877227" start="5902" end="5905" title="Ogi, Saga" label="Ogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351707" start="5910" end="5916" title="Miyaki, Saga" label="Miyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q209766" start="5932" end="5936" title="Saga (city)" label="Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q738275" start="5995" end="6002" title="Karatsu, Saga" label="Karatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q634130" start="6007" end="6015" title="Ureshino, Saga" label="Ureshino"/>
<link wikidata="Q877220" start="6029" end="6034" title="Takeo, Saga" label="Takeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206915" start="6036" end="6047" title="Yoshinogari, Saga" label="Yoshinogari"/>
<link wikidata="Q668427" start="6053" end="6058" title="Arita, Saga" label="Arita"/>
<link wikidata="Q990392" start="6073" end="6080" title="Kanzaki, Saga" label="Kanzaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754176" start="6114" end="6125" title="Higashiyoka, Saga" label="Higashiyoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379877" start="6127" end="6134" title="Kawasoe, Saga" label="Kawasoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067797" start="6139" end="6145" title="Kubota, Saga" label="Kubota"/>
<link wikidata="Q11370254" start="6197" end="6214" title="Kyushu Shinkansen" label="Kyushu Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13987" start="6237" end="6243" title="Kyushu" label="Kyushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q498047" start="6335" end="6345" title="Genkai Sea" label="Genkai Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q52055" start="6354" end="6369" title="Tsushima Strait" label="Tsushima Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q49557" start="6391" end="6401" title="Ariake Sea" label="Ariake Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209766" start="6610" end="6614" title="Saga (city)" label="Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q738275" start="6619" end="6626" title="Karatsu, Saga" label="Karatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q738275" start="6829" end="6836" title="Karatsu, Saga" label="Karatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q860674" start="6873" end="6877" title="Tosu, Saga" label="Tosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206942" start="6911" end="6915" title="Tara, Saga" label="Tara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8528436" start="7133" end="7145" title="Mount Sefuri" label="Mount Sefuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q954320" start="7296" end="7309" title="Chikugo River" label="Chikugo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q45341" start="7447" end="7461" title="East China Sea" label="East China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49557" start="7463" end="7473" title="Ariake Sea" label="Ariake Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27092" start="7489" end="7501" title="Sea of Japan" label="Sea of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q498047" start="7503" end="7513" title="Genkai Sea" label="Genkai Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11398556" start="7685" end="7695" title="Kakarajima" label="Kakarajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="8019" end="8030" title="Arable land" label="Arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q674950" start="8072" end="8083" title="Residential" label="Residential"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8268" end="8281" title="List of national parks of Japan#History" label="Natural Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072901" start="8294" end="8320" title="Genkai Quasi-National Park" label="Genkai Quasi-National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637052" start="8325" end="8337" title="Hachimandake Prefectural Natural Park" label="Hachimandake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379563" start="8339" end="8354" title="Kawakami-Kinryū Prefectural Natural Park" label="Kawakami-Kinryū"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446325" start="8356" end="8368" title="Kurokamiyama Prefectural Natural Park" label="Kurokamiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446131" start="8370" end="8385" title="Sefuri-Kitayama Prefectural Natural Park" label="Sefuri-Kitayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055507" start="8387" end="8395" title="Taradake Prefectural Natural Park (Saga)" label="Taradake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700953" start="8401" end="8407" title="Tenzan Prefectural Natural Park" label="Tenzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q494721" start="8582" end="8588" title="Cities of Japan" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122846" start="8594" end="8603" title="Districts of Japan" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103755" start="8612" end="8617" title="Towns of Japan" label="towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446132" start="8806" end="8812" title="Sefuri, Saga" label="Sefuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q990392" start="8837" end="8844" title="Kanzaki, Saga" label="Kanzaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122846" start="8979" end="8987" title="Districts of Japan" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="9250" end="9258" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="9272" end="9281" title="fisheries" label="fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q115443" start="9452" end="9461" title="mochigome" label="mochigome"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="9480" end="9490" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q125337" start="9491" end="9506" title="mandarin orange" label="mandarin orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="9689" end="9700" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="9724" end="9733" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="9800" end="9805" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452829" start="10173" end="10202" title="Kyushu Ryukoku Junior College" label="Kyushu Ryukoku Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040607" start="10204" end="10226" title="Nishikyushu University" label="Nishikyushu University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040611" start="10228" end="10265" title="Nishikyushu University Junior College" label="Nishikyushu University Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10296" end="10333" title="Saga Prefectural Agricultural College" label="Saga Prefectural Agricultural College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195814" start="10335" end="10350" title="Saga University" label="Saga University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398910" start="10352" end="10384" title="Saga Women&amp;#x27;s Junior College" label="Saga Women&amp;#x27;s Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366663" start="10416" end="10428" title="Saga Airport" label="Saga Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042665" start="10482" end="10494" title="Saga Station" label="Saga Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q840544" start="10496" end="10508" title="Tosu Station" label="Tosu Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q852147" start="10510" end="10525" title="Karatsu Station" label="Karatsu Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189881" start="10530" end="10543" title="Imari Station" label="Imari Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11370252" start="10553" end="10576" title="Nishi Kyushu Shinkansen" label="Nishi Kyushu Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105971" start="10595" end="10614" title="Takeo-Onsen Station" label="Takeo-Onsen Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q498366" start="10617" end="10626" title="JR Kyushu" label="JR Kyushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042132" start="10629" end="10641" title="Chikuhi Line" label="Chikuhi Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187520" start="10644" end="10663" title="Kagoshima Main Line" label="Kagoshima Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q851961" start="10666" end="10678" title="Karatsu Line" label="Karatsu Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q11370254" start="10681" end="10698" title="Kyushu Shinkansen" label="Kyushu Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078117" start="10701" end="10719" title="Nagasaki Main Line" label="Nagasaki Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q11370252" start="10722" end="10745" title="Nishi Kyushu Shinkansen" label="Nishi Kyushu Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q852097" start="10748" end="10759" title="Sasebo Line" label="Sasebo Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788223" start="10761" end="10777" title="Matsuura Railway" label="Matsuura Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040371" start="10780" end="10797" title="Nishi-Kyūshū Line" label="Nishi-Kyūshū Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q642407" start="10799" end="10812" title="Amagi Railway" label="Amagi Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q642407" start="10815" end="10825" title="Amagi Railway Amagi Line" label="Amagi Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q926383" start="10839" end="10856" title="National highways of Japan" label="National highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157284" start="10859" end="10867" title="Japan National Route 34" label="Route 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157306" start="10869" end="10877" title="Japan National Route 35" label="Route 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156929" start="10880" end="10889" title="Japan National Route 202" label="Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156931" start="10891" end="10900" title="Japan National Route 203" label="Route 203"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156935" start="10902" end="10911" title="Japan National Route 204" label="Route 204"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421420" start="10913" end="10922" title="Japan National Route 207" label="Route 207"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157071" start="10924" end="10933" title="Japan National Route 263" label="Route 263"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157073" start="10935" end="10944" title="Japan National Route 264" label="Route 264"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157237" start="10946" end="10955" title="Japan National Route 323" label="Route 323"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157402" start="10957" end="10966" title="Japan National Route 385" label="Route 385"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157564" start="10968" end="10977" title="Japan National Route 444" label="Route 444"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157706" start="10979" end="10988" title="Japan National Route 498" label="Route 498"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="10990" end="10997" title="Tollway" label="Tollway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958607" start="11001" end="11020" title="Nagasaki Expressway" label="Nagasaki Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060803" start="11022" end="11039" title="Kyushu Expressway" label="Kyushu Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157703" start="11041" end="11064" title="Nishi-Kyūshū Expressway" label="Nishi-Kyūshū Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11067" end="11085" title="Nijō-Hamatama Road" label="Nijō-Hamatama Road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11087" end="11104" title="Kyūragi-Taku Road" label="Kyūragi-Taku Road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11106" end="11120" title="Mitsuse Tunnel" label="Mitsuse Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q668427" start="11134" end="11139" title="Arita, Saga" label="Arita"/>
<link wikidata="Q857266" start="11141" end="11146" title="Imari, Saga" label="Imari"/>
<link wikidata="Q738275" start="11151" end="11158" title="Karatsu, Saga" label="Karatsu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11289" end="11306" title="Imaemon Porcelain" label="Imaemon Porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11308" end="11325" title="Genemon Porcelain" label="Genemon Porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11330" end="11348" title="Fukagawa Porcelain" label="Fukagawa Porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161011" start="11374" end="11386" title="Saga dialect" label="Saga dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398902" start="11471" end="11504" title="Saga International Balloon Fiesta" label="Saga International Balloon Fiesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q209766" start="11566" end="11575" title="Saga (city)" label="Saga City"/>
<link wikidata="Q493695" start="11698" end="11712" title="Karatsu Kunchi" label="Karatsu Kunchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q738275" start="11753" end="11765" title="Karatsu, Saga" label="Karatsu City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374308" start="11884" end="11903" title="Kashima Gatalympics" label="Kashima Gatalympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q684494" start="11943" end="11950" title="Kashima, Saga" label="Kashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003417" start="12129" end="12155" title="Imari Ton-Ten-Ton Festival" label="Imari Ton-Ten-Ton Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q857266" start="12222" end="12232" title="Imari, Saga" label="Imari City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11470974" start="12411" end="12418" title="Matsuri float" label="Danjiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051238" start="12605" end="12615" title="Sagan Tosu" label="Sagan Tosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q860674" start="12617" end="12621" title="Tosu, Saga" label="Tosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626123" start="12636" end="12653" title="Hisamitsu Springs" label="Hisamitsu Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q860674" start="12655" end="12659" title="Tosu, Saga" label="Tosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q53309521" start="12674" end="12689" title="Saga Ballooners" label="Saga Ballooners"/>
<link wikidata="Q209766" start="12691" end="12695" title="Saga (city)" label="Saga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12708" end="12729" title="Saga Indonesia Dreams" label="Saga Indonesia Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q877220" start="12731" end="12736" title="Takeo, Saga" label="Takeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073585" start="12775" end="12781" title="Karatsu Castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207858" start="12834" end="12839" title="Yayoi" label="Yayoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206915" start="12851" end="12862" title="Yoshinogari, Saga" label="Yoshinogari"/>
<link wikidata="Q251682" start="12931" end="12950" title="Yūtoku Inari Shrine" label="Yūtoku Inari Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="13046" end="13051" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638261" start="13058" end="13074" title="Zombie Land Saga" label="Zombie Land Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q131578" start="13293" end="13298" title="J-pop" label="J-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646947" start="13306" end="13312" title="Hanawa" label="Hanawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q860940" start="13413" end="13428" title="Masashi Tashiro" label="Masashi Tashiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q352469" start="13485" end="13497" title="Saburō Sakai" label="Saburō Sakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041266" start="13554" end="13570" title="Yasuko Matsuyuki" label="Yasuko Matsuyuki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13614" end="13626" title="Yuna Katsuki" label="Yuna Katsuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="13924" end="13942" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="13967" end="13984" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334677" start="14054" end="14076" title="Nabeshima Naomasa" label="Lord Naomasa Nabeshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101516" start="14097" end="14111" title="Nabeshima clan" label="Nabeshima clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202291" start="14214" end="14225" title="Etō Shinpei" label="Etō Shinpei"/>
<link wikidata="Q243141" start="14350" end="14365" title="Ōkuma Shigenobu" label="Ōkuma Shigenobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q274948" start="14386" end="14409" title="Prime Minister of Japan" label="Prime Minister of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q274486" start="14431" end="14448" title="Waseda University" label="Waseda University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578374" start="14452" end="14462" title="Ōki Takatō" label="Ōki Takatō"/>
<link wikidata="Q702789" start="14658" end="14673" title="Soejima Taneomi" label="Soejima Taneomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202384" start="14694" end="14698" title="Diet of Japan" label="Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q555055" start="14827" end="14841" title="Sano Tsunetami" label="Sano Tsunetami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538440" start="14854" end="14872" title="Japanese Red Cross" label="Japanese Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q970410" start="14876" end="14891" title="Shima Yoshitake" label="Shima Yoshitake"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="14926" end="14934" title="Hokkaidō" label="Hokkaidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975995" start="14952" end="14963" title="Saga Domain" label="Saga Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446765" start="14966" end="14980" title="Saga Rebellion" label="Saga Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q387227" start="15157" end="15165" title="Hagakure" label="Hagakure"/>
<link wikidata="Q548162" start="15174" end="15192" title="Yamamoto Tsunetomo" label="Yamamoto Tsunetomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183738" start="15199" end="15206" title="Bushido" label="Bushidō"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180750" wikidata="Q3270912" url="?curid=180750" title="Architecture of cathedrals and great churches">
<text>Cathedrals, collegiate churches, and monastic churches like those of abbeys and priories, often have certain complex structural forms that are found less often in parish churches. They also tend to display a higher level of contemporary architectural style and the work of accomplished craftsmen, and occupy a status both ecclesiastical and social that an ordinary parish church rarely has. Such churches are generally among the finest buildings locally and a source of regional pride. Many are among the world&#x27;s most renowned works of architecture. These include St Peter&#x27;s Basilica, Notre-Dame de Paris, Cologne Cathedral, Salisbury Cathedral, Antwerp Cathedral, Prague Cathedral, Lincoln Cathedral, the Basilica of Saint-Denis, Santa Maria Maggiore, the Basilica of San Vitale, St Mark&#x27;s Basilica, Westminster Abbey, Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral, Antoni Gaudí&#x27;s incomplete Sagrada Família and the ancient cathedral of Hagia Sophia in Istanbul, now a mosque.

The earliest large churches date from Late Antiquity. As Christianity and the construction of churches spread across the world, their manner of building was dependent upon local materials and local techniques. Different styles of architecture developed and their fashion spread, carried by the establishment of monastic orders, by the posting of bishops from one region to another and by the travelling of master stonemasons who served as architects. The successive styles of the great church buildings of Europe are known as Early Christian, Byzantine, Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque, Rococo, Neoclassical, and various Revival styles of the late 18th to early 20th centuries, and then Modern. Underlying each of the academic styles are the regional characteristics. Some of these characteristics are so typical of a particular country or region that they appear, regardless of style, in the architecture of churches designed many centuries apart.
==Function==

Among the world&#x27;s largest and most architecturally significant churches, many were built to serve as cathedrals or abbey churches. The categories below are not exclusive. A church can be an abbey church and serve as a cathedral. Some Protestant parish churches like Ulm Minster have never served as any of these; since the Reformation many Western Christian denominations dispensed with the episcopate altogether and medieval churches lost, gained, or lost again their cathedral status, like St Giles&#x27;, Edinburgh or St Magnus&#x27;, Kirkwall. Some great churches of the Middle Ages, such as Westminster Abbey, are former abbeys; others like Ripon Cathedral and Bath Abbey were built as monastic churches and became cathedrals or parish churches in recent centuries; others again were built as parish churches and subsequently raised to cathedrals, like Southwark Cathedral. Some significant churches are termed &quot;temples&quot; or &quot;oratories&quot;. Among the Roman Catholic churches, many have been raised to the status of &quot;basilica&quot; since the 18th century.

===Cathedral===

A cathedral has a specific ecclesiastical role and administrative purpose as the seat of a bishop. The cathedral () takes its name from the of the bishop, known as the episcopal throne. The word &quot;cathedral&quot; is sometimes mistakenly applied as a generic term for any very large and imposing church.

The role of bishop as an administrator of local clergy came into being in the 1st century. It was two hundred years before the first cathedral building was constructed in Rome. With the legalizing of Christianity in 313 by the Emperor Constantine I, churches were built rapidly. Five very large churches were founded in Rome and, though much altered or rebuilt, still exist today, including the cathedral church of Rome, St John on the Lateran Hill and the papal St Peter&#x27;s Basilica on the Vatican Hill, now the Vatican City.

The architectural form which cathedrals took was largely dependent upon their ritual function as the seat of a bishop. Cathedrals are places where, in common with other Christian churches, the Eucharist is celebrated, the Bible is read, the liturgy is said or sung, prayers are offered and sermons are preached. But in a cathedral, among denominations with episcopalian church governance, these things are done with a greater amount of elaboration, pageantry and procession than in lesser churches. This elaboration is particularly present during important liturgical rites performed by a bishop, such as confirmation and ordination. In areas with a state religion or an established church a cathedral is often the site of rituals associated with local or national government, the bishops performing the tasks of all sorts from the induction of a mayor to the coronation of a monarch. Some of these tasks are apparent in the form and fittings of particular cathedrals.

Cathedrals are not always large buildings and there are no prerequisites in size, height, or capacity for cathedrals to serve as such beyond those required to be a typical church. A cathedral might be as small as the historic Newport Cathedral, a late medieval parish church declared a cathedral in 1949. That said, size, height, capacity, and architectural prominence are all categories in which most cathedrals excel (at least comparatively within the municipal context of each building).

There exist a number of practical reasons for this:

* The cathedral was created to the glory of God. It was seen as appropriate that it should be as grand and as beautiful as wealth and skill could make it.
* As the seat of a bishop, the cathedral was the location for certain liturgical rites, such as the ordination of priests, which brought together large numbers of clergy and people.
* It functioned as an ecclesiastical and social meeting-place for many people, not just those of the town in which it stood, but also, on occasions, for the entire region.
* The cathedral often had its origins in a monastic foundation and was a place of worship for members of a holy order who said the mass privately at a number of small chapels within the cathedral.
* The cathedral often became a place of worship and burial for wealthy local patrons. These patrons often endowed the cathedrals with money for successive enlargements and building programs.
* Cathedrals are also traditionally places of pilgrimage, to which people travel from afar to celebrate certain important feast days or to visit the shrine associated with a particular saint. An extended eastern end is often found at cathedrals where the remains of a saint are interred behind the High Altar.

=== Collegiate churches ===
===Monastic churches===

An abbey church is one that is, or was in the past, the church of a monastic order. Likewise a friary church is the church of an order of friars. These orders include Benedictines, Cistercians, Augustinians, Franciscans, Dominicans, Jesuits and many more. Many churches of abbey foundation, are or previously were, part of a monastic complex that includes dormitories, refectory, cloisters, library, chapter house and other such buildings.

In many parts of the world, abbey churches frequently served the local community as well as the monastic community. In regions such as the British Isles where the monastic communities were dissolved, appropriated, secularized, or otherwise suppressed, the monastic churches often continued to serve as a parish church. In many areas of Asia and South America, the monasteries had the earliest established churches, with the monastic communities acting initially as missionaries to, and colonists of, indigenous people. Well-known abbey churches include Santa Maria delle Grazie, Milan, Italy; Westminster Abbey and Beverley Minster in England, the Abbey of Saint-Étienne, Caen and Abbey of St-Denis in France, Melk Abbey in Austria, Great Lavra on Mt Athos, and the Malate Church in Manila.

=== Basilica ===

The meaning of &quot;basilica&quot; in architecture is discussed below; in the Roman Catholic ecclesiastical sense, a &quot;basilica&quot; is a title awarded by the pope, head of the Catholic Church, and recipient churches are accordingly afforded certain privileges. A building that is designated as a basilica might be a cathedral, a collegiate or monastic church, a parish church, or a shrine. The four so-called &quot;Major Basilicas&quot; are four churches of Rome of 4th century foundation, St John Lateran, Santa Maria Maggiore, St Peter&#x27;s Basilica, and the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls. There are 1,810 churches in the world which are designated as &quot;Minor Basilicas&quot;. The reason for such a designation is often that the church is a prominent pilgrimage site and contains the celebrated relics of a saint, or another relic, such as a supposed fragment of the True Cross. These churches are often large and of considerable architectural significance. They include the Basilica of St Francis, Assisi; the Church of the Nativity, Bethlehem; Santhome Church, Chennai; the Sanctuary of Fátima, Portugal; Sheshan Basilica, Shanghai, the Basilica of the Immaculate Conception in Manila, and the Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe in Mexico City.

==Origins and development of the church building==

The church building grew out of a number of features of the Ancient Roman period:
* The house church
* The atrium
* The basilica
* The bema
* The mausoleum – centrally planned building
* The cruciform ground plan – Latin or Greek cross

===From house church to church===
From the first to the early fourth centuries most Christian communities worshipped in private homes, often secretly. Some Roman churches, such as the Basilica of San Clemente in Rome, are built directly over the houses where early Christians worshipped. Other early Roman churches are built on the sites of Christian martyrdom or at the entrance to catacombs where Christians were buried.
The first very large Christian churches were built in Rome and have their origins in the early 4th century, when with Edict of Milan the emperors Constantine and Licinius continued the legalization of Christianity begun by their predecessor Galerius&#x27;s Edict of Serdica. Several of Rome&#x27;s largest churches, notably Santa Maria Maggiore and St John Lateran, have their foundation in the 4th century. The cathedral church of Rome is St John Lateran and not the more famous St Peter&#x27;s Basilica. St Peter&#x27;s is also of 4th century foundation, though nothing of that appears above the ground.

=== Atrium ===
When Early Christian Communities began to build churches they drew on one particular feature of the houses that preceded them, the &quot;atrium&quot;, or courtyard with a colonnade surrounding it. Most of these atriums have disappeared. A fine example remains at the Basilica of San Clemente in Rome and another was built in the Romanesque period at Sant&#x27;Ambrogio, Milan. The descendants of these &quot;atria&quot; may be seen in the large square cloisters that can be found beside many cathedrals, and in the huge colonnaded squares or piazze at the Basilicas of St Peter&#x27;s in Rome and St Mark&#x27;s in Venice and the Camposanto (Holy Field) at Pisa Cathedral.

===Basilica===
Early church architecture did not draw its form from Roman temples, as the latter did not have large internal spaces where worshipping congregations could meet.
It was the Roman basilica, used for meetings, markets and courts of law that provided a model for the large Christian church and that gave its name to the Christian basilica.
Both Roman basilicas and Roman bath houses had at their core a large vaulted building with a high roof, braced on either side by a series of lower chambers or a wide arcade passage. An important feature of the Roman basilica was that at either end it had a projecting exedra, or apse, a semicircular space roofed with a half-dome. This was where the magistrates sat to hold court. It passed into the church architecture of the Roman world and was adapted in different ways as a feature of cathedral architecture.

The earliest large churches, such as the cathedral of St John Lateran in Rome, consisted of a single-ended basilica with one apsidal end and a courtyard, or &quot;atrium&quot;, at the other end. As Christian liturgy developed, processions became part of the proceedings. The processional door was that which led from the furthest end of the building, while the door most used by the public might be that central to one side of the building, as in a basilica of law. This is the case in many cathedrals and churches.

===Mausoleum===
One of the influences on church architecture was the mausoleum. The mausoleum of a noble Roman was a square or circular domed structure which housed a sarcophagus. Constantine the Great built for his daughter Constantina a mausoleum which has a circular central space surrounded by a lower ambulatory or passageway separated by a colonnade.

This burial place became a place of worship, Santa Costanza, as well as a tomb. It is one of the earliest church buildings that was centrally, rather than longitudinally planned. Constantine was also responsible for the building of the circular, mausoleum-like Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, which in turn influenced the plan of a number of buildings, including that constructed in Rome to house the remains of the proto-martyr Saint Stephen, San Stefano Rotondo and the Basilica of San Vitale in Ravenna.

Ancient circular or polygonal churches are comparatively rare. A small number, such as the Temple Church, London were built during the Crusades in imitation of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre as isolated examples in England, France and Spain. In Denmark such churches in the Romanesque style are much more numerous. In parts of Europe there are also round tower-like churches of the Romanesque period but they are generally vernacular architecture and of small scale. Others, like Rotunda of St Martin at Vyšehrad in the Czech Republic are finely detailed.

The circular or polygonal form lent itself to those buildings within church complexes that perform a function in which it is desirable for people to stand, or sit around, with a centralised focus, rather than an axial one. In Italy the circular or polygonal form was used throughout the medieval period for baptisteries, while in England it was adapted for chapter houses. In France the aisled polygonal plan was adapted as the eastern terminal and in Spain the same form is often used as a chapel.

Other than Santa Costanza and San Stefano, there was another significant place of worship in Rome that was also circular, the vast Ancient Roman Pantheon, with its numerous statue-filled niches. This too was to become a church and subsequently a Roman Catholic basilica and lend its style to the development of ecclesiastical architecture.

===Bema===

As numbers of clergy increased, the small apse which contained the altar, or table upon which the sacramental bread and wine were offered in the rite of Holy Communion, was not sufficient to accommodate them. A raised dais called a&quot; bema&quot; formed part of many large basilican churches. In the case of St Peter&#x27;s Basilica and St Paul&#x27;s Outside the Walls in Rome, this bema extended laterally beyond the main meeting hall, forming two arms so that the building took on the shape of a T with a projecting apse. From this beginning, the plan of the church developed into the so-called Latin Cross which is the shape of most Western Cathedrals and large churches. The arms of the cross are called the transept.

===Latin Cross and Greek Cross===

Many of the earliest churches of Byzantium have a longitudinal plan. At Hagia Sophia, Istanbul, there is a central dome, framed on one axis by two high semi-domes and on the other by low rectangular transept arms, the overall plan being square. This large church was to influence the building of many later churches, even into the 21st century. A square plan in which the nave, chancel and transept arms are of equal length forming a Greek cross, the crossing generally surmounted by a dome became the common form in the Orthodox Church, with many churches throughout Eastern Europe and Russia being built in this way. Churches of the Greek Cross form often have a narthex or vestibule which stretches across the front of the church. This type of plan was also to later play a part in the development of church architecture in Western Europe, most notably in Bramante&#x27;s plan for St Peter&#x27;s Basilica and Christopher Wren&#x27;s design for St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral.

Most cathedrals and great churches have a cruciform groundplan. In churches of Western European tradition, the plan is usually longitudinal, in the form of the so-called Latin Cross with a long nave crossed by a transept. The transept may be as strongly projecting as at York Minster or not project beyond the aisles as at Amiens Cathedral.

==Architecture==
===Architectural forms common to many cathedrals and great churches===
Note- The list below is compiled from Banister Fletcher. Because of the diversity in the individual building histories, not all the characteristics pertain to every building.

====Axis====
As described above, the majority of cathedrals and great churches are cruciform in shape with the church having a defined axis. The axis is generally east/west with external emphasis upon the west front, normally the main entrance, and internal emphasis upon the eastern end so that the congregation faces the direction of the coming of Christ. As it is also in the direction of the rising sun, the architectural features of the east end often focus on enhancing interior illumination by the sun. Not every church or cathedral maintains a strict east–west axis, but even in those that do not, the terms East End and West Front are used. Many churches of Rome, notably St Peter&#x27;s Basilica, face the opposite direction.

==== Nave ====
The majority of cathedrals and large churches of the Western European tradition have a high wide nave with a lower aisle separated by an arcade on either side. Occasionally the aisles are as high as the nave, forming a hall church; this is mostly a German type. Many cathedrals have two aisles on either side. Notre-Dame de Paris has two aisles and a row of chapels.

In the case of a centrally planned church, the major axis is that between the main door and the altar.

==== Transept ====
The transept forms the arms of the church building. In English cathedrals of monastic foundation there are often two transepts. The intersection where the nave and transept meet is called the crossing and is often surmounted by a small spire called a &quot;flèche&quot;, a dome or, particularly in England, a large tower with or without a spire.

==== Vertical emphasis ====

There is generally a prominent external feature that rises upwards. It may be a dome, a central tower, two western towers or towers at both ends as at Speyer Cathedral. The towers are often topped by a spire. Often towers rise above the main entrance at the west front, or they may be placed centrally, or at the east end, but spires were unusual at the west end before James Gibbs&#x27;s innovative and much-copied St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, in the 1720s. The towers may be finished with pinnacles or spires or a small dome.

==== West front ====

The façade or &quot;west front&quot; or in some cases termed the westwork, is the most ornate part of the exterior, with the processional doors, often three in number, and often richly decorated with sculpture, marble or stone tracery. The façade often has a large window, sometimes a rose window or an impressive sculptural group as its central feature.

In the Western European tradition, there are frequently paired towers framing the façade. These towers have their origin in a tradition practiced at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem. During Holy Week the faithful would process along the Way of the Cross, leading to the Basilica, which in Early Christian times consisted of a domed shrine over the site of the tomb, and a &quot;porch&quot; which had a staircase on either side, supported by a small tower, by which the procession entered and exited. These towers were adopted symbolically, particularly in Romanesque architecture, as corner turrets. They flourished in Norman and Gothic architecture as large towers, reaching their height of magnificence at Cologne Cathedral, where they were not completed until the late 19th century.

==== East end ====

The east end is the part of the building which shows the greatest diversity of architectural form. At the eastern end, internally, lies the sanctuary where the altar of the cathedral is located.

*Early Christian and Byzantine – A projecting semi-circular apse.
*Romanesque – A rounded end. It may be a lower apse projecting from a higher square end, usual in Italy, Germany and Eastern Europe. In France and England the chancel terminated in a high eastern end of semi-circular form, surrounded by an ambulatory. While common in France, in England this form has only been retained without significant change at Norwich Cathedral.
*France, Spain, German and Eastern European Gothic – The eastern end is long and extends into a high vaulted apsidal end. The eastern aisles are continued around this apse, making a lower passage or ambulatory. There may be a group of projecting, radiating chapels called a chevet.
*English Gothic – The eastern ends show enormous diversity. Canterbury Cathedral has an apsidal end with ambulatory and projecting chapels. No English Cathedral prior to the 19th century has a fully developed chevet. In the some, notably Lincoln Cathedral, the east end presents a square, cliff-like form while in most this severity is broken by a projecting Lady Chapel. There are also examples of the lower aisle continuing around the square east end.

====External decoration====
The external decoration of a cathedral or large church building is often both architectural and pictorial. Decorative architectural devices include columns, pilasters, arcading, cornices, moldings, finials and tracery. The forms taken by these features is one of the clearest indications of the style and date of any particular building. Pictorial elements may include sculpture, painting and mosaic.

Sculpture is the predominant pictorial decorative element in most regions where buildings are of stone construction. In the great medieval churches of France, Spain, England and much of Germany, figurative sculpture is found adorning façades and portals.

Churches of brick, such as those of much of Italy, are often adorned with mosaics, inlays, inset marble friezes and free-standing statues at the roofline. Mosaics were a particular feature of Byzantine architecture and are the main form of adornment of many Orthodox churches, both externally and internally.

The most common theme in the decoration, both external and internal, of any church, is the salvation of humankind by Jesus Christ. The decorative scheme often functions as a Poor Man&#x27;s Bible, warning the church-goer that, in Biblical terms, the just rewards for his sinful nature is death, and that only through Jesus can forgiveness and redemption be gained. The scheme typically starts outside the church, on the west front, with the portrayal of Christ the Judge above the lintel of the main door. In Romanesque and Gothic buildings, this is usually a sculptural group, and may entail a whole scene of the Last Judgement with details of souls being weighed and rewarded, or dragged down to Hell by demons. In those churches in which painted rather than sculptured decoration prevails, the &quot;Last Judgement&quot; is often located on the interior of the west end, rather than the exterior.

Section references:Banister Fletcher, Wim Swaan, Larousse.

===Internal features===

====Nave and aisles====
The main body of the building, making the longer arm of the cross, where worshippers congregate, is called the nave. The term is from the Latin word for ship. A cathedral is symbolically a ship bearing the people of God through the storms of life. In addition, the high wooden roof of a large church is similarly constructed to the hull of a ship.

The nave is braced on either side by lower aisles, separated from the main space by a row of piers or columns. The aisles facilitate the movement of people, even when the nave is full of worshippers. They also strengthen the structure by buttressing the inner walls that carry the high roof, which in the case of many cathedrals and other large churches, is made of stone. Above the roof of the aisle are the clerestory windows which light the nave.

In some large churches, particularly late Medieval churches, there are two aisles on either side of nave. Other churches have a single aisle and a row of chapels on either side. In some churches, particularly in Germany, the aisles are almost as high as the nave, forming a &quot;hall church&quot;. In this case, because there is no clerestory, the aisle windows are often very tall, to admit light to the nave.

====Crossing and transept====
The crossing is the point in a church at which the transept intersects the nave. This point is often marked externally by a tower or dome and internally by the piers and arches that are required to bear the weight of such a structure. The interior of the dome or tower may be one of the major architectural features of the interior of the church. In a centrally planned church such as Hagia Sophia, and typical of many Orthodox churches, the major interior space of the building is roofed by the dome.

The transept is symbolic of the arms of the Cross, but also provides space for congregation and for additional chapels. Transept chapels are often dedicated to a particular saint, or to a particular aspect in the life and ministry of Christ, such as the Nativity or the Resurrection. In some English cathedrals there is often a second transept containing chapels, to facilitate the saying of the Divine Office by clergy each day.

==== Chancel, choir and presbytery ====
In a church in which part of the body of the church extends beyond the transept, then this extension is architecturally termed the &quot;chancel&quot;, for which the stricter definition includes only the choir and the sanctuary with the high altar, but in the common wider definition includes the whole eastern arm beyond the crossing. This architectural form is common in Norman and Gothic architecture. The choir, where it exists, normally contains the choir stalls, and the &quot;sanctuary&quot; and the &quot;cathedra&quot; (bishop&#x27;s throne). The architectural &quot;choir&quot; is sometimes termed the &quot;quire&quot; to differentiate it from the choir of singers. In the Middle Ages these were all clergy, or boys in an attached choir school, and the chancel (strictly defined) was the area occupied by officiating clergy, with few lay intrusions. In cathedrals the canons and other priests sat in the choir, as did the monks in monastic churches.

In those English cathedrals with two transepts, there is a further area beyond the choir which is called the presbytery. This is where the priests or monks could make their private devotions (and is not to be confused with the general sense of a room to the side where the clergy put on their vestments, or a Catholic clergy house). Often there are many additional chapels located towards the eastern end of a cathedral or abbey church. The chief among these is typically the Lady Chapel which is dedicated to the Virgin Mary.

==== Altar ====
The altar in the Roman Catholic church is the center of the church where the sacrifice on the cross is made present in sacramental form. Secondarily in the Catholic church, and primarily in other Christian denominations, the altar is a table on which is laid the Blessed Sacrament of bread and wine for consecration by a priest prior to use in the rite of Communion. The main altar in a church is located in a designated space called the &quot;chancel&quot; or &quot;sanctuary&quot; (&quot;holy place&quot;). The word has passed into modern English with an altered meaning because a criminal who could gain access to this area without capture was thereby given the sanctuary of the church. Many churches have an additional altar placed further forward in the church, as well as altars in chapels. The altar of a Catholic church may be made of stone, often marble. In most Protestant churches altars are of wood, symbolic of the table of the Last Supper rather than of a sacrificial altar, and may be called the Communion table.

The sanctuary is often separated from the body of the church by railings and screens, and, in the case of Orthodox and Byzantine Catholic churches, by an iconostasis which forms a complete visual as well as physical barrier. The sanctuary is usually the most ornately decorated part of a church, creating a visual focus towards the altar. This might be done in several ways. There might be a carved or painted altarpiece, a large carved screen called a reredos, or a structure called a ciborium which form a canopy over the altar. In English churches that have a square eastern end, a very large stained glass &quot;east window&quot; often fills the wall behind the altar; examples still with medieval glass include York Minster, Gloucester Cathedral and St Margaret&#x27;s, Westminster.

==== Choir stalls and organ ====
The term &quot;choir&quot; is used in two distinct ways in relation to cathedrals. It firstly means the choir of &quot;choristers&quot;, often men and boys, that sing at the services; in medieval cathedrals, and sometimes still, the boys from a special choir school. It is also the term used for that section of the church where the choir sits and stands to sing in services. In a cathedral or large church, there may be fixed seating in this area, called choir stalls which also provided seating for the cathedral clergy and some congregation. The choir stalls are often richly carved and decorated. The bishop&#x27;s throne or &quot;cathedra&quot; is often located in this space. The choir may be separated from the nave by a highly decorated screen of wood or stone.

The organ which provides music and accompanies the choir may be located on the screen, or may be in the gallery above the choir, or in a transept. Some churches have an organ loft at the west end of the church. These are usually a later addition to medieval churches; large examples had portative organs, often several. 
====Font, lectern and pulpit====
Towards the western end of the nave stands the font, or water basin at which the rite of Baptism is performed. It is placed towards the door because the Baptism signifies entry into the community of the church. Standing to the front of the nave is a lectern from which the Holy Scripture is read. In many churches this takes the form of an eagle which supports the book on its outstretched wings and is the symbol of John the Evangelist.

The third significant furnishing of the nave is the pulpit or rostrum from which the sermon is preached and the biblical readings are expounded. The pulpit might be of marble or wood, and may be a simple structure or represent a highly elaborate carved sermon. It is often decorated with the winged figures of a man, a lion, a bull and an eagle, representing the Gospel writers, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.

====Decoration====

The internal decorative features of a cathedral or great church might follow a carefully conceived scheme which might continue the theme begun on the west front. There are many examples which give evidence of this, and include the mosaic vaults of Orthodox churches, the stained glass windows of Medieval churches and the sculptural schemes of Baroque churches. However, in many other cases, any unified scheme has been lost with the vagaries of the building&#x27;s history.

Despite losses and changes of direction, the over-riding aim in the decoration of church interiors is to convey the message of the Gospels. To this end, many churches have, in their decorative schemes, elements of a Poor Man&#x27;s Bible, illustrating aspects of the &quot;Life of Christ&quot; and other related narratives, with the aim of educating the viewer. Among these representations are the &quot;Stations of the Cross&quot; and the &quot;Crucifix&quot; which was traditionally suspended from the chancel arch, or placed on a rood screen at the entrance to the quire. Other figurative representations include sculptures or pictures of saints and prophets, which are the common subject of the panel paintings on the iconostasis of Orthodox Churches.

The symbolism used in ancient churches is not always easy for modern people to read. Virtues and vices may be represented by small figures with particular attributes, or by animals that were thought to embody a particular quality. A common example is the pelican which was thought to peck its breast to feed its young on the blood, thus representing the love of Christ for the Church.

The decorative scheme generally culminated at the altar, where there would be a painted altarpiece or sculptured reredos, or it would be framed by a stained glass window, or an apsidal mosaic.

== Architectural style ==

===Early Christian===
The period of architecture termed Early or Paleo-Christian lasted from the first Christian Church buildings of the early 4th century until the development of a distinctly Byzantine style which emerged in the reign of Justinian I in the 6th century, foundation of Constantinople by Constantine in 330 CE. Some of the earliest Christian churches were constructed by the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia, where king Tiridates III converted to Christianity in 301. The small aisleless Kasagh Basilica at Aparan in the Kingdom of Armenia is traditionally dated to the 4th or 5th century.

Large Early Christian churches generally took the form of aisled basilicas with an apse. Among the early larger churches in Rome the Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore has retained much of its original internal arrangement, its vast basilical proportions, its simple apsidal end, its great colonnade supporting a straight cornice rather than arches and some very early mosaic decoration. Santa Sabina, also in Rome, exemplifies the simplicity of architectural decoration that characterized many of the early Christian basilicas. Other important churches of this period are the two ancient circular churches of Rome, The Basilica of Santa Costanza and San Stefano Rotondo. These churches are marked by their formal application of the Roman architectural orders in their columns, with Ionic capitals supporting the lintel at Santa Maria Maggiore, Corinthian and Composite capitals at Santa Sabina and Santa Costanza, and all three orders at San Stefano. At Santa Costanza the thick brick walls of the central tambour are supported on slim elegant columns that are paired to give extra strength, each pair supporting a small section of cornice from which the arches spring.

A number of Rome&#x27;s churches have retained Early Christian mosaics. Those at Santa Costanza are similar to mosaics and painted decoration found in public and domestic interiors, being largely geometric or floral, but close examination reveals much Christian symbolism in the choice of motives. One of the most extensive decorative schemes from the period to have remained at least partially intact is that at Santa Maria Maggiore, where the proscenium of the apse is decorated with stories of the &quot;Infancy of Jesus&quot; drawn from the Gospel of Matthew.

The Anchiskhati Basilica is the oldest church in Georgia, dating from the 6th century.

Where churches of Early Christian foundation remain, they are mostly considerably altered, are badly deteriorated and no longer viable, or are roofless ruins, a state which almost overtook San Stefano, prior to a renovation in the 15th century. The 4th century Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem was rebuilt by Justinian I after a fire in the 6th century, but appears to have retained much of its original form, including its massive Roman colonnades. The Constantinian Church of the Holy Sepulchre, on the other hand, was demolished under the order of the Fatimid caliph Al-Hakim in 1009 so that what stands today is a total reconstruction.

The Euphrasian Basilica in Poreč, Croatia, was founded in 360 on the site of a house church and retaining part of its Roman pavement. Although renovated and decorated in the late 6th century, the church has retained Early Christian features, including the atrium. Several Early Christian churches exist in Syria and Armenia, mostly in a ruined state. These show Roman rather than Byzantine architectural features, but have a regional character distinct from those of Rome.

===Byzantine===
Ravenna, on the eastern coast of Italy, is home to several vast churches of basilica plan dating from the age of the Emperor Justinian (6th century CE). San Apollinare Nuovo is in plan similar to Santa Maria Maggiore, but the details of the carvings are no longer in the classical Roman style. The capitals are like fat lacy stone cushions. Many of the mosaics are intact.

In the same town stands the uniquely structured, centrally planned, and domed church of San Vitale, of the same date. Its main internal space is 25 m across. The central dome is surrounded by eight apsidal semi-domes like the petals of a flower. There is a complex arrangement of curving arcades on several levels which gives a spatial effect only equalled by the Baroque church of Santa Maria della Salute built a thousand years later a few miles north in Venice. San Vitale was to be imitated in the 9th century in a simplified form by Charlemagne at Aachen, Germany.

In Venice stands San Marco&#x27;s, one of the world&#x27;s best known Byzantine-style churches, dating mainly from the 11th-century and decorated over many centuries but maintaining its centrally planned Byzantine form. It is called St Mark&#x27;s Basilica, not because it is of basilical shape, but because it has been awarded that title. It has a Greek Cross plan, a large dome being surrounded by four somewhat smaller ones. Its decoration, both inside and out, is typical of the Byzantine period in its lavish use of mosaics and polychrome marble veneers.

===Romanesque===
After the decline of the Roman Empire, the building of large churches in Western Europe gradually gained momentum with the spread of organised monasticism under the rule of Saint Benedict and others. A huge monastery at Cluny, only a fraction of which still exists, was built using a simplified Roman style, stout columns, thick walls, small window openings and semi-circular arches. The style spread with monasticism throughout Europe. The technique of building high vaults in masonry was revived. A treatment of decoration evolved that had elements drawn from local Pre-Christian traditions and incorporated zig-zags, spirals and fierce animal heads. The typical wall decorations were painted fresco murals. Romanesque building techniques spread to England at about the time of the Norman conquest.

Representative of the period are Abbaye aux Hommes (the Abbey of the Men) in Caen, France; Worms Cathedral in Germany, the Cathedral of Pisa with its famous leaning campanile (bell tower), the Cathedral of Cefalù, Modena Cathedral and Parma Cathedral in Italy, and Durham Cathedral and Peterborough Cathedral in England.

===Gothic===
By the mid 12th century many large cathedrals and abbey churches had been constructed and the engineering skills required to build high arches, stone vaults, tall towers and the like, were well established. The style evolved to one that was less heavy, had larger windows, lighter-weight vaulting supported on stone ribs and above all, the pointed arch which is the defining characteristic of the style now known as Gothic. With thinner walls, larger windows and high pointed arched vaults, the distinctive flying buttresses developed as a means of support. The huge windows were ornamented with stone tracery and filled with stained glass illustrating stories from the Bible and the lives of the saints.

Buildings representative of this period include Notre Dame, Paris; Chartres Cathedral, Reims Cathedral, Rouen Cathedral, Strasbourg Cathedral in France, Antwerp Cathedral in Belgium, Cologne Cathedral in Germany, St Stephen&#x27;s Cathedral Vienna in Austria, Florence Cathedral, Siena Cathedral, Milan Cathedral and San Lorenzo Maggiore, Naples in Italy, Burgos Cathedral, Toledo Cathedral and Leon Cathedral in Spain, Guarda Cathedral in Portugal, Salisbury Cathedral, Canterbury Cathedral and Lincoln Cathedral in England.

===Renaissance===

In the early 15th century a competition was held in Florence for a plan to roof the central crossing of the huge, unfinished Gothic Florence Cathedral. It was won by the artist Brunelleschi who, inspired by domes that he had seen on his travels, such as that of San Vitale in Ravenna and the enormous dome of the Roman period which roofed the Pantheon, designed a huge dome which is regarded as the first building of the Renaissance period. Its style, visually however, is ribbed and pointed and purely Gothic. It was Renaissance (a rebirth) in its audacity and the fact that it looked back to Roman structural techniques.

Brunelleschi, and others like him, developed a passion for the highly refined style of Roman architecture, in which the forms and decorations followed rules of placement and proportion that had long been neglected. They sought to rediscover and apply these rules. It was a time of architectural theorising and experimentation. Brunelleschi built two large churches in Florence demonstrating how the new style could be applied, San Lorenzo&#x27;s and Santo Spirito. They are essays in the Classical, with rows of cylindrical columns, Corinthian capitals, entablatures, semi-circular arches and apsidal chapels.

The greatest cathedral building of the age was the rebuilding of St Peter&#x27;s Basilica in Rome, the combined work of the architects Bramante, Raphael, Sangallo, Maderno and surmounted by Michelangelo&#x27;s glorious dome, taller but just one foot narrower than the one that Brunelleschi had built a hundred years earlier in Florence. The dome is both an external and an internal focus. The chancel and transept arms are identical in shape, thus recalling the Greek Cross plan of Byzantine churches. The nave was, in fact, an addition.

Pope Julius II could command the greatest artists of his day as designers. (The role of architect had not yet become a separate one from painter, sculptor or builder.) The product of these many minds is a massive, glorious and unified whole.

===Baroque===
By the time that St Peter&#x27;s was completed, a style of architecture was developed by architects who knew all the rules that had been so carefully recovered, and chose to break them. The effect was a dynamic style of architecture in which the forms seem to take on life of their own, moving, swaying and undulating. The name Baroque means &#x27;mis-shapen pearl&#x27;.

There are many large churches, abbeys, and basilicas built in this style, but few cathedrals in Western Europe, the most notable exception being St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral in London. St Paul&#x27;s is an unusual cathedral in that it was designed by a single individual and completed in a short time. The architect was Sir Christopher Wren and the building replaced the ancient cathedral which burnt down in the Great Fire of 1666. It is in the Baroque style, but it is a very controlled and English sort of Baroque in which Wren creates surprising and dramatic spatial effects, particularly in his use of the dome, which, like Brunelleschi&#x27;s dome in Florence, spans not only the nave but also the aisles, opening the whole centre of the church into a vast light space.

In Russia, for the most part, the Baroque style was overlaid as architectonic features on the essentially Byzantine forms used for church construction. Many churches were built in this style, notably the Cathedral of the Dormition at Smolensk and the Cathedral of the Presentation at Solvychegodsk. In the design of many churches the Byzantine arrangement of tented roof or onion dome is replaced with a larger dome, usually on a tall, often polygonal, tambour.

Many European cathedrals have baroque features, high altars, façades and chapels. The façades of Santiago de Compostela, Jaén Cathedral and Valladolid Cathedral in Spain was rebuilt at this time. The Baroque style was carried by the Spanish and Portuguese to South and Central America, to the Philippines and to Goa in India where it was to become the prominent style of building for churches large and small. Both in the Americas and the Philippines, large Baroque churches often have a proportionally very wide façade which seems stretched between the towers. The intensely ornate decoration both in Spain and the Americas is called Churrigueresque.



=== Rococo ===
The Rococo style is a late evolution of Baroque architecture, first apparent in French domestic architecture and design. It is distinguished by the asymmetry found within its decoration, generally taking the form of ornate sculptured cartouches or borders. These decorations are loosely based on organic objects, particularly seashells and plant growth, but also on other natural forms that have an apparent &quot;organised chaos&quot; such as waves of clouds. The churches that are thus decorated may have strongly Baroque architectural form but a general lightness and delicacy of appearance, sometimes described as &quot;playfulness&quot;. A number of pilgrimage churches in Bavaria, Germany, are of this style, most notably the Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers (Vierzehnheiligen) near Bamberg by Johann Balthasar Neumann, the master and arguably the originator of the style. This combines a relatively staid exterior with a dynamic internal plan and an exquisitely orchestrated decorative scheme of painted ceiling and figurative sculpture, all set in a diverse array of gilded Rococo cartouches. Externally, the façade has a rippling surface, and rises with increasing ornateness to fanciful cupolas that are a hallmark of the churches of Bavaria and much of central and Eastern Europe.

Perhaps the most remarkable large-scale example of Rococo church building was the Dresden Frauenkirche, recently rebuilt after its almost total destruction in World War II. The entire structures embodies a dynamic, surging motion which combines with a delicacy of architectural detail that is typical of the Rococo style. This church is dominated by its bell-shaped cupola which imitates in form those to be found on countless church towers in the region, but recreated here not in wood sheathed with metal, but as a mighty masonry dome.



===Revivals===

The 18th and 19th centuries were a time of expansion and colonisation by Western Europeans. It was also a time of much Christian revival and in England, a considerable growth in the Roman Catholic Church. There was also much industrialisation and the growth of towns. New churches and cathedrals were needed. The Medieval styles, and particularly Gothic, were seen as the most suitable for the building of new cathedrals, both in Europe and in the colonies.

Cathedrals in the Gothic Revival style include Liverpool Anglican Cathedral in England, the New Cathedral, Linz in Austria, the Cathedral of St John the Divine in New York and St Patrick&#x27;s Cathedral, Melbourne in Australia.

Not all of the cathedrals that are in a revivalist style are Gothic. Westminster Cathedral, the seat of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Westminster, is an eclectic design of predominantly Byzantine style with polychrome walls, domes and a very tall Italian-style campanile. Mary, Queen of the World Cathedral in Canada is a Renaissance revival building based on St Peter&#x27;s, Rome.

===Modern===
In the 20th century, building in the Medieval style continued, but in a stripped-down, cleanly functional form, often in brick. A fine example is Guildford Cathedral in England. Another is Armidale Anglican Cathedral in Australia.

After World War II traditionalist ideas were abandoned for the rebuilding of the bombed cathedral in Coventry. The old cathedral was actually a large parish church that had been elevated to cathedral status. Its glorious spire fortunately escaped severe damage. The 20th century Coventry Cathedral, of alternating slabs of masonry and stained glass attempts to capture symbolically the sense of an old cathedral church, without attempting to reproduce it. Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral is the 20th century&#x27;s answer to the centrally planned church, a vast circular structure with the sanctuary at the centre.

=== Post Modern ===

As with other Postmodern movements, postmodern architecture formed in reaction to the ideals of modernism as a response to the perceived blandness, hostility, and Utopianism of the Modern movement. While rare in designs of Church architecture, there are nonetheless some notable examples as architects have begun to recover and renew historical styles and &quot;cultural memory&quot; of Christian architecture. Notable practitioners include Steven J. Schloeder, Duncan Stroik, and Thomas Gordon Smith.

The functional and formalized shapes and spaces of the modernist movement are replaced by unapologetically diverse aesthetics: styles collide, form is adopted for its own sake, and new ways of viewing familiar styles and space abound. Perhaps most obviously, architects rediscovered the expressive and symbolic value of architectural elements and forms that had evolved through centuries of building—often maintaining meaning in literature, poetry and art—but which had been abandoned by the modern movement.

== See also ==

* Sacred architecture
* Church architecture
* Medieval architecture
* List of regional characteristics of European cathedral architecture
* Architecture of the medieval cathedrals of England
* Lists of cathedrals
* The Reformation and its influence on church architecture

===Architectural styles (chronological order)===
* Early Christian art and architecture
* Byzantine architecture
* Eastern Orthodox church architecture
* Romanesque architecture
* Gothic architecture
* French Gothic architecture
* Renaissance architecture
* Baroque architecture
* Victorian architecture
* Polish Cathedral style architecture

===Architectural features===
* Architectural development of the eastern end of cathedrals in England and France 
* Cathedral diagram
* Clerestory
* Rose window
* Triforium
* Vault

===Decorative features===
* Ablaq
* Gargoyle
* Grotesque
* Labours of the Months
* Stained glass
** British and Irish stained glass (1811–1918)
* Tree of Jesse

== Notes ==
==References==

* Banister Fletcher, &quot;A History of Architecture on the Comparative method&quot;, 2001, Elsevier Science &amp; Technology, 
* Batsford, Harry and Fry, Charles, &quot;The Greater English Church of the Middle Ages&quot;, 1944 (2nd edn), Batsford
* Nikolaus Pevsner, &quot;An Outline of European Architecture&quot;, 1964, Pelican Books, ISBN
* Rolof Beny, Peter Gunn, &quot;The Churches of Rome&quot;, 1981, Simon and Schuster, 
* Brittain-Catlin, Timothy, &quot;Churches&quot;, 2008, Collins, ISBN 9780007263066
* T. Francis Bumpus, &quot;The Cathedrals and Churches of Belgium&quot;, 1928, T. Werner Laurie Ltd, ISBN
* Alec Clifton-Taylor, &quot;The Cathedrals of England&quot;, 1967, Thames and Hudson, 
* Alain Erlande-Brandenburg, &quot;The Cathedral: The Social and Architectural Dynamics of Construction &quot;, 2009 (new paperback edition), Cambridge University Press
* Giovanni Fanelli, &quot;Brunelleschi&quot;, 1980, Becocci, ISBN
* John Fleming, Hugh Honour and Nikolaus Pevsner, &quot;The Penguin Dictionary of Architecture&quot;, 3rd edn, 1980, Penguin, ISBN 0140510133
* Paul Frankl/Paul Crossley, &quot;Gothic Architecture&quot;, 2001 (2nd revised edition), Yale University Press
* Andre Grabar, &quot;The Beginnings of Christian Art&quot;, Thames and Hudson, 1967, ISBN
* John Harvey, &quot;The Gothic World, 1100–1600&quot;, 1950, Batsford, ISBN
* John Harvey, &quot;English Cathedrals&quot;, 1961, Batsford, ISBN
* Howard Hibbard, &quot;Masterpieces of Western Sculpture&quot;, 1966, Thames and Hudson, ISBN
* Rene Huyghe editor, &quot;Larousse Encyclopedia of Byzantine and Medieval Art&quot;, 1963, Paul Hamlyn, ISBN
* François Icher, &quot;Building the Great Cathedrals&quot;, 1998, Harry N. Abrams, 
* James Lees-Milne, &quot;Saint Peter&#x27;s&quot;, 1967, Hamish Hamiliton, ISBN
* Pio V. Pinto, &quot;The Pilgrim&#x27;s Guide to Rome&quot;, 1974, Harper and Row, 
* Gerald Randall, &quot;Church Furnishing and Decoration in England &amp; Wales&quot;, 1980, London: B. T. Batsford Ltd., ; New York: Holmes and Meier Publishers, 
* John Summerson, &quot;Architecture in Britain, 1530–1830&quot;, 1983, Pelican History of Art, 
* Wim Swaan, &quot;The Gothic Cathedral&quot;, 1988, Omega Books, 
* Wim Swaan, &quot;Art and Architecture of the Late Middle Ages&quot;, Omega Books, 
* Tim Tatton-Brown, John Crook, &quot;The English Cathedral&quot;, 2002, New Holland Publishers, 
* Rolf Toman, editor, &quot;Romanesque – Architecture, Sculpture, Painting&quot;, 1997, Konemann, 
* Watkin, David, &quot;A History of Western Architecture&quot;, 1986, Barrie &amp; Jenkins, 
* Christopher Wilson, &quot;The Gothic Cathedral: The Architecture of the Great Church 1130–1530&quot;, 1992 (2nd Edition), Thames and Hudson
* Yarwood, Doreen, &quot;The Architecture of Europe&quot;, 1987 (first edn. 1974), Spring Books, 
== External links ==

===Byzantine===
* St Mark&#x27;s Basilica – </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="0" end="9" title="Cathedral" label="Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="12" end="29" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="37" end="54" title="Monastery" label="monastic churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="69" end="74" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750108" start="80" end="88" title="Priory" label="priories"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="163" end="176" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q186018" start="224" end="256" title="Contemporary architecture" label="contemporary architectural style"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="569" end="593" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="595" end="614" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176" start="616" end="633" title="Cologne Cathedral" label="Cologne Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q390150" start="635" end="654" title="Salisbury Cathedral" label="Salisbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901" start="656" end="673" title="Antwerp Cathedral" label="Antwerp Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949" start="675" end="691" title="Prague Cathedral" label="Prague Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q390169" start="693" end="710" title="Lincoln Cathedral" label="Lincoln Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="716" end="739" title="Basilica of Saint-Denis" label="Basilica of Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="741" end="761" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q721817" start="767" end="789" title="Basilica of San Vitale" label="Basilica of San Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="791" end="814" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="816" end="833" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q129846" start="835" end="863" title="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q25328" start="865" end="877" title="Antoni Gaudí" label="Antoni Gaudí"/>
<link wikidata="Q48435" start="896" end="911" title="Sagrada Família" label="Sagrada Família"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="941" end="953" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="957" end="965" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="973" end="979" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1039" end="1051" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="1076" end="1084" title="Church (building)" label="churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q32880" start="1202" end="1224" title="Architectural style" label="styles of architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="1328" end="1334" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794820" start="1395" end="1405" title="stonemason" label="stonemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="1421" end="1430" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1488" end="1494" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="1508" end="1523" title="Early Christianity" label="Early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="1525" end="1534" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="1536" end="1546" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="1548" end="1554" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="1556" end="1567" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="1569" end="1576" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="1578" end="1584" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="1586" end="1598" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216982" start="1612" end="1619" title="Revivalism (architecture)" label="Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="1678" end="1684" title="Modern architecture" label="Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2193" end="2203" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q44562" start="2225" end="2236" title="Ulm Minster" label="Ulm Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="2282" end="2293" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="2299" end="2316" title="Western Christian" label="Western Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="2350" end="2360" title="episcopate" label="episcopate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="2451" end="2476" title="St Giles&amp;#x27;, Edinburgh" label="St Giles&amp;#x27;, Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q732112" start="2480" end="2505" title="St Magnus&amp;#x27;, Kirkwall" label="St Magnus&amp;#x27;, Kirkwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2534" end="2545" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q638466" start="2605" end="2620" title="Ripon Cathedral" label="Ripon Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q334399" start="2625" end="2635" title="Bath Abbey" label="Bath Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q922967" start="2817" end="2836" title="Southwark Cathedral" label="Southwark Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2931" end="2945" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846867" start="3001" end="3009" title="Basilicas in the Catholic Church" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="3060" end="3069" title="cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="3149" end="3155" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="3414" end="3420" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="3593" end="3614" title="Emperor Constantine I" label="Emperor Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="3787" end="3794" title="St John Lateran" label="St John"/>
<link wikidata="Q468405" start="3802" end="3814" title="Lateran Hill" label="Lateran Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="3823" end="3828" title="papal" label="papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053000" start="3861" end="3873" title="Vatican Hill" label="Vatican Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="3883" end="3895" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661523" start="3902" end="3920" title="architectural form" label="architectural form"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="3976" end="3982" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="4091" end="4100" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4120" end="4125" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="4139" end="4146" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="4164" end="4170" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="4188" end="4194" title="sermon" label="sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="4255" end="4285" title="episcopalian church governance" label="episcopalian church governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285545" start="4455" end="4470" title="Christian liturgy" label="liturgical rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q188613" start="4503" end="4515" title="confirmation" label="confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="4520" end="4530" title="ordination" label="ordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="4548" end="4562" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="4569" end="4587" title="established church" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="4621" end="4627" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="4663" end="4673" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="4745" end="4750" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="4758" end="4768" title="coronation" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="4774" end="4781" title="monarch" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q338619" start="5094" end="5111" title="Newport Cathedral" label="Newport Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465852" start="5448" end="5460" title="glory of God" label="glory of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370598" start="5995" end="6011" title="place of worship" label="place of worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="6356" end="6366" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="6432" end="6442" title="Calendar of saints" label="feast days"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="6742" end="6756" title="monastic order" label="monastic order"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="6769" end="6782" title="Friary" label="friary church"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="6812" end="6817" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="6841" end="6853" title="Benedictines" label="Benedictines"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="6855" end="6866" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercians"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="6868" end="6880" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="6882" end="6893" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="6895" end="6905" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="6907" end="6914" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q568225" start="7043" end="7052" title="refectory" label="refectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="7054" end="7063" title="cloisters" label="cloisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416310" start="7074" end="7087" title="chapter house" label="chapter house"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="7254" end="7267" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="7304" end="7313" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q212468" start="7315" end="7327" title="Appropriation (law)" label="appropriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413401" start="7329" end="7340" title="Secularization (church property)" label="secularized"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644648" start="7355" end="7365" title="Suppression of monasteries" label="suppressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="7451" end="7455" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="7460" end="7473" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q244952" start="7668" end="7699" title="Santa Maria delle Grazie, Milan" label="Santa Maria delle Grazie, Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="7701" end="7706" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="7708" end="7725" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q851660" start="7730" end="7746" title="Beverley Minster" label="Beverley Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="7750" end="7757" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q376932" start="7763" end="7791" title="Abbey of Saint-Étienne, Caen" label="Abbey of Saint-Étienne, Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="7796" end="7813" title="Abbey of St-Denis" label="Abbey of St-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="7817" end="7823" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q660082" start="7825" end="7835" title="Melk Abbey" label="Melk Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="7839" end="7846" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q546516" start="7848" end="7859" title="Great Lavra (Athos)" label="Great Lavra"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="7863" end="7871" title="Mt Athos" label="Mt Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741382" start="7881" end="7894" title="Malate Church" label="Malate Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="7898" end="7904" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="8090" end="8094" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8108" end="8123" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q697295" start="8314" end="8320" title="shrine" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="8422" end="8437" title="St John Lateran" label="St John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="8439" end="8459" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="8461" end="8485" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q231699" start="8495" end="8535" title="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls" label="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="8758" end="8763" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="8776" end="8781" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="8818" end="8828" title="True Cross" label="True Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q207486" start="8926" end="8956" title="Basilica of Saint Francis of Assisi" label="Basilica of St Francis, Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q194504" start="8962" end="8984" title="Church of the Nativity" label="Church of the Nativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="8986" end="8995" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q733577" start="8997" end="9012" title="Santhome Church" label="Santhome Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="9014" end="9021" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627029" start="9027" end="9046" title="Sanctuary of Fátima" label="Sanctuary of Fátima"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="9048" end="9056" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330137" start="9058" end="9074" title="Sheshan Basilica" label="Sheshan Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="9076" end="9084" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q773443" start="9090" end="9127" title="Manila Cathedral" label="Basilica of the Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="9131" end="9137" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q305419" start="9147" end="9180" title="Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe" label="Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="9184" end="9195" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q681375" start="9338" end="9350" title="house church" label="house church"/>
<link wikidata="Q189265" start="9357" end="9363" title="Atrium (architecture)" label="atrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="9370" end="9378" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029217" start="9385" end="9389" title="bema" label="bema"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="9396" end="9405" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q385910" start="9671" end="9695" title="Basilica of San Clemente" label="Basilica of San Clemente"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="9838" end="9844" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q172896" start="9870" end="9878" title="catacomb" label="catacomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q180764" start="10028" end="10042" title="Edict of Milan" label="Edict of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="10056" end="10067" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184549" start="10072" end="10080" title="Licinius" label="Licinius"/>
<link wikidata="Q172168" start="10151" end="10159" title="Galerius" label="Galerius"/>
<link wikidata="Q128742" start="10167" end="10183" title="Edict of Serdica" label="Edict of Serdica"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="10234" end="10254" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="10259" end="10274" title="St John Lateran" label="St John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="10390" end="10414" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10669" end="10675" title="Atrium (architecture)#Ancient atria" label="atrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="10703" end="10712" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q385910" start="10799" end="10823" title="Basilica of San Clemente" label="Basilica of San Clemente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071570" start="10882" end="10907" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Ambrogio, Milan" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Ambrogio, Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="10984" end="10993" title="cloisters" label="cloisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754247" start="11189" end="11203" title="Pisa Cathedral" label="Pisa Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="11399" end="11407" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="11547" end="11555" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q836108" start="11588" end="11599" title="Baths of Diocletian" label="bath houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q186637" start="11723" end="11729" title="Arcade (architecture)" label="arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q594648" start="11825" end="11831" title="exedra" label="exedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="11836" end="11840" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="12125" end="12140" title="St John Lateran" label="St John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="12279" end="12286" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860334" start="12629" end="12648" title="church architecture" label="church architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="12657" end="12666" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="12755" end="12766" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="12768" end="12789" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q464452" start="12813" end="12824" title="Constantina" label="Constantina"/>
<link wikidata="Q831361" start="12991" end="13005" title="Santa Costanza" label="Santa Costanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="13207" end="13235" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q161775" start="13386" end="13399" title="Saint Stephen" label="Saint Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q919456" start="13401" end="13420" title="San Stefano Rotondo" label="San Stefano Rotondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q721817" start="13429" end="13451" title="Basilica of San Vitale" label="Basilica of San Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429312" start="13556" end="13569" title="Temple Church" label="Temple Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="13600" end="13608" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q616334" start="13971" end="13979" title="Vyšehrad" label="Vyšehrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416310" start="14381" end="14394" title="chapter house" label="chapter house"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="14669" end="14677" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207104" start="14975" end="14992" title="sacramental bread" label="sacramental bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q111944691" start="15022" end="15026" title="Rite (Christianity)" label="rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="15030" end="15044" title="Holy Communion" label="Holy Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q200674" start="15477" end="15488" title="Latin Cross" label="Latin Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="15592" end="15600" title="transept" label="transept"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="15671" end="15680" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="15710" end="15722" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894479" start="16072" end="16083" title="Greek cross" label="Greek cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="16159" end="16174" title="Orthodoxy" label="Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q208576" start="16303" end="16310" title="narthex" label="narthex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793" start="16497" end="16505" title="Bramante" label="Bramante"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="16522" end="16546" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="16551" end="16574" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="16586" end="16610" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057509" start="16665" end="16675" title="cathedral floorplan" label="groundplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200674" start="16783" end="16794" title="Latin Cross" label="Latin Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="16807" end="16811" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q252575" start="16884" end="16896" title="York Minster" label="York Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q106934" start="16936" end="16952" title="Amiens Cathedral" label="Amiens Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634186" start="17081" end="17098" title="Banister Fletcher" label="Banister Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="17364" end="17368" title="Coordinate axis" label="axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="17569" end="17575" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="18068" end="18072" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007996" start="18086" end="18091" title="aisle" label="aisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q728266" start="18190" end="18201" title="hall church" label="hall church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="18281" end="18300" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="18466" end="18474" title="transept" label="transept"/>
<link wikidata="Q728243" start="18654" end="18662" title="crossing (architecture)" label="crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28016883" start="18719" end="18725" title="flèche (architecture)" label="flèche"/>
<link wikidata="Q22720" start="18989" end="19005" title="Speyer Cathedral" label="Speyer Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q852590" start="19040" end="19045" title="spire" label="spire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352355" start="19208" end="19219" title="James Gibbs" label="James Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335201" start="19254" end="19277" title="St Martin-in-the-Fields" label="St Martin-in-the-Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461541" start="19458" end="19466" title="westwork" label="westwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="19902" end="19930" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="19952" end="19961" title="Holy Week" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q231685" start="19999" end="20015" title="Way of the Cross" label="Way of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="20318" end="20341" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="20381" end="20387" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="20392" end="20411" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176" start="20470" end="20487" title="Cologne Cathedral" label="Cologne Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="20766" end="20781" title="Early Christianity" label="Early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="20786" end="20795" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q756720" start="21071" end="21081" title="ambulatory" label="ambulatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q768692" start="21181" end="21198" title="Norwich Cathedral" label="Norwich Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q756720" start="21399" end="21409" title="ambulatory" label="ambulatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="21474" end="21480" title="chevet" label="chevet"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="21542" end="21562" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="21691" end="21697" title="chevet" label="chevet"/>
<link wikidata="Q390169" start="21720" end="21737" title="Lincoln Cathedral" label="Lincoln Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800075" start="21841" end="21852" title="Lady chapel" label="Lady Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="22113" end="22119" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q175112" start="22122" end="22130" title="pilaster" label="pilaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q186637" start="22133" end="22141" title="arcade (architecture)" label="arcading"/>
<link wikidata="Q328092" start="22143" end="22150" title="cornice" label="cornice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770806" start="22153" end="22160" title="Molding (decorative)" label="molding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406758" start="22163" end="22169" title="finial" label="finial"/>
<link wikidata="Q847108" start="22175" end="22182" title="tracery" label="tracery"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="22697" end="22703" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281067" start="22706" end="22711" title="inlay" label="inlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="22727" end="22733" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="22881" end="22889" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="23024" end="23033" title="salvation" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="23050" end="23062" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581437" start="23107" end="23128" title="Poor Man&amp;#x27;s Bible" label="Poor Man&amp;#x27;s Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q752121" start="23387" end="23403" title="Christ Pantocrator" label="Christ the Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370517" start="23414" end="23420" title="lintel" label="lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="23547" end="23561" title="Last Judgement" label="Last Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="23631" end="23635" title="Hell" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="23639" end="23644" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="24054" end="24058" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q490016" start="24149" end="24162" title="people of God" label="people of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="24275" end="24279" title="hull (watercraft)" label="hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="24701" end="24711" title="clerestory" label="clerestory"/>
<link wikidata="Q728243" start="25190" end="25198" title="Crossing (architecture)" label="crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q51628" start="25943" end="25951" title="Nativity of Jesus" label="Nativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="25959" end="25971" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q45774" start="26085" end="26098" title="Liturgy of the Hours" label="Divine Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="26297" end="26304" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q207707" start="26364" end="26369" title="Choir (architecture)" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="26533" end="26539" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="26544" end="26563" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q207707" start="26615" end="26626" title="choir stall" label="choir stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="26819" end="26824" title="choir" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609416" start="26902" end="26914" title="choir school" label="choir school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="27039" end="27045" title="Canon (priest)" label="canons"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="27231" end="27241" title="Presbytery (architecture)" label="presbytery"/>
<link wikidata="Q607241" start="27440" end="27452" title="clergy house" label="clergy house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800075" start="27598" end="27609" title="Lady chapel" label="Lady Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="27636" end="27647" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="27929" end="27946" title="Blessed Sacrament" label="Blessed Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="28022" end="28031" title="Eucharist" label="Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="28110" end="28117" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28331" end="28354" title="Right of asylum#Medieval England" label="sanctuary of the church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="28538" end="28548" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51633" start="28607" end="28618" title="Last Supper" label="Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q318958" start="28677" end="28692" title="Communion table" label="Communion table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546359" start="28814" end="28832" title="Byzantine Catholic" label="Byzantine Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193073" start="28849" end="28860" title="iconostasis" label="iconostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711026" start="29105" end="29115" title="altarpiece" label="altarpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q346621" start="29181" end="29189" title="ciborium (architecture)" label="ciborium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="29291" end="29304" title="stained glass" label="stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q252575" start="29411" end="29423" title="York Minster" label="York Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q262500" start="29425" end="29445" title="Gloucester Cathedral" label="Gloucester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q823412" start="29450" end="29481" title="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s, Westminster" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s, Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="29621" end="29626" title="choir" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609416" start="29770" end="29782" title="choir school" label="choir school"/>
<link wikidata="Q207707" start="29818" end="29839" title="Choir (architecture)" label="section of the church"/>
<link wikidata="Q207707" start="29973" end="29985" title="choir stalls" label="choir stalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138500" start="30152" end="30160" title="cathedra" label="cathedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806700" start="30575" end="30590" title="portative organ" label="portative organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="30731" end="30738" title="Baptism" label="Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="30915" end="30929" title="Holy Scripture" label="Holy Scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325313" start="30971" end="30987" title="Eagle lectern" label="form of an eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="31059" end="31078" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="31166" end="31172" title="sermon" label="sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="31230" end="31236" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="31444" end="31450" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="31742" end="31748" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="31782" end="31795" title="stained glass" label="stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="32118" end="32125" title="Gospels" label="Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581437" start="32203" end="32224" title="Poor Man&amp;#x27;s Bible" label="Poor Man&amp;#x27;s Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q231685" start="32391" end="32412" title="Stations of the Cross" label="Stations of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q20460" start="32433" end="32441" title="Crucifix" label="Crucifix"/>
<link wikidata="Q449189" start="32520" end="32524" title="rood" label="rood"/>
<link wikidata="Q193073" start="32709" end="32720" title="iconostasis" label="iconostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413" start="32999" end="33006" title="pelican" label="pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711026" start="33218" end="33228" title="altarpiece" label="altarpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q46686" start="33243" end="33250" title="reredos" label="reredos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="33590" end="33601" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="33636" end="33650" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q704151" start="33741" end="33767" title="Arsacid dynasty of Armenia" label="Arsacid dynasty of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172520" start="33780" end="33793" title="Tiridates III of Armenia" label="Tiridates III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936626" start="33838" end="33847" title="Aisleless church" label="aisleless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664877" start="33848" end="33863" title="Kasagh Basilica" label="Kasagh Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q39618" start="33867" end="33873" title="Aparan" label="Aparan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208404" start="33881" end="33899" title="Kingdom of Armenia (antiquity)" label="Kingdom of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="34096" end="34116" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="34239" end="34248" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q328092" start="34271" end="34278" title="cornice" label="cornice"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="34318" end="34324" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q592244" start="34337" end="34349" title="Santa Sabina" label="Santa Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q831361" start="34581" end="34595" title="Santa Costanza" label="Santa Costanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q919456" start="34600" end="34619" title="San Stefano Rotondo" label="San Stefano Rotondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="34732" end="34737" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="34738" end="34746" title="Capital (architecture)" label="capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q734649" start="34809" end="34818" title="Composite order" label="Composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="35666" end="35683" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Gospel of Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q609419" start="35690" end="35710" title="Anchiskhati Basilica" label="Anchiskhati Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="35735" end="35742" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194504" start="36035" end="36057" title="Church of the Nativity" label="Church of the Nativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="36061" end="36070" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="36245" end="36273" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q27019863" start="36332" end="36346" title="Fatimid caliph" label="Fatimid caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q342137" start="36347" end="36355" title="Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah" label="Al-Hakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q645105" start="36422" end="36441" title="Euphrasian Basilica" label="Euphrasian Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="36908" end="36915" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="37025" end="37042" title="Emperor Justinian" label="Emperor Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q832278" start="37061" end="37081" title="San Apollinare Nuovo" label="San Apollinare Nuovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="37104" end="37124" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="37261" end="37267" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q721817" start="37370" end="37380" title="Basilica of San Vitale" label="San Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955008" start="37488" end="37497" title="semi-dome" label="semi-dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q52531" start="37664" end="37688" title="Santa Maria della Salute" label="Santa Maria della Salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="37739" end="37745" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="37820" end="37831" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="37835" end="37841" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="38086" end="38109" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894479" start="38202" end="38213" title="Greek Cross" label="Greek Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="38374" end="38380" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183127" start="38386" end="38396" title="polychrome" label="polychrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="38397" end="38403" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432787" start="38404" end="38410" title="Masonry veneer" label="veneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="38456" end="38468" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44265" start="38604" end="38618" title="Benedict of Nursia" label="Saint Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q192982" start="38651" end="38656" title="Cluny" label="Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="38837" end="38848" title="monasticism" label="monasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189114" start="39051" end="39057" title="spiral" label="spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="39126" end="39132" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="39133" end="39138" title="mural" label="mural"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="39215" end="39230" title="Norman conquest" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q376932" start="39266" end="39283" title="Abbaye aux Hommes" label="Abbaye aux Hommes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="39310" end="39314" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q701996" start="39324" end="39339" title="Worms Cathedral" label="Worms Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="39369" end="39373" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354756" start="39426" end="39445" title="Cathedral of Cefalù" label="Cathedral of Cefalù"/>
<link wikidata="Q753721" start="39447" end="39463" title="Cathedral of Modena" label="Modena Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287889" start="39468" end="39483" title="Cathedral of Parma" label="Parma Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q746207" start="39498" end="39514" title="Durham Cathedral" label="Durham Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259104" start="39519" end="39541" title="Peterborough Cathedral" label="Peterborough Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="39662" end="39673" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690580" start="40075" end="40092" title="flying buttresses" label="flying buttresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="40194" end="40207" title="stained glass" label="stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="40238" end="40243" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="40252" end="40271" title="lives of the saints" label="lives of the saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="40322" end="40332" title="Notre Dame de Paris" label="Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q180274" start="40341" end="40359" title="Chartres Cathedral" label="Chartres Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q206823" start="40361" end="40376" title="Reims Cathedral" label="Reims Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q476516" start="40378" end="40393" title="Rouen Cathedral" label="Rouen Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q745460" start="40395" end="40415" title="Strasbourg Cathedral" label="Strasbourg Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901" start="40427" end="40444" title="Antwerp Cathedral" label="Antwerp Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176" start="40457" end="40474" title="Cologne Cathedral" label="Cologne Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943" start="40487" end="40514" title="Stephansdom" label="St Stephen&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="40515" end="40521" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="40534" end="40552" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q282554" start="40554" end="40569" title="Siena Cathedral" label="Siena Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q18068" start="40571" end="40586" title="Milan Cathedral" label="Milan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084608" start="40591" end="40619" title="San Lorenzo Maggiore, Naples" label="San Lorenzo Maggiore, Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q744420" start="40630" end="40646" title="Burgos Cathedral" label="Burgos Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123180" start="40648" end="40664" title="Toledo Cathedral" label="Toledo Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q175874" start="40669" end="40683" title="Leon Cathedral" label="Leon Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487144" start="40694" end="40710" title="Cathedral of Guarda" label="Guarda Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q390150" start="40724" end="40743" title="Salisbury Cathedral" label="Salisbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="40745" end="40765" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q390169" start="40770" end="40787" title="Lincoln Cathedral" label="Lincoln Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="40872" end="40880" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="40952" end="40970" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="40997" end="41009" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q721817" start="41082" end="41092" title="Basilica of San Vitale" label="San Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="41163" end="41171" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="41189" end="41193" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="41531" end="41549" title="Roman architecture" label="Roman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q573881" start="41871" end="41882" title="Basilica di San Lorenzo di Firenze" label="San Lorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519975" start="41894" end="41907" title="Santo Spirito, Florence" label="Santo Spirito"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="41977" end="41987" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q187459" start="41998" end="42009" title="entablature" label="entablature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793" start="42190" end="42198" title="Bramante" label="Bramante"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="42200" end="42207" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q312365" start="42209" end="42217" title="Giuliano da Sangallo" label="Sangallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q122328" start="42219" end="42226" title="Carlo Maderno" label="Maderno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="42245" end="42257" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="42382" end="42390" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="42594" end="42608" title="Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="43179" end="43186" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="43255" end="43260" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="43267" end="43275" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="43369" end="43393" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="43540" end="43560" title="Sir Christopher Wren" label="Sir Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="43633" end="43643" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="43849" end="43861" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231015" start="44201" end="44227" title="Assumption Cathedral in Smolensk" label="Cathedral of the Dormition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="44231" end="44239" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q196388" start="44281" end="44294" title="Solvychegodsk" label="Solvychegodsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="44557" end="44579" title="Santiago de Compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q954879" start="45095" end="45110" title="Churrigueresque" label="Churrigueresque"/>
<link wikidata="Q368205" start="45364" end="45374" title="Cartouche (design)" label="cartouches"/>
<link wikidata="Q213096" start="45456" end="45464" title="seashell" label="seashell"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661523" start="45654" end="45672" title="architectural form" label="architectural form"/>
<link wikidata="Q10631691" start="45785" end="45802" title="pilgrimage church" label="pilgrimage church"/>
<link wikidata="Q694252" start="45862" end="45899" title="Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers" label="Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q61349" start="45935" end="45959" title="Johann Balthasar Neumann" label="Johann Balthasar Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q157229" start="46510" end="46530" title="Dresden Frauenkirche" label="Dresden Frauenkirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="46587" end="46599" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="47042" end="47054" title="colonisation" label="colonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="47167" end="47188" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="47462" end="47482" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866506" start="47491" end="47519" title="Liverpool Cathedral" label="Liverpool Anglican Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q257481" start="47536" end="47555" title="New Cathedral, Linz" label="New Cathedral, Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q865655" start="47572" end="47603" title="Cathedral of St. John the Divine" label="Cathedral of St John the Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138670" start="47620" end="47658" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Melbourne" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q739364" start="47743" end="47764" title="Westminster Cathedral" label="Westminster Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q102711221" start="47797" end="47822" title="Archbishop of Westminster" label="Archbishop of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q183127" start="47884" end="47894" title="polychrome" label="polychrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q200334" start="47938" end="47947" title="campanile" label="campanile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151330" start="47949" end="47983" title="Mary, Queen of the World Cathedral" label="Mary, Queen of the World Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q502163" start="47999" end="48018" title="Neo-Renaissance" label="Renaissance revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q687799" start="48220" end="48239" title="Guildford Cathedral" label="Guildford Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q606169" start="48263" end="48271" title="Armidale, New South Wales" label="Armidale"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="48294" end="48303" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="48456" end="48469" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138070" start="48585" end="48603" title="Coventry Cathedral" label="Coventry Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470975" start="48762" end="48794" title="Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral" label="Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="48958" end="48968" title="Postmodern" label="Postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q595448" start="48980" end="49003" title="postmodern architecture" label="postmodern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="49040" end="49049" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860334" start="49167" end="49186" title="Church architecture" label="Church architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614865" start="49385" end="49404" title="Steven J. Schloeder" label="Steven J. Schloeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070180" start="49406" end="49419" title="Duncan Stroik" label="Duncan Stroik"/>
<link wikidata="Q47942" start="49451" end="49461" title="Functionalism (architecture)" label="functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="49502" end="49511" title="Modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="49562" end="49572" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47848" start="49975" end="49994" title="Sacred architecture" label="Sacred architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860334" start="49997" end="50016" title="Church architecture" label="Church architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349760" start="50019" end="50040" title="Medieval architecture" label="Medieval architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636236" start="50043" end="50110" title="List of regional characteristics of European cathedral architecture" label="List of regional characteristics of European cathedral architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438509" start="50113" end="50163" title="Architecture of the medieval cathedrals of England" label="Architecture of the medieval cathedrals of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748859" start="50166" end="50185" title="Lists of cathedrals" label="Lists of cathedrals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50188" end="50244" title="Church architecture#The Reformation and its influence on church architecture" label="The Reformation and its influence on church architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q429811" start="50297" end="50333" title="Early Christian art and architecture" label="Early Christian art and architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="50336" end="50358" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031836" start="50361" end="50397" title="Eastern Orthodox church architecture" label="Eastern Orthodox church architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="50400" end="50423" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="50426" end="50445" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245347" start="50448" end="50474" title="French Gothic architecture" label="French Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="50477" end="50501" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="50504" end="50524" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="50527" end="50549" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209882" start="50552" end="50587" title="Polish Cathedral style" label="Polish Cathedral style architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787047" start="50620" end="50700" title="Architectural development of the eastern end of cathedrals in England and France" label="Architectural development of the eastern end of cathedrals in England and France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057509" start="50704" end="50721" title="Cathedral diagram" label="Cathedral diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="50724" end="50734" title="Clerestory" label="Clerestory"/>
<link wikidata="Q174520" start="50737" end="50748" title="Rose window" label="Rose window"/>
<link wikidata="Q751239" start="50751" end="50760" title="Triforium" label="Triforium"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="50763" end="50768" title="Vault (architecture)" label="Vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668050" start="50798" end="50803" title="Ablaq" label="Ablaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q215194" start="50806" end="50814" title="Gargoyle" label="Gargoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q218248" start="50817" end="50826" title="Grotesque" label="Grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595225" start="50829" end="50850" title="Labours of the Months" label="Labours of the Months"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="50853" end="50866" title="Stained glass" label="Stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971286" start="50870" end="50913" title="British and Irish stained glass (1811–1918)" label="British and Irish stained glass (1811–1918)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140484" start="50916" end="50929" title="Tree of Jesse" label="Tree of Jesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634186" start="50961" end="50978" title="Banister Fletcher" label="Banister Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="51209" end="51225" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Nikolaus Pevsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361401" start="51304" end="51314" title="Roloff Beny" label="Rolof Beny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829780" start="51669" end="51694" title="Alain Erlande-Brandenburg" label="Alain Erlande-Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429542" start="51904" end="51916" title="John Fleming (art historian)" label="John Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787443" start="51918" end="51929" title="Hugh Honour" label="Hugh Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="51934" end="51950" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Nikolaus Pevsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722972" start="52249" end="52260" title="John Harvey (historian)" label="John Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722972" start="52326" end="52337" title="John Harvey (historian)" label="John Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q552784" start="53015" end="53029" title="John Summerson" label="John Summerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703367" start="53461" end="53474" title="David Watkin (architectural historian)" label="Watkin, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q59527605" start="53696" end="53711" title="Doreen Yarwood" label="Yarwood, Doreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="53832" end="53855" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180752" wikidata="Q23058" url="?curid=180752" title="Cantons of Switzerland">
<text>The 26 cantons of Switzerland are the member states of the Swiss Confederation. The nucleus of the Swiss Confederacy in the form of the first three confederate allies used to be referred to as the . Two important periods in the development of the Old Swiss Confederacy are summarized by the terms (&#x27;Eight Cantons&#x27;; from 1353 to 1481) and (&#x27;Thirteen Cantons&#x27;, from 1513 to 1798).

Each canton of the Old Swiss Confederacy, formerly also (&#x27;lieu/locality&#x27;, from before 1450), or (&#x27;estate&#x27;, from ), was a fully sovereign state with its own border controls, army, and currency from at least the Treaty of Westphalia (1648) until the establishment of the Swiss federal state in 1848, with a brief period of centralised government during the Helvetic Republic (1798–1803). The term has been widely used since the 19th century.

The number of cantons was increased to 19 with the Act of Mediation (1803), with the recognition of former subject territories as full cantons. The Federal Treaty of 1815 increased the number to 22 due to the accession of former associates of the Old Swiss Confederacy. The canton of Jura acceded as the 23rd canton with its secession from Bern in 1979. The official number of cantons was increased to 26 in the federal constitution of 1999, which designated former half-cantons as cantons.

The areas of the cantons vary from 37 km (15 sq. mi.) (Basel-Stadt) to 7,105 km (2743 sq. mi.) (Grisons); the populations (as of 2018) range from 16,000 (Appenzell Innerrhoden) to 1.5 million (Zürich).

==Terminology==
The term &quot;canton&quot;, now also used as the English term for administrative subdivisions of other countries, originates in French usage in the late 15th century (recorded in Fribourg in 1467), from a word for &quot;edge, corner&quot;, at the time the literal translation of Early Modern High German .
After 1490, was increasingly used in French and Italian documents to refer to the members of the Swiss Confederacy. English use of &quot;canton&quot; in reference to the Swiss Confederacy (as opposed to the heraldic sense) dates to the early 17th century.

In the Old Swiss Confederacy, the term (plural: ) was in use from the early 15th century as a generic term for the member cantons. The founding cantons specifically were also known as &#x27;forest settlements&#x27; (singular: ). The formulaic for the members of the early confederacy is recorded in the mid-14th century, used interchangeably with (&#x27;cities and lands&#x27;, &#x27;city cantons and rural cantons&#x27;) until the late 15th century.
 was increasingly replaced by (plural: ) &#x27;estate&#x27; about 1550, a term taken to imply liberty and sovereignty. Abolished in the Helvetic Republic, the term &#x27;Stand&#x27; was revived in 1815 and remains in use today.

The French term adopted into German after 1648, and then only in occasional use until the early 19th century: prominent usage of and gradually disappeared in German-speaking Switzerland from the time of the Helvetic Republic. Only with the Act of Mediation of 1803 did German become an official designation, retained in the Swiss Constitution of 1848.
The term (, ) remains in synonymous usage and is reflected in the name of the upper chamber of the Swiss Parliament, the Council of States (, , , ).
In the modern era, since Neuchâtel ceased to be a principality in 1848, all Swiss cantons can be considered to have a republican form of government. Some cantons formally describe themselves as republics in their constitutions. This applies to the Romance-speaking cantons in particular:
Geneva (formally , &#x27;Republic and canton of Geneva&#x27;), Jura, Neuchâtel, Valais, Vaud and Ticino.

== History ==

In the 16th century, the Old Swiss Confederacy was composed of 13 sovereign confederate allies (the Thirteen Cantons; ), and there were two different kinds: five rural states () – Uri, Schwyz (which became eponymous of the confederacy), Unterwalden, Glarus, Appenzell – and eight urban states () – Zürich, Bern, Luzern, Zug, Basel, Fribourg, Solothurn, Schaffhausen.

Though they were technically part of the Holy Roman Empire, they had become &quot;de facto&quot; independent when the Swiss defeated Emperor Maximilian I in 1499 in Dornach.

In the early modern period, the individual confederate allies came to be seen as republics; while the six traditional allies had a tradition of direct democracy in the form of the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot;, the urban states operated via representation in city councils, de facto oligarchic systems dominated by families of the patriciate.

The old system was abandoned with the formation of the Helvetic Republic following the French invasion of Switzerland in 1798. The cantons of the Helvetic Republic had merely the status of an administrative subdivision with no sovereignty. The Helvetic Republic collapsed within five years, and cantonal sovereignty was restored with the Act of Mediation of 1803. The status of Switzerland as a federation of states was restored, at the time including 19 cantons (the six accessions to the early modern Thirteen Cantons being composed of former associates and subject territories: St. Gallen, Grisons, Aargau, Thurgau, Ticino, Vaud). Three additional western cantons, Valais, Neuchâtel and Geneva, acceded in 1815.

The process of &quot;Restoration&quot;, completed by 1830, returned most of the former feudal rights to the cantonal patriciates, leading to rebellions among the rural population. The Radicals embodied these democratic forces calling for a new federal constitution. This tension, paired with religious issues (&quot;Jesuit question&quot;) escalated into armed conflict in the 1840s, with the brief Sonderbund War. The victory of the Liberal-Radicals resulted in the formation of Switzerland as a federal state in 1848. The cantons retained far-reaching sovereignty but were no longer allowed to maintain individual standing armies or international relations. As the revolutions of 1848 in Western Europe had failed elsewhere, Switzerland during the later 19th century (and with the exception of the French Third Republic, until the end of World War I) found itself as an isolated democratic republic, surrounded by the restored monarchies of France, Italy, Austria-Hungary and Germany.

==Constitutions and powers==

The Swiss Federal Constitution declares the cantons to be sovereign to the extent that their sovereignty is not limited by federal law. Areas specifically reserved to the Confederation are the armed forces, currency, the postal service, telecommunications, immigration into and emigration from the country, granting asylum, conducting foreign relations with sovereign states, civil and criminal law, weights and measures, and customs duties.

Each canton has its own constitution, legislature, executive, police and courts. Similar to the Confederation, a directorial system of government is followed by the cantons.

The cantonal legislatures are unicameral parliaments, with their size varying between 58 and 200 seats. A few legislatures also involve or did involve general popular assemblies known as &quot;Landsgemeinden&quot;; the use of this form of legislature has declined: at present, it exists only in the cantons of Appenzell Innerrhoden and Glarus. The cantonal executives consist of either five or seven members, depending on the canton. For the names of the institutions, see the list of cantonal executives and list of cantonal legislatures.

The cantons retain all powers and competencies not delegated to the Confederation by the federal constitution or law: most significantly the cantons are responsible for healthcare, welfare, law enforcement, public education, and retain the power of taxation. Each canton defines its official language(s). Cantons may conclude treaties not only with other cantons but also with foreign states (respectively Articles 48 and 56 of the Federal Constitution).

The cantonal constitutions determine the internal organisation of the canton, including the degree of autonomy accorded to the municipalities, which varies but almost always includes the power to levy taxes and pass municipal laws; some municipalities have their own police forces.

As at the federal level, all cantons provide for some form of direct democracy. Citizens may demand a popular vote to amend the cantonal constitution or laws or to veto laws or spending bills passed by the parliament. Other than in the instances of general popular assemblies in Appenzell Innerrhoden and Glarus, democratic rights are exercised by secret ballot. The right of foreigners to vote varies by canton, as does whether Swiss citizens living abroad (and registered to vote in a canton) can take part in cantonal voting.

Swiss citizens are citizens of a particular municipality (the place of origin) and the canton in which that municipality is part. Cantons, therefore, have a role in and set requirements for the granting of citizenship (naturalisation), though the process is typically undertaken at a municipal level and is subject to federal law.

Switzerland has only one federal public holiday (1 August); public holidays otherwise vary from canton to canton.

== List ==
The cantons are listed in their order of precedence given in the federal constitution. This reflects the historical order of precedence of the Eight Cantons in the 15th century, followed by the remaining cantons in the order of their historical accession to the confederacy.

The two-letter abbreviations for Swiss cantons are widely used, e.g. on car license plates. They are also used in the ISO 3166-2 codes of Switzerland with the prefix &quot;CH-&quot; ( — Helvetian Confederation —  having been the ancient Roman name of the region). &quot;CH-SZ&quot;, for example, is used for the canton of Schwyz.

==Half-cantons==
Six of the 26 cantons are traditionally, but no longer officially, called &quot;half-cantons&quot; (, , , ). In two instances (Basel and Appenzell) this was a consequence of a historic division, whilst in the case of Unterwalden a historic mutual association, resulting in three pairs of half-cantons. The other 20 cantons were, and in some instances still are—though only in a context where it is needed to distinguish them from any half-cantons—typically termed &quot;full&quot; cantons in English.

The first article of the 1848 and 1874 constitutions constituted the Confederation as the union of &quot;twenty-two sovereign cantons&quot;, referring to the half-cantons as &quot;Unterwalden ( [&#x27;above and beneath the woods&#x27;])&quot;, &quot;Basel ( [&#x27;city and country&#x27;])&quot; and &quot;Appenzell ( [&#x27;both Rhoden&#x27;])&quot;. 
The 1874 constitution was amended to list 23 cantons with the accession of the Canton of Jura in 1978.

The historic half-cantons, and their pairings, are still recognizable in the first article of the Swiss Federal Constitution of 1999 by being joined to their other &quot;half&quot; with the conjunction &quot;and&quot;:

The 1999 constitutional revision retained the traditional distinction, on the request of the six cantonal governments, as a way to mark the historic association of the half-cantons to each other. While the older constitutions referred to these states as &quot;half-cantons&quot;, a term that remains in popular use, the 1999 revision and official terminology since then use the appellation &quot;cantons with half of a cantonal vote&quot;.

The , 1 and 2 francs coins as minted since 1874 represent the number of cantons by 22 stars surrounding the figure of Helvetia on the obverse.
The design of the coins was altered to show 23 stars, including Jura, beginning with the 1983 batch. The design has remained unchanged since, and does not reflect the official number of &quot;26 cantons&quot; introduced in 1999.
The reasons for the existence of the three pairs of half-cantons are varied:

* Unterwalden never consisted of a single unified jurisdiction. Originally, Obwalden, Nidwalden, and the Abbey of Engelberg formed distinct communities. The collective term &quot;Unterwalden&quot; remains in use, however, for the area that partook in the creation of the original Swiss confederation in 1291 with Uri and Schwyz. The Federal Charter of 1291 called for representatives from each of the three &quot;areas&quot;.
* The historical canton of Appenzell divided itself into &quot;inner&quot; and &quot;outer&quot; halves as a consequence of the Reformation in Switzerland in 1597: Appenzell Innerrhoden (Catholic) and Appenzell Ausserrhoden (Protestant).
* The historical canton of Basel was divided in 1833 after the Basel countryside (which became the canton of Basel-Landschaft) declared its independence from the city of Basel (which became the canton of Basel-Stadt), following a period of protest and armed conflict about the under-representation of the more populous countryside in the canton&#x27;s political system.

With their original circumstances of partition now a historical matter, the half-cantons are since 1848 equal to the other cantons in all but two respects:

* They elect only one member of the Council of States instead of two (Cst. art. 150 par. 2). This means there are a total of 46 seats in the council.
* In popular referendums about constitutional amendments, which require for adoption a national popular majority as well as the assent of a majority of the cantons (&quot; / &quot;), the result of the half-cantons&#x27; popular vote counts only one half of that of the other cantons (Cst. arts. 140, 142). This means that for purposes of a constitutional referendum, at least 12 out of a total of 23 cantonal popular votes must support the amendment.

Between 1831 and 1833 the canton of Schwyz was divided into half-cantons: (Inner) Schwyz and the break-away Outer Schwyz; in this instance, the half-cantons were forced by the Confederation to settle their disputes and reunite.

In the 20th century, some Jura separatists suggested a new canton of Jura to be divided into half-cantons of North Jura and South Jura. Instead, North Jura became the (full) canton of Jura while South Jura remains in the canton of Bern as the region of Bernese Jura.

== Names in national languages ==
The name of each canton in its own official language is shown in bold.

==Admission of new cantons==

The enlargement of Switzerland by way of the admission of new cantons ended in 1815. The latest formal attempt considered by Switzerland was in 1919 from Vorarlberg but subsequently rejected. A few representatives submitted in 2010 a parliamentary motion to consider enlargement although it was widely seen as anti-EU rhetoric rather than a serious proposal. The motion was eventually dropped and not even examined by the parliament.

==See also==

* Cantonal bank
* Cantonal police
* Conference of the Cantonal Governments
* Flags and arms of cantons of Switzerland
* List of Swiss cantons by GDP
* List of cantons of Switzerland by elevation
* Spatial planning in Switzerland

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
; Works cited

* . Cited as &quot;Ehrenzeller&quot;.
* Cited as &quot;Häfelin&quot;.
==External links==

* Swissworld.org – The cantons of Switzerland
* Swisskarte.ch – Maps of the Cantons of Switzerland
* GeoPuzzleAssemble cantons on a Swiss map
* BadacDatabase on Swiss cantons and cities </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="7" end="29" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="cantons of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q107390" start="38" end="50" title="Federated state" label="member state"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="59" end="78" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="247" end="268" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="419" end="440" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="547" end="562" title="sovereignty" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="630" end="650" title="Treaty of Westphalia" label="Treaty of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206696" start="775" end="792" title="Helvetic Republic" label="Helvetic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886026" start="912" end="928" title="Mediation (Switzerland)" label="Act of Mediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q687554" start="1009" end="1023" title="Federal Treaty" label="Federal Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1090" end="1129" title="old Swiss Confederacy#Associates" label="associates of the Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755" start="1135" end="1149" title="canton of Jura" label="canton of Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q679447" start="1186" end="1195" title="Jura separatism" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q11911" start="1201" end="1205" title="Canton of Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="1273" end="1301" title="Swiss Federal Constitution" label="federal constitution of 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q12172" start="1408" end="1419" title="Basel-Stadt" label="Basel-Stadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="1449" end="1456" title="Grisons" label="Grisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="1507" end="1528" title="Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11943" start="1546" end="1552" title="canton of Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1587" end="1593" title=":wikt:canton#English" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311958" start="1639" end="1665" title="Canton (country subdivision)" label="administrative subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473289" start="1701" end="1707" title="Middle French" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472199" start="1852" end="1876" title="Early Modern High German" label="Early Modern High German"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2016" end="2022" title=":wikt:canton" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267314" start="2086" end="2100" title="Canton (heraldry)" label="heraldic sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="2634" end="2640" title="state (polity)" label="estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="2852" end="2862" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="after 1648"/>
<link wikidata="Q206696" start="3023" end="3040" title="Helvetic Republic" label="Helvetic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q666909" start="3056" end="3072" title="Act of Mediation" label="Act of Mediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="3140" end="3158" title="Swiss Constitution" label="Swiss Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q609037" start="3289" end="3306" title="Council of States (Switzerland)" label="Council of States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3435" end="3464" title="Government#Republics" label="republican form of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="3511" end="3519" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917" start="3605" end="3611" title="canton of Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755" start="3668" end="3672" title="Canton of Jura" label="Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q12738" start="3674" end="3683" title="Canton of Neuchâtel" label="Neuchâtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="3685" end="3691" title="Canton of Valais" label="Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="3693" end="3697" title="Canton of Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="3702" end="3708" title="Ticino" label="Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="3751" end="3772" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895113" start="3826" end="3842" title="Thirteen Cantons" label="Thirteen Cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404" start="3906" end="3909" title="Canton of Uri" label="Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12433" start="3911" end="3917" title="Canton of Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379116" start="3932" end="3941" title="Name of Switzerland" label="eponymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q214069" start="3963" end="3974" title="Unterwalden" label="Unterwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="3976" end="3982" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q688257" start="3984" end="3993" title="Canton of Appenzell" label="Appenzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11943" start="4024" end="4030" title="Canton of Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q11911" start="4032" end="4036" title="Canton of Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12121" start="4038" end="4044" title="Canton of Luzern" label="Luzern"/>
<link wikidata="Q11933" start="4046" end="4049" title="Canton of Zug" label="Zug"/>
<link wikidata="Q660776" start="4051" end="4056" title="Canton of Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640" start="4058" end="4066" title="Canton of Fribourg" label="Fribourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11929" start="4068" end="4077" title="Canton of Solothurn" label="Solothurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12697" start="4079" end="4091" title="Canton of Schaffhausen" label="Schaffhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="4135" end="4152" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q251597" start="4218" end="4226" title="Battle of Dornach" label="defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="4227" end="4247" title="Emperor Maximilian I" label="Emperor Maximilian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="4350" end="4358" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="4413" end="4429" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q688561" start="4455" end="4468" title="Landsgemeinde" label="Landsgemeinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145286" start="4506" end="4520" title="Representation (politics)" label="representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="4548" end="4558" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095374" start="4596" end="4606" title="patrician (post-Roman Europe)" label="patriciate"/>
<link wikidata="Q206696" start="4664" end="4681" title="Helvetic Republic" label="Helvetic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450451" start="4696" end="4726" title="French invasion of Switzerland" label="French invasion of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311958" start="4801" end="4827" title="Canton (country subdivision)" label="administrative subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q666909" start="4947" end="4963" title="Act of Mediation" label="Act of Mediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12746" start="5190" end="5200" title="Canton of St. Gallen" label="St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="5202" end="5209" title="Grisons" label="Grisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11972" start="5211" end="5217" title="Aargau" label="Aargau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12713" start="5219" end="5226" title="Thurgau" label="Thurgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="5228" end="5234" title="Ticino" label="Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="5236" end="5240" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="5277" end="5283" title="Canton of Valais" label="Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q12738" start="5285" end="5294" title="Canton of Neuchâtel" label="Neuchâtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917" start="5299" end="5305" title="Canton of Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095374" start="5442" end="5453" title="Patrician (post-Roman Europe)" label="patriciates"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102158" start="5509" end="5517" title="Liberalism and radicalism in Switzerland" label="Radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q688894" start="5617" end="5633" title="religion in Switzerland" label="religious issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q688297" start="5723" end="5737" title="Sonderbund War" label="Sonderbund War"/>
<link wikidata="Q355857" start="5804" end="5834" title="Switzerland as a federal state" label="Switzerland as a federal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="5991" end="6010" title="revolutions of 1848" label="revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="6124" end="6145" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6164" end="6175" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="6267" end="6273" title="Second French Empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="6275" end="6280" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="6282" end="6297" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="6302" end="6309" title="German Confederation" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="6346" end="6372" title="Swiss Federal Constitution" label="Swiss Federal Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="6809" end="6821" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="6823" end="6834" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="6836" end="6845" title="Executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q677962" start="6847" end="6853" title="Law enforcement in Switzerland" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="6858" end="6863" title="judiciary" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523556" start="6898" end="6916" title="directorial system" label="directorial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="6990" end="7000" title="unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="7001" end="7011" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q688561" start="7153" end="7166" title="Landsgemeinde" label="Landsgemeinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="7270" end="7291" title="Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="7296" end="7302" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620719" start="7437" end="7464" title="List of cantonal executives of Switzerland" label="list of cantonal executives"/>
<link wikidata="Q667186" start="7469" end="7498" title="List of cantonal legislatures of Switzerland" label="list of cantonal legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="7670" end="7680" title="health care" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="7682" end="7689" title="Welfare (financial aid)" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="7708" end="7724" title="public education" label="public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463638" start="7750" end="7758" title="Taxation in Switzerland" label="taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="7827" end="7835" title="treaty" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q70208" start="8084" end="8098" title="Municipalities of Switzerland" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="8302" end="8318" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039721" start="8607" end="8634" title="Right of foreigners to vote in Switzerland" label="right of foreigners to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q448506" start="8770" end="8784" title="Swiss nationality law" label="Swiss citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021360" start="8832" end="8847" title="place of origin" label="place of origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q671354" start="9188" end="9214" title="Public holidays in Switzerland" label="vary from canton to canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q668589" start="9371" end="9384" title="Eight Cantons" label="Eight Cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q689200" start="9576" end="9594" title="vehicle registration plates of Switzerland" label="car license plates"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9622" end="9653" title="ISO 3166-2:CH" label="ISO 3166-2 codes of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12433" start="9816" end="9832" title="canton of Schwyz" label="canton of Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214069" start="10534" end="10545" title="Unterwalden" label="Unterwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12573" start="10555" end="10560" title="Obwalden" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q12592" start="10565" end="10572" title="Nidwalden" label="beneath"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755" start="10786" end="10800" title="Canton of Jura" label="Canton of Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="10909" end="10935" title="Swiss Federal Constitution" label="Swiss Federal Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q471424" start="11476" end="11498" title="Coins of the Swiss franc" label=", 1 and 2 francs coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q15317" start="11590" end="11598" title="Helvetia" label="Helvetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214069" start="11924" end="11935" title="Unterwalden" label="Unterwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q667880" start="12027" end="12045" title="Abbey of Engelberg" label="Abbey of Engelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404" start="12235" end="12238" title="Canton of Uri" label="Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12433" start="12243" end="12249" title="Canton of Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q662637" start="12255" end="12278" title="Federal Charter of 1291" label="Federal Charter of 1291"/>
<link wikidata="Q688257" start="12365" end="12384" title="canton of Appenzell" label="canton of Appenzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q671922" start="12476" end="12502" title="Reformation in Switzerland" label="Reformation in Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="12512" end="12533" title="Canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12535" end="12543" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12079" start="12549" end="12571" title="Canton of Appenzell Ausserrhoden" label="Appenzell Ausserrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="12573" end="12583" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q660776" start="12603" end="12618" title="canton of Basel" label="canton of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12146" start="12695" end="12711" title="Basel-Landschaft" label="Basel-Landschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q12172" start="12780" end="12801" title="canton of Basel-Stadt" label="canton of Basel-Stadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q609037" start="13150" end="13167" title="Swiss Council of States" label="Council of States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13269" end="13288" title="Voting in Switzerland#Constitutional referendums (Popular initiatives)" label="popular referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q381599" start="13824" end="13836" title="Outer Schwyz" label="Outer Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q679447" start="13971" end="13987" title="Jura separatism" label="Jura separatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755" start="14119" end="14133" title="canton of Jura" label="canton of Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631098" start="14188" end="14194" title="Subdivisions of the canton of Bern" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q247613" start="14198" end="14210" title="Bernese Jura" label="Bernese Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q38981" start="14490" end="14497" title="1919 Vorarlberg referendum" label="in 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q38981" start="14503" end="14513" title="Vorarlberg" label="Vorarlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q665634" start="14800" end="14813" title="Cantonal bank" label="Cantonal bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q665913" start="14816" end="14831" title="Cantonal police" label="Cantonal police"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14834" end="14872" title="Conference of the Cantonal Governments" label="Conference of the Cantonal Governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q673619" start="14875" end="14915" title="Flags and arms of cantons of Switzerland" label="Flags and arms of cantons of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q56696532" start="14918" end="14946" title="List of Swiss cantons by GDP" label="List of Swiss cantons by GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247402" start="14949" end="14992" title="List of cantons of Switzerland by elevation" label="List of cantons of Switzerland by elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342818" start="14995" end="15026" title="Spatial planning in Switzerland" label="Spatial planning in Switzerland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180754" wikidata="Q143108" url="?curid=180754" title="Franz von Sickingen">
<text>Franz von Sickingen (2 March 14817 May 1523) was a knight of the Holy Roman Empire who, with Ulrich von Hutten, led the so-called &quot;Knights&#x27; War,&quot; and was one of the most notable figures of the early period of the Protestant Reformation. Sickingen is posthumously known as &quot;the last knight&quot; (&quot;der letzte Ritter&quot;), an epithet he shared with his contemporaries Chevalier de Bayard and Emperor Maximilian.

== Early life ==
Franz von Sickingen was born on 2 March 1481 at Ebernburg Castle in the Palatinate of the Holy Roman Empire to Schweickhardt von Sickingen and his wife Margarethe Puller von der Hohenburg. Franz was married to Hedwig von Flersheim (d. 1515). Having fought for the emperor Maximilian I against Venice in 1508, he inherited large estates on the Rhine, and increased his wealth and reputation by numerous private feuds, in which he usually posed as the friend of the oppressed. 
In 1513, Sickingen took up the quarrel of Balthasar Schlör, a citizen who had been driven out of Worms, and attacked it with 7000 men. In spite of an imperial ban, he devastated its lands, intercepted its commerce, and desisted only when his demands were granted. He made war on Antoine, Duke of Lorraine, and compelled Philip, Landgrave of Hesse, to pay him 35,000 gulden. In 1518 he interfered in a civil conflict in Metz, ostensibly siding with the citizens against the governing oligarchy. He led an army of 20,000 against it, compelled the magistrates to give him 20,000 gulden and a month&#x27;s pay for his troops. 
In 1518, Maximilian released him from the ban, and he took part in the war carried on by the Swabian League against Ulrich, Duke of Württemberg.

In the contest for the imperial throne upon the death of Maximilian in 1519, Sickingen accepted bribes from King Francis I of France, but when the election took place he led his troops to Frankfurt, where their presence assisted to secure the election of Charles V. For this service he was made imperial chamberlain and councillor, and in 1521 he led an expedition into France, which ravaged Picardy, but was beaten back from Mézières and forced to retreat.

In about 1517 Sickingen first met Ulrich von Hutten, and gave his support to Hutten&#x27;s schemes. He assisted many a creditor in procuring what was due him from a powerful debtor. Without being a scholar, he loved science and protected men of learning. In 1519 a threat from him freed Johann Reuchlin from his enemies, the Dominicans of Cologne. His castles became (in Hutten&#x27;s words) a &quot;refuge for righteousness&quot; (&quot;Herberge der Gerechtigkeit&quot;). Here many of the reformers found shelter, and a retreat was offered to Martin Luther.

== Knights&#x27; War ==
After the failure of the French expedition, Sickingen, aided by Hutten, formed, or revived, a large scheme to overthrow the spiritual princes and to elevate the order of knighthood, the Knights&#x27; War. He hoped to secure this by the help of the towns and peasantry, and promote his own situation. A large army was soon collected, many nobles from the upper Rhineland joined the standard, and at Landau, in August 1522, Sickingen was formally named commander. He declared war against his old enemy, Richard Greiffenklau of Vollraths, Archbishop of Trier, and marched against that city. Trier was loyal to the archbishop, and the landgrave of Hesse and Louis V, count palatine of the Rhine, hastened to his assistance. Sickingen, without the help he needed, was compelled to fall back on his castle, Nanstein Castle, above Landstuhl.

===Siege of Nanstein===
On 22 October 1522 the council of regency placed him under the ban, to which he replied, in the spring of 1523, by plundering Kaiserslautern. The Archbishop of Trier, Palatine Elector Louis V, and the Landgrave of Hesse decided to move against him, and having obtained help from the Swabian League, marched on Nanstein Castle. He refused to negotiate, and during the siege was mortally wounded. This was one of the first occasions artillery was used, and breaches were soon made in an otherwise impregnable fortress. On 6 May 1523 Sickingen was forced to capitulate, and died the following day. He was buried in the old Mary&#x27;s Chapel (present-day St. Andreas-Kirche), Landstuhl.

== Issue ==
Sickingen&#x27;s six children included two sons. Schweikhard von Sickingen zu Neuenbürg (1500-1562) and Franz Conrad (1511-1575). Franz Conrad was made baron of the Empire (&quot;Reichsfreiherr&quot;) by Maximilian II.

== Honours ==
In 1889, the Hutten-Sickingen Monument of Bad Münster am Stein-Ebernburg in Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany, was built above the town to commemorate Hutten and Sickingen&#x27;s role in the Knights&#x27; War.

== Legacy ==
Ferdinand Lasalle&#x27;s 1859 play &quot;Franz von Sickingen: A Historical Tragedy&quot; was a five-part drama based on the knight&#x27;s life. This work sparked intense debate on socialist aesthetics between Lasalle on the one hand and Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels on the other, which became known as the &quot;Sickingen Debate&quot;

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* This work in turn cites:
** H. Ulmann, &quot;Franz von Sickingen&quot; (Leipzig, 1872)
** F. P. Bremer, &quot;Sickingens Fehde gegen Trier&quot; (Strassburg, 1883)
** H. Prutz, &quot;Franz von Sickingen in Der neue Plutarch&quot; (Leipzig, 1880)
** U. von Hutten, &quot;Flersheimer Chronik&quot; in &quot;Hutten&#x27;s Deutsche Schriften&quot;, edited by O. Waltz (sic!) and Szamatolati (sic!) (Strassburg, 1891)

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q143108" start="0" end="19" title="Franz von Sickingen" label="Franz von Sickingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139654" start="51" end="57" title="Imperial Knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="65" end="82" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q77107" start="93" end="110" title="Ulrich von Hutten" label="Ulrich von Hutten"/>
<link wikidata="Q569485" start="136" end="153" title="Knights&amp;#x27; War" label="Knights&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="228" end="250" title="Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q552017" start="393" end="412" title="Pierre Terrail, seigneur de Bayard" label="Chevalier de Bayard"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="417" end="435" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q884300" start="503" end="519" title="Ebernburg Castle" label="Ebernburg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="527" end="537" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="545" end="562" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="727" end="739" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="748" end="754" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="798" end="803" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852" start="1028" end="1033" title="Worms, Germany" label="Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q583733" start="1081" end="1093" title="imperial ban" label="imperial ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q590487" start="1210" end="1235" title="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine" label="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169319" start="1251" end="1277" title="Philip I, Landgrave of Hesse" label="Philip, Landgrave of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q318904" start="1297" end="1303" title="Rhenish guilder" label="gulden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="1350" end="1354" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="1414" end="1423" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q687124" start="1647" end="1661" title="Swabian League" label="Swabian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q61671" start="1670" end="1697" title="Ulrich, Duke of Württemberg" label="Ulrich, Duke of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="1813" end="1832" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="1888" end="1897" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="1955" end="1964" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249603" start="2092" end="2099" title="Picardy" label="Picardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47383" start="2126" end="2134" title="Charleville-Mézières" label="Mézières"/>
<link wikidata="Q77107" start="2193" end="2210" title="Ulrich von Hutten" label="Ulrich von Hutten"/>
<link wikidata="Q61067" start="2446" end="2461" title="Johann Reuchlin" label="Johann Reuchlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="2484" end="2493" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="2498" end="2505" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="2703" end="2716" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q91308" start="3244" end="3277" title="Richard Greiffenklau zu Vollraths" label="Richard Greiffenklau of Vollraths"/>
<link wikidata="Q708778" start="3279" end="3298" title="Archbishop of Trier" label="Archbishop of Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="3331" end="3336" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013198" start="3544" end="3559" title="Nanstein Castle" label="Nanstein Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22950" start="3567" end="3576" title="Landstuhl" label="Landstuhl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758" start="3729" end="3743" title="Kaiserslautern" label="Kaiserslautern"/>
<link wikidata="Q62954" start="3770" end="3794" title="Louis V, Elector Palatine" label="Palatine Elector Louis V"/>
<link wikidata="Q169319" start="3804" end="3822" title="Philip I of Hesse" label="Landgrave of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338119" start="4452" end="4471" title="Freiherr" label="baron of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150862" start="4504" end="4517" title="Maximilian II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q50894" start="4576" end="4606" title="Bad Münster am Stein-Ebernburg" label="Bad Münster am Stein-Ebernburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="4610" end="4630" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4632" end="4639" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q75784" start="4754" end="4771" title="Ferdinand Lassalle" label="Ferdinand Lasalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="4944" end="4954" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="4991" end="5000" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="5005" end="5021" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180755" wikidata="Q232475" url="?curid=180755" title="Mary of Modena">
<text>Mary of Modena (; ) was Queen of England, Scotland and Ireland as the second wife of James II and VII. A devout Roman Catholic, Mary married the widower James, who was then the younger brother and heir presumptive of Charles II. She was devoted to James and their children, two of whom survived to adulthood: the Jacobite claimant to the thrones, James Francis Edward, and Louisa Maria Teresa.

Born a princess of the northwestern Italian Duchy of Modena, Mary is primarily remembered for the controversial birth of Prince James Francis Edward, her only surviving son. It was widely rumoured that he was smuggled into the birth chamber in a warming pan in order to perpetuate her husband&#x27;s Roman Catholic Stuart dynasty. James Francis Edward&#x27;s birth was a contributing factor to the &quot;Glorious Revolution&quot;, the revolution which deposed James II and VII, and replaced him with Mary II, a Protestant, the elder of James II’s daughters from his first marriage to Anne Hyde (1637–1671). Mary II and her husband, William III of Orange, would reign jointly over all three kingdoms. 

Mary went into exile in France, being known as the &quot;Queen over the Water&quot; among the Jacobites. She lived with her husband and children in the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye, provided by King Louis XIV. Mary was popular among Louis&#x27;s courtiers; James, however, was considered a bore. In widowhood, Mary spent time with the nuns at the Convent of Chaillot, frequently during summers with her daughter, Louisa Maria Teresa. In 1701, when James II died, young James Francis Edward, aged 13, became king in the eyes of the Jacobites. Given that he was too young to assume the nominal reins of government, Mary represented him until he reached the age of 16. When James Francis Edward was asked to leave France as part of the settlement from the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, which ended the War of the Spanish Succession (1701–1714), Mary stayed despite having no family there, her daughter having died of smallpox. Fondly remembered by her French contemporaries, Mary died of breast cancer in 1718.

== Early life (1658–1673) ==

Maria Beatrice d&#x27;Este, the second (but eldest surviving) child of Alfonso IV, Duke of Modena, and his wife, Laura Martinozzi, was born on 5 October 1658 NS in Modena, Duchy of Modena, Italy. Her only younger brother, Francesco, succeeded their father as Duke upon the latter&#x27;s death in 1662, the year Mary turned four. Mary and Francesco&#x27;s mother, Laura, was strict with them and acted as regent of the duchy until her son came of age. Mary&#x27;s education was excellent; she spoke French and Italian fluently, had a good knowledge of Latin and, later, mastered English.

Mary was described by contemporaries as &quot;tall and admirably shaped&quot;, and was sought as a bride for James, Duke of York, by Lord Peterborough. Lord Peterborough was Groom of the Stole to the Duke of York. A widower, James was the younger brother and heir of Charles II of England. Duchess Laura was not initially forthcoming with a reply to Peterborough&#x27;s proposal, hoping, according to the French ambassador, for a &quot;grander&quot; match with the eleven-year-old Charles II of Spain. Whatever the reason for Laura&#x27;s initial reluctance, she finally accepted the proposal on behalf of Mary, and they were married by proxy on 30 September 1673, she just shy of 15, he being 39.

Modena was within the sphere of influence of Louis XIV of France, who endorsed Mary&#x27;s candidature and greeted Mary warmly in Paris, where she stopped &quot;en route&quot; to England, giving her a brooch worth £8,000. Her reception in England was much cooler. Parliament, which was entirely composed of Protestants, reacted poorly to the news of a &quot;Roman Catholic&quot; marriage, fearing it was a &quot;Papist&quot; plot against the country. The English public, who were predominantly Protestant, branded the Duchess of York – as Mary was thereafter known as until her husband&#x27;s accession – the &quot;Pope&#x27;s daughter&quot;. Parliament threatened to have the marriage annulled, leading Charles to suspend parliament until 7 January 1674 OS, to ensure the marriage would be honoured and safeguarding the reputation of his House of Stuart.

== Duchess of York (1673–1685) ==

=== Household ===
James, an avowed Roman Catholic, was twenty-five years older than his bride, scarred by smallpox and afflicted with a stammer. He had secretly converted to Catholicism around 1668. Mary first saw her husband on 23 November 1673 OS, on the day of their second marriage ceremony. James was pleased with his bride. Mary, however, at first disliked him, and burst into tears each time she saw him. Nonetheless, she soon warmed to James. From his first marriage to Anne Hyde, a commoner, who had died in 1671, James had two daughters: Lady Mary and Lady Anne. They were introduced to Mary by James with the words, &quot;I have brought you a new play-fellow&quot;. Unlike Lady Mary, Lady Anne disliked her father&#x27;s new wife. Mary played games with Anne to win her affection.

The Duchess of York received £5,000 spending money annually and her own household, headed by Carey Fraser, Countess of Peterborough; it was frequented by ladies of her husband&#x27;s selection: Frances Stewart, Duchess of Richmond and Anne Scott, 1st Duchess of Buccleuch. That Mary loathed gambling did not stop her ladies compelling her to do so almost every day. They believed that &quot;if she refrained, it might be taken ill&quot;. Consequently, Mary incurred minor gambling debts.

The birth of Mary&#x27;s first child, Catherine Laura, named after Queen Catherine, on 10 January 1675 OS represented the beginning of a string of children that would die in infancy. At this time the Duchess of York was on excellent terms with Lady Mary, and visited her in The Hague after the younger Mary had married William of Orange. She travelled incognito and took Lady Anne with her.

=== Popish plot and exile ===

The Duchess&#x27;s Catholic secretary, Edward Colman, was, in 1678, falsely implicated in a fictitious plot against the King by Titus Oates. The plot, known as the Popish Plot, led to the Exclusionist movement, which was headed by Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury. The Exclusionists sought to debar the Catholic Duke of York from the throne. Their reputation in tatters, the Yorks were reluctantly exiled to Brussels, a domain of King Charles II of Spain, ostensibly to visit Lady Mary—since 1677 the wife of Prince William III of Orange. Accompanied by her not yet three-year-old daughter Isabella and Lady Anne, the Duchess of York was saddened by James&#x27;s extra-marital affair with Catherine Sedley. Mary&#x27;s spirits were briefly revived by a visit from her mother, who was living in Rome.
A report that King Charles was very sick sent the Yorks hastily back to England. They feared the King&#x27;s eldest illegitimate son, James Scott, 1st Duke of Monmouth, the commander of England&#x27;s armed forces, might usurp the crown if Charles died before their return. The danger was compounded by the fact that Monmouth enjoyed the support of the Exclusionists, who held a majority in the English House of Commons. Charles survived but, feeling the Yorks returned to court too soon, sent James and Mary to Edinburgh, where they stayed on-and-off for the next three years. Lodging in Holyrood Palace, the Yorks had to make do without Ladies Anne and Isabella, who stayed in London on Charles&#x27;s orders. The Yorks were recalled to London in February 1680, only to return again to Edinburgh that autumn; this time they went on a more honourable footing: James was created King&#x27;s Commissioner to Scotland. Separated from Lady Isabella once again, Mary sank into a state of sadness, exacerbated by the passing of the Exclusion bill in the Commons. Isabella, thus far the only one of Mary&#x27;s children to survive infancy, died in February 1681. Isabella&#x27;s death plunged Mary into a religious mania, worrying her physician. At the same time as news reached Holyrood of Isabella&#x27;s death, Mary&#x27;s mother was falsely accused of offering £10,000 for the murder of the King. The accuser, a pamphleteer, was executed by order of the King.

The Exclusionist reaction that followed the Popish plot had died down by May 1682. Exclusionist-dominated Parliament, suspended since March 1681, never again met in the reign of Charles II. Therefore, the Duke and Duchess returned to England, and Mary gave birth to a daughter named Charlotte Mary in August 1682; Charlotte Mary&#x27;s death three weeks later, according to the French ambassador, robbed James of &quot;hope that any child of his can live&quot;—all James&#x27;s sons by his first wife died in infancy. James&#x27;s sadness was dispelled by his revival in popularity following the discovery of a plot to kill him and Charles. The objective of the plot, known as the Rye House Plot, was to have Monmouth placed on the throne as Lord Protector. The revival was so strong that, in 1684, James was re-admitted to the Privy Council, after an absence of eleven years.

== Queen consort (1685–1688) ==
Despite all the furore over Exclusionism, James ascended his brother&#x27;s thrones easily upon the latter&#x27;s death – which occurred on 6 February 1685 OS – possibly owing to the risk that the said alternative might provoke another civil war. Mary sincerely mourned Charles, recalling in later life, &quot;He was always kind to me.&quot; Mary and James&#x27;s £119,000 coronation, occurring on 23 April OS, Saint George&#x27;s day, was meticulously planned. Precedents were sought for Mary because a full-length joint coronation had not occurred since the coronation of King Henry VIII and Queen Catherine.

Queen Mary&#x27;s health had still not recovered after the death of Lady Isabella. So much so, in fact, that the Tuscan envoy reported to Florence that &quot;general opinion turns [for Mary&#x27;s successor] in the direction of the Princess, Your Highness&#x27;s daughter&quot;. France, too, was preparing for Mary&#x27;s imminent demise, putting forward as its candidate for James&#x27;s new wife the Duke of Enghien&#x27;s daughter. The Queen was then trying to make her brother, the Duke of Modena, marry the former, Anna Maria Luisa de&#x27; Medici.

In February 1687, Mary, at the time irritated by James&#x27;s affair with Catherine Sedley, Countess of Dorchester, moved into new apartments in Whitehall; Whitehall had been home to a Catholic chapel since December 1686. Her apartments were designed by Christopher Wren at the cost of £13,000. Because the palace&#x27;s renovation was thus far unfinished, James received ambassadors in her rooms, much to Mary&#x27;s chagrin. Five months later, shortly after the marriage talks with Tuscany collapsed, the Queen&#x27;s mother, Duchess Laura, died. Therefore, the whole English court went into mourning. Duchess Laura left Mary &quot;a considerable sum of cash&quot; and some jewellery. William III of Orange, James&#x27;s nephew and son-in-law, sensed popular discontent with James&#x27;s government; he used the death of Mary&#x27;s mother as a guise to send his cousin Count Zuylestein, to England, ostensibly to condole the Queen, but in reality as a spy.
Having visited Bath, in the hope its waters would aid conception, Queen Mary became pregnant in late 1687. When the pregnancy became public knowledge shortly before Christmas, Catholics rejoiced. Protestants, who had tolerated James&#x27;s Catholic government because he had no Catholic heir, were concerned. The Protestant disillusion came to a head after the child was known to be male, and many Protestants believed the child was spurious; if not, James II&#x27;s Catholic dynasty would have been perpetuated. Popular opinion alleged that the child, named James Francis Edward, was smuggled into the birth chamber as a substitute for the Queen&#x27;s real but stillborn child. This rumour was widely accepted as fact by Protestants, despite the many witnesses of the birth. Mainly by mismanagement on James&#x27;s part, these rumours had some excuse as from personal prejudice he had excluded many from the ceremony whose testimony must have been counted valid; most of the witnesses were Catholics or foreigners, and several, such as his daughter Anne and the Protestant prelates, or the maternal relatives of his daughters, whom the new birth would remove from the direct succession, were not present.

Anne and her elder sister, Mary, still suspected that their father had thrust a changeling upon the nation. Count Zuylestein, returning to the Netherlands shortly after the birth, agreed with Anne&#x27;s findings.

Issued by seven leading Whig nobles, the invitation for William to invade England signalled the beginning of a revolution that culminated in James&#x27;s deposition. The invitation assured William that &quot;nineteen parts of twenty of the people throughout the kingdom&quot; wished for an intervention. The revolution, known as the Glorious Revolution, deprived James Francis Edward of his right to the English throne, on the grounds that he was not deemed the King&#x27;s real son, and later because he was a Catholic. With England in the hands of William of Orange&#x27;s 15,000-strong army, James and Mary decided to go into exile in France. On 9 December 1688, Mary left London in disguise with the infant Prince of Wales and in the company of Victoria Davia-Montecuculi, under the arrangement of Antoine Nompar de Caumont. After arriving in France through Calais, she was joined by James a few weeks later. There, they stayed at the expense of James&#x27;s first cousin King Louis XIV, who supported the Jacobite cause.

== Queen over the water (1688–1701) ==

=== Reception at Louis XIV&#x27;s court ===

James was formally deposed on 11 December 1688 OS in England and on 11 May 1689 OS in Scotland, and his daughter Mary II and her husband, William III, were made joint monarchs. James, however, backed by Louis XIV of France, still considered himself king by divine right, and maintained it was not within parliament&#x27;s prerogative to depose a monarch. Louis gave the exiled royal couple the use of Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye, where they set up a court-in-exile.

Mary quickly became a popular fixture at Louis XIV&#x27;s court at Versailles, where diarist Madame de Sévigné acclaimed Mary for her &quot;distinguished bearing and her quick wit&quot;. Questions of precedence, however, marred Mary&#x27;s relations with Louis&#x27;s daughter-in-law, Maria Anna Victoria of Bavaria. Because Mary was accorded the privileges and rank of a queen, Maria Anna was outranked by her. Therefore, Maria Anna refused to see Mary, etiquette being a sensitive issue at Versailles. In spite of this, Louis and his secret wife, Madame de Maintenon, became close friends with Mary. As there was no queen at the French court, nor a dauphine after Maria Anna&#x27;s death in 1690, Mary took precedence over all the female members of the French court and French royal house, as did her daughter in her capacity of a royal princess until the next French dauphine appeared in 1711. James was largely excluded from French court life. His contemporaries found him boring, and French courtiers frequently joked that &quot;when one talks to him, one understands why he is here.&quot; Mary gave birth to a daughter, Louise Mary, in 1692. She was to be James and Mary&#x27;s last child.

Initially supported by Irish Catholics in his effort to regain the thrones, James launched an expedition to Ireland in March 1689. He abandoned it upon his defeat at the Battle of the Boyne in 1690. During James&#x27;s campaign, Mary supported his cause throughout the British Isles: she sent three French supply ships to Bantry Bay and £2,000 to Jacobite rebels in Dundee. She financed those measures by selling her jewellery. Money problems plagued the Stuart court-in-exile, despite a substantial pension from Louis XIV of 50,000 livres. Mary tried her best to assist those of her husband&#x27;s followers living in poverty, and encouraged her children to give part of their pocket money to Jacobite refugees.

=== Estensi succession ===
The collapse of James&#x27;s invasion of Ireland in 1691 upset Mary. Her spirits were lifted by news of the marriage of her brother, the Duke of Modena, to Margherita Maria Farnese of Parma. When, in 1695, Mary&#x27;s brother died, the House of Este was left with one progenitor, their uncle Cardinal-Duke Rinaldo. Queen Mary, concerned for the dynasty&#x27;s future, urged the Cardinal-Duke to resign his cardinalate, &quot;for the good of the people and for the perpetuation of the sovereign house of Este&quot;. Rinaldo&#x27;s bride, Princess Charlotte Felicitas of Brunswick-Lüneburg, was, according to Mary, &quot;of an easy disposition best suited to [the Duke]&quot;.

A bone of contention, however, arose over the Queen&#x27;s inheritance and dowry. Duke Rinaldo refused to release the former, and left the latter £15,000 in arrears. In 1700, five years later, Rinaldo finally paid Mary her dowry; her inheritance, however, remained sequestered, and relations with Modena worsened again when Rinaldo allied himself with Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I. Leopold was an enemy of Louis XIV.

== Regency (1701–1704)==

In March 1701, James suffered a stroke while hearing mass at the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye, leaving him partially paralysed. Fagon, Louis XIV&#x27;s personal physician, recommended the waters of Bourbon-l&#x27;Archambault, to cure James&#x27;s paralysis. The waters, however, had little effect, and James died of a seizure on 16 September 1701. Louis, contravening the Peace of Ryswick and irritating William, declared James Francis Edward King of England, Ireland and Scotland as James III and VIII. Mary acted as nominal regent for her minor son. She presided over his regency council, too, although she was uninterested in politics. Before his death, James II expressed his wish that Mary&#x27;s regency would last no longer than their son&#x27;s 18th birthday.
Dressed in mourning for the remainder of her life, Mary&#x27;s first act as regent was to disseminate a manifesto, outlining James Francis Edward&#x27;s claims. It was largely ignored in England. In Scotland, however, the confederate Lords sent Lord Belhaven to Saint-Germain, to convince the Queen to surrender to them custody of James Francis Edward and accede to his conversion to Protestantism. The conversion, said Belhaven, would enable his accession to the English throne upon William&#x27;s death. Mary was not swayed by Belhaven&#x27;s argument, so a compromise was reached: James Francis Edward, if he became king, would limit the number of Catholic priests in England and promise not to tamper with the established Church of England. In exchange, the confederate Lords would do all in their power to block the passing of the Hanoverian succession in Scottish parliament. When, in March 1702, William died, Lord Lovat declared for James Francis Edward at Inverness. Soon after, Lovat travelled to the court-in-exile at Saint-Germain, and begged Mary to allow her son to come to Scotland. Lovat intended to raise an army of 15,000 soldiers in Scotland to seize the throne for James Francis Edward. Mary refused to part with James Francis Edward, and the rising failed. Mary&#x27;s regency ceased with her son&#x27;s reaching of the age of 16.

==Later life==
Having wished to become a nun in her youth, Mary sought refuge from the stresses of exile at the Convent of the Visitations, Chaillot, near Paris, where she befriended Louis&#x27;s penitent mistress, Louise de La Vallière. There, Mary stayed with her daughter for long periods almost every summer. It was here, too, in 1711, that Mary found out that, as part of the embryonic Treaty of Utrecht, James Francis Edward was to lose Louis&#x27;s explicit recognition and be forced to leave France. The next year, when James Francis Edward was expelled and Louise Mary died of smallpox, Mary was very upset; according to Mary&#x27;s close friend Madame de Maintenon, Mary was &quot;a model of desolation&quot;. Deprived of the company of her family, Mary lived out the rest of her days at Chaillot and Saint-Germain in virtual poverty, unable to travel by her own means because all her horses had died and she could not afford to replace them.

Following her death from cancer on 7 May 1718, Mary was remembered fondly by her French contemporaries, three of whom, Elizabeth Charlotte of the Palatinate, the Duke of Saint-Simon and the Marquis of Dangeau, deemed her a &quot;saint&quot;. Mary&#x27;s remains were interred in Chaillot among the nuns she had befriended.

== Issue ==
== Ancestry ==
== Notes ==
== References ==

=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
*Allan Fea (1909). &quot;James II and His Wives&quot;. Meuthon and Co.
*Brown, Beatrice Curtis (1929). &quot;Anne Stuart: Queen of England&quot;. Geoffrey Bles.
*Chapman, Hester (1953). &quot;Mary II, Queen of England&quot;. Jonathan Cape.
*Fraser, Antonia (2002). &quot;King Charles II&quot; Phoenix. 
*Fraser, Antonia (2007). &quot;Love and Louis XIV: The Women in the Life of the Sun King&quot;. Phoenix. 
*Gregg, Edward (1980). &quot;Queen Anne&quot;. Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul.
*Haile, Martin (1905). &quot;Queen Mary of Modena: Her Life and Letters&quot;. J.M. Dent &amp; Co.
*Harris, Tim. (2007). &quot;Revolution: The Great Crisis of the British Monarchy 1685–1720&quot;. Penguin. 
*Maclagan, Michael; Louda, Jiří (1999). &quot;Line of Succession: Heraldry of the Royal Families of Europe&quot;. Little, Brown &amp; Co. 
*Marshall, Rosalind (2003) &quot;Scottish Queens, 1034–1714&quot;. Tuckwell Press.
*Oman, Carola (1962). &quot;Mary of Modena&quot;. Hodder &amp; Stoughton.
*Starkey, David (2007). &quot;Monarchy: From the Middle Ages to Modernity&quot;. Harper Perennial. .
*Turner, FC (1948). &quot;James II&quot;. Eyre &amp; Spottswoode.
*Uglow, Jenny (2009). &quot;A Gambling Man: Charles II and the Restoration&quot;. Faber &amp; Faber. 
*Waller, Maureen (2002). &quot;Ungrateful Daughters: The Stuart Princesses Who Stole Their Father&#x27;s Crown&quot;. Hodder &amp; Stoughton. 

== External links ==
*Mary of Modena from the online &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;.
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q232475" start="0" end="14" title="Mary of Modena" label="Mary of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192635" start="24" end="40" title="List of English royal consorts" label="Queen of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850905" start="42" end="50" title="List of Scottish royal consorts" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="85" end="101" title="James II and VII" label="James II and VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="112" end="126" title="Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="197" end="213" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="217" end="227" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="313" end="321" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="347" end="367" title="James Francis Edward" label="James Francis Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q271999" start="373" end="392" title="Louisa Maria Teresa" label="Louisa Maria Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q252580" start="439" end="454" title="Duchy of Modena" label="Duchy of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="710" end="724" title="Stuart dynasty" label="Stuart dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="799" end="818" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="895" end="902" title="Mary II" label="Mary II"/>
<link wikidata="Q145609" start="979" end="988" title="Anne Hyde" label="Anne Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="1027" end="1048" title="William III of Orange" label="William III of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520841" start="1249" end="1281" title="Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye" label="Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="1295" end="1309" title="King Louis XIV" label="King Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="1854" end="1871" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="1897" end="1926" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2012" end="2020" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q677173" start="2152" end="2163" title="d&amp;#x27;Este" label="d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q932379" start="2208" end="2234" title="Alfonso IV, Duke of Modena" label="Alfonso IV, Duke of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q269371" start="2250" end="2266" title="Laura Martinozzi" label="Laura Martinozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="2295" end="2297" title="New Style" label="NS"/>
<link wikidata="Q279" start="2301" end="2307" title="Modena" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q252580" start="2309" end="2324" title="Duchy of Modena" label="Duchy of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q715243" start="2359" end="2368" title="Francesco II d&amp;#x27;Este, Duke of Modena" label="Francesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="2834" end="2853" title="James, Duke of York" label="James, Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726004" start="2858" end="2875" title="Henry Mordaunt, 2nd Earl of Peterborough" label="Lord Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918893" start="2899" end="2917" title="Groom of the Stole" label="Groom of the Stole"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="2992" end="3013" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q36174" start="3206" end="3225" title="Charles II of Spain" label="Charles II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898928" start="3351" end="3367" title="married by proxy" label="married by proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="3469" end="3488" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="4263" end="4278" title="House of Stuart" label="House of Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="4422" end="4430" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q145609" start="4794" end="4803" title="Anne Hyde" label="Anne Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="4864" end="4873" title="Mary II of England" label="Lady Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="4878" end="4887" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Lady Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q271155" start="5303" end="5339" title="Frances Stewart, Duchess of Richmond" label="Frances Stewart, Duchess of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080470" start="5344" end="5380" title="Anne Scott, 1st Duchess of Buccleuch" label="Anne Scott, 1st Duchess of Buccleuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q176253" start="5665" end="5680" title="Catherine of Braganza" label="Queen Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="5872" end="5881" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="5917" end="5934" title="William III of England" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579783" start="6060" end="6073" title="Edward Colman (martyr)" label="Edward Colman"/>
<link wikidata="Q734446" start="6149" end="6160" title="Titus Oates" label="Titus Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540578" start="6185" end="6196" title="Popish Plot" label="Popish Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383566" start="6209" end="6230" title="Exclusion Bill" label="Exclusionist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q336002" start="6252" end="6298" title="Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury" label="Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="6443" end="6451" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q36174" start="6465" end="6489" title="King Charles II of Spain" label="King Charles II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588072" start="6625" end="6633" title="Isabel Stuart" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q275061" start="6724" end="6740" title="Catherine Sedley" label="Catherine Sedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="6829" end="6833" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q140235" start="6969" end="7002" title="James Scott, 1st Duke of Monmouth" label="James Scott, 1st Duke of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="7230" end="7254" title="English House of Commons" label="English House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="7347" end="7356" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q505950" start="7424" end="7439" title="Holyrood Palace" label="Holyrood Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="8064" end="8073" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302148" start="8975" end="8989" title="Rye House Plot" label="Rye House Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="9122" end="9135" title="Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q125535990" start="9546" end="9587" title="Coronation of James II and VII and Mary" label="Mary and James&amp;#x27;s £119,000 coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q112716652" start="9764" end="9813" title="coronation of King Henry VIII and Queen Catherine" label="coronation of King Henry VIII and Queen Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="9954" end="9962" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q233181" start="10048" end="10056" title="Anna Maria Luisa de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q47292" start="10058" end="10071" title="Cosimo III de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Your Highness"/>
<link wikidata="Q444087" start="10218" end="10233" title="Henri Jules, Prince of Condé" label="Duke of Enghien"/>
<link wikidata="Q275061" start="10445" end="10485" title="Catherine Sedley, Countess of Dorchester" label="Catherine Sedley, Countess of Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q391620" start="10516" end="10525" title="Palace of Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="10625" end="10641" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550262" start="11243" end="11259" title="William Nassau de Zuylestein, 1st Earl of Rochford" label="Count Zuylestein"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="11346" end="11350" title="Bath, England" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="11890" end="11910" title="James Francis Edward" label="James Francis Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="12778" end="12782" title="Whig (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954419" start="12791" end="12835" title="Invitation to William" label="the invitation for William to invade England"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="13087" end="13106" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44739869" start="13503" end="13529" title="Victoria Davia-Montecuculi" label="Victoria Davia-Montecuculi"/>
<link wikidata="Q124955" start="13556" end="13581" title="Antoine Nompar de Caumont" label="Antoine Nompar de Caumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="13616" end="13622" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="13730" end="13744" title="King Louis XIV" label="King Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="13764" end="13772" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="14123" end="14135" title="Divine right of kings" label="divine right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520841" start="14267" end="14299" title="Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye" label="Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="14405" end="14415" title="Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q237103" start="14431" end="14448" title="Madame de Sévigné" label="Madame de Sévigné"/>
<link wikidata="Q57623" start="14623" end="14653" title="Maria Anna Victoria of Bavaria" label="Maria Anna Victoria of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q230670" start="14887" end="14906" title="Madame de Maintenon" label="Madame de Maintenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271999" start="15464" end="15475" title="Louisa Maria Teresa Stuart" label="Louise Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q644960" start="15705" end="15724" title="Battle of the Boyne" label="Battle of the Boyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292350" start="15857" end="15867" title="Bantry Bay" label="Bantry Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="15901" end="15907" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q607248" start="16068" end="16074" title="French livres" label="livres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550274" start="16432" end="16456" title="Margherita Maria Farnese" label="Margherita Maria Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q715048" start="16568" end="16589" title="Rinaldo d&amp;#x27;Este, Duke of Modena" label="Cardinal-Duke Rinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551176" start="16813" end="16863" title="Princess Charlotte Felicitas of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Princess Charlotte Felicitas of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="17027" end="17032" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q150494" start="17304" end="17332" title="Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I" label="Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="17428" end="17434" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333551" start="17528" end="17533" title="Guy-Crescent Fagon" label="Fagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q245080" start="17598" end="17624" title="Bourbon-l&amp;#x27;Archambault" label="Bourbon-l&amp;#x27;Archambault"/>
<link wikidata="Q164393" start="17772" end="17788" title="Peace of Ryswick" label="Peace of Ryswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237424" start="18413" end="18426" title="John Hamilton, 2nd Lord Belhaven and Stenton" label="Lord Belhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="18552" end="18565" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="18894" end="18911" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="19004" end="19014" title="House of Hanover" label="Hanoverian"/>
<link wikidata="Q320286" start="19085" end="19095" title="Simon Fraser, 11th Lord Lovat" label="Lord Lovat"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="19133" end="19142" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q232125" start="19736" end="19757" title="Louise de La Vallière" label="Louise de La Vallière"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="19912" end="19929" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="20500" end="20506" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57221" start="20594" end="20631" title="Elizabeth Charlotte of the Palatinate" label="Elizabeth Charlotte of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q463728" start="20633" end="20656" title="Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon" label="the Duke of Saint-Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881019" start="20661" end="20683" title="Philippe de Courcillon" label="the Marquis of Dangeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q52147524" start="20896" end="20905" title="Allan Fea" label="Allan Fea"/>
<link wikidata="Q242796" start="21136" end="21151" title="Fraser, Antonia" label="Fraser, Antonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044640" start="21809" end="21821" title="Carola Oman" label="Oman, Carola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176720" start="21883" end="21897" title="Starkey, David" label="Starkey, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179496" start="22050" end="22062" title="Uglow, Jenny" label="Uglow, Jenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="22354" end="22377" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180757" wikidata="Q8020977" url="?curid=180757" title="Williams Air Force Base">
<text>Williams Air Force Base is a former United States Air Force (USAF) base, located in Maricopa County, Arizona, east of Chandler, and about southeast of Phoenix. It is a designated Superfund site due to a number of soil and groundwater contaminants.

It was active as a training base for both the United States Army Air Forces, as well as the USAF from 1941 until its closure in 1993. Williams was the leading pilot training facility of the USAF, supplying 25% of all pilots.

Since its closure, the base has largely been annexed by the city of Mesa, Arizona. It was converted into the civilian Williams Gateway Airport, later renamed Mesa Gateway Airport. In recent years, the land has emerged as an educational and industrial campus anchored by Arizona State University Polytechnic Campus and Chandler-Gilbert Community College.

==History==
During March 1941, some citizens of Mesa, Arizona, were actively working on obtaining a U.S. Army Air Corps facility located near their city. One of the sites seriously considered for the new airfield was on the Gila River Indian Reservation located near Chandler, Arizona. At the time, the land on which Williams would eventually be built was vacant and not used for agriculture due to a lack of irrigation. It had no homes or farms and was essentially desert with a few Indian ruins scattered on it. On their own initiative, the city of Mesa began to acquire rights to the property that was divided among 33 different owners. Agreements were made for a railroad spur line, along with the appropriate electric, water, telephone and gas services.

The hard work paid off with the announcement in June 1941 that the War Department had approved the site for an Army Air Corps base. Construction of the new base started on 16 July 1941 with a ceremony attended by Mesa, Arizona, mayor George Nicholas Goodman and Arizona governor Sidney P. Osborn, who both attended the groundbreaking of Falcon Field that morning. Initial construction was completed in December, making the base operational.

As of 10 December, the airfield had no name and a debate ensued on what to call the new base. It was initially named Mesa Military Airport. the name was changed October 1941 to Higley Field, the base being in the proximity of the town of Higley, Arizona. In February 1942, the growing military airfield&#x27;s name was changed to Williams Field in honor of Arizona native 1st Lt Charles Linton Williams (1898–1927). Lieutenant Williams died on 6 July 1927 when his Boeing PW-9A pursuit aircraft crashed near Fort DeRussy, Hawaii.

As a flying school, numerous runways and auxiliary airfields were constructed. The main airfield consisted of three concrete runways aligned NE/SW, ENE/WSW and NE/SW. A blacktop landing area was aligned E/W to the south of the main field and a blacktop landing area was aligned E/W to the south of the main field. 
Known auxiliary airfields were:
* Gilbert Field (Aux #1) 
: Redeveloped in the 1970s. Today housing development S of US 60 in Gilbert, Arizona.
* Rittenhouse Field (Aux #2) 
: Today: Rittenhouse Army Heliport used by Arizona National Guard, adjacent to suburbs of Gilbert, Arizona
* Casa Grande Field (Aux #3) 
: Today: Casa Grande Municipal Airport in Casa Grande, Arizona.
* Goodyear Field (Aux #4) 
: Today: Gila River Memorial Airport southwest of Chandler, Arizona.
* Williams Auxiliary Army Airfield #5 
: Build 1942. Today Gila River Memorial Airport 
* Coolidge AAF 
: Was auxiliary until 1944, turned over to Air Transport Command in May 1944. Today: Coolidge Municipal Airport .
* Cutter Field 
: Was emergency landing field. Today: San Carlos Apache Airport near Cutter, Arizona.
* Ajo AAF 
: Transferred from Luke AAF, June 1943. Part of the Gila Bend Gunnery Range. Today: Eric Marcus Municipal Airport 
* Gila Bend AAFAF 
: Transferred from Luke AAF, June 1943. Part of the Gila Bend Gunnery Range
** Gila Bend #6/Williams AAF #4: 
** Gila Bend #6/Williams AAF #5: 
** Gila Bend #6/Williams AAF #6: 

===World War II===

During World War II, Williams Field was under the command of the 89th Army Air Force Base Unit, AAF West Coast Training Center. The flying organization was the 38th (Bombardier and Specialized Twin- and 4-Engine) Flying Training Wing. Thousands of future P-38 Lightning pilots learnt their twin-engine flying skills flying the Beech AT-10 Wichita at Williams. By July 1942, there were 79 AT-10s assigned to the field, however the hot, dry climate of Arizona tended to dry out the wood and glue of the wooden AT-10s, causing at least 10 flying cadets to lose their lives in crashes. Training with the AT-10 was stopped and the aircraft were flown to more humid locations. They were replaced by the Cessna AT-17 Bobcat twin engine trainers, however the AT-17 was seen as &quot;too easy to fly&quot; and were replaced by the more demanding Curtiss-Wright AT-9. By January 1943, almost 200 AT-9s were at the airfield.

The RP-322 training version of the P-38 began to arrive also in early 1944, and by May, the flying school was involved in four courses of instruction. By far, the largest course was a single-engine advanced course where cadets received instruction on the AT-6 Texan. Graduates advanced to the twin-engine AT-9, then on to the RP-322. This training was intended to prepare pilots for photo-reconnaissance missions. Another course was given to experienced pilots who were transitioning to twin-engine aircraft, also in the RP-322. Later, a night fighter training program was established for pilots on the RP-322 for later transition to the P-61 Black Widow at Hammer Field, California.

By late 1944, there was an ample supply of twin-engine pilots in training and by late 1944, the single-engine T-6 training was discontinued. Williams then began to offer four-engine training with Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress bombers in December. Its students would be experienced pilots who were transitioning to the large four-engine bomber. The B-17 pilot training ended in April 1945, graduating 608 officers for the Flying Fortress program.

The training mission of the base also conducted flexible gunnery training, and radar observer training.

After the United States entered the war, the Army Air Forces also developed a pilot training program for the Chinese Air Force. The Air Corps conducted most of the training for the Chinese at Luke AFB, Williams, and Thunderbird Field in Arizona. Training the Chinese presented some special challenges because, due to their small stature, some students could not reach all the controls. That problem was usually solved through the use of extra cushions and occasionally by switching them to another type of airplane. A bigger problem was the language barrier. It took all the interpreters the Air Force could muster to support the training programs for the Chinese. In the end, 3,553 Chinese received flying and technical training, including 866 pilots.

===Postwar era===
After the end of the war in September 1945, most of the temporary training bases were put on inactive status and eventually closed. This was particularly true for bases like Williams that had sprung up overnight and were built with temporary wooden structures. However, Williams was an exception and remained open after World War II.

In early 1945, the first P-80 Shooting Star jet pilot school was opened at Williams. Army Air Forces Training Command was re-designated as Air Training Command, and in 1946 all flight instruction was integrated into a new consolidated program. The P-80 jet fighter pilot transition and fighter gunnery schools at Williams Field remained; however, the gunnery school existed only to fulfill research obligations.

Fighter gunnery training was reestablished in early 1947. The new program studied the use of fighter gunnery, bombing, and rocketry equipment. Students flew P-51 Mustangs, P-47 Thunderbolts, and beginning at midyear, P-80s. The gunnery school, however was again discontinued on 1 June 1948 and moved to Las Vegas AFB, Nevada.

By early 1947 the AAF had sped up its conversion to jet aircraft. However, the training program was handicapped by the fact that no twin-seat jet aircraft trainers yet existed. Putting untrained jet pilots into a single-seat fighter endangered personnel and expensive equipment. To overcome this problem, Air Training Command decided to use a newly developed &quot;captivair&quot; training device. It was received and installed at Williams in early 1947. In 1949, T-33 Shooting Star jet trainer derivatives of the F-80 began to arrive.

===3525th Pilot Training Wing===
With the establishment of the United States Air Force in September 1947, Williams Army Airfield was re-designated Williams Air Force Base on 13 January 1948. In addition, the 89th AAFBU was discontinued and the 3525th Pilot Training Wing (Advanced
Single-Engine) was established as the host unit at the new Air Force Base. Training squadrons under the 3525th Pilot Training Group were:
* 3525th Training Squadron, 26 August 1948
: Re-designated 4532d Combat Crew Training Squadron, 1 July 1958
: Re-designated 3525th Pilot Training Squadron, 1 October 1960 – 1 February 1973
* 3526th Training Squadron, 26 May 1949
: Re-designated 4533d Combat Crew Training Squadron, 1 July 1958
: Re-designated 3526th Pilot Training Squadron, 1 October 1960 – 1 February 1973

Through the Mutual Defense Assistance Program began in 1952, international students received flying or technical training at various ATC bases. Students from Taiwan began to arrive at Williams, and training of Taiwanese pilots continued until the closure of the base in 1993.

Air Training Command redesignated the 3525th Pilot Training Wing (Basic Single-Engine) at Williams on 1 January 1956. It became the 3525th Combat Crew Training Wing (Fighter). A month later, on 1 February 1956, ATC reassigned the 3525th from its Flying Training Air Force to Crew Training Air Force. It also discontinued the single engine basic pilot school (T-28 Trojan) at Williams and replaced it with an advanced fighter school with T-33s exclusively. (Williams had transferred its single-engine training responsibilities to Laughlin AFB, Texas in September 1955.)

In 1958, Air Training Command transferred its combat pilot training to Strategic Air Command (SAC) and Tactical Air Command (TAC). ATC would concentrate on Primary and Basic flying training. As a result, jurisdiction of Williams was passed to TAC on 1 July. This was a brief transfer, as on 1 October 1960, TAC transferred Williams AFB back to ATC. Williams would become part of ATC&#x27;s new consolidated pilot training program. On the same date, Tactical Air Command reassigned its 4530th Combat Crew Training Wing (Tactical Fighter) and subordinate units at Williams to ATC and ATC discontinued the wing. Concurrently, Air Training Command used
assets from the 4530th to organize and establish the 3525th Pilot Training Wing.

Pilot training continued throughout the 1960s. The T-33s began to be phased out in 1962, being replaced by the T-38 Talon as the primary jet training aircraft. T-38s were used until the closure of Williams in 1993 along with the Cessna T-37 Tweet Both trainers were two-seat, dual-engine jet aircraft, the T-38 being capable of supersonic flight.

Students began with academic classroom and simulator instruction. After initial training in a Cessna T-41 at an offsite location (e.g., Eloy, AZ was used in the late 1960s), the first jet flight was largely a &#x27;demo&#x27; flight in the T-37 aircraft with the instructor orienting the student to the aircraft, the local training area, and some basic flight maneuvers.

The undergraduate flight training program lasted just less than one full year and involved classroom, simulator, and aircraft training activities. Graduates were selected to remain as instructors, after an intensive training course, or went on to train in their primary weapon system aircraft.

====F-5 Freedom Fighter====
In 1963, Williams was selected to support the Military Assistance Program F-5A/B Freedom Fighter sales by providing pilots and maintenance training personnel to nations purchased the fighter under the MAP program. The F-5 was a lightweight fighter designed for allied nations, and was not programmed for USAF use. Initial deliveries, beginning in April 1964, were to the 4441st Combat Crew Training Squadron, which was activated to run the F-5 school.

The first overseas order for F-5As was from Norway, which ordered 64 aircraft plus four attrition replacements on 28 February 1964. Other nations whose pilots trained at Williams were South Vietnam, Iran, South Korea, Greece, Philippines, Taiwan, Turkey, Morocco, Pakistan, Ethiopia, Libya, Jordan, Spain and Yemen.

=====Skoshi Tiger Program=====
Although all F-5A/B production was intended for MAP, the USAF actually requested at least 200 F-5s for use in the Vietnam War. This sudden request on the part of the USAF which had previously perceived no need for a lightweight fighter, was a result of heavier than expected attrition in Southeast Asia and because the F-5 promised to be available with a relatively short lead time. The USAF request for combat evaluation in Southeast Asia was approved by the Department of Defense (DoD) in July 1965, and the evaluation was initiated on 26 July 1965.

The program was given the code name &quot;Skoshi Tiger&quot;, which was a corruption of &quot;Sukoshi Tiger&quot; (Japanese for &quot;Little Tiger&quot;). In October 1965, the USAF &quot;borrowed&quot; 12 combat-ready F-5As from MAP supplies (5 F-5A-15s and seven F-5A-20s) and activated the 4503rd Tactical Fighter Wing (Provisional) at Williams for operational service trials. The 4503rd TFS (Provisional) was formed on 29 July 1965 to conduct the evaluation, and their pilots underwent training at Williams AFB while Northrop modified the aircraft for duty in Southeast Asia.

The aircraft left Williams AFB on 20 October 1965 for Southeast Asia, arriving at Bien Hoa Air Base on 23 October. They flew their first combat mission the same afternoon.

Although the Freedom Fighter was judged to be a technical success in Vietnam, the Skoshi Tiger program was essentially a political project, designed to appease those few USAF officers who believed in the aircraft. The Freedom Fighter was destined to have a relatively brief operational career with the USAF, and the DoD turned down a second request for F-5s, deciding instead to look at other types such as the U.S. Navy A-7 Corsair II. The surviving F-5s were turned over to the South Vietnamese in March 1966.

After the Skoshi Tiger program, substantial numbers of Freedom Fighters were supplied to the Republic of Vietnam Air Force. The USAF directed ATC to initiate immediately a training program for South Vietnamese F-5 pilot replacements. The 4441st CCTS at Williams began this training on 15 April, although the base&#x27;s training facilities were already saturated by the school&#x27;s undergraduate program. The first Vietnamese crews left for Williams AFB for training in August 1966.

The 4441st CCTS was transferred to Tactical Air Command and re-designated as the 425th Tactical Fighter Training Squadron on 15 October 1969. It was placed under the 58th Tactical Fighter Training Wing at Luke AFB, Arizona, although the squadron physically remained at Williams AFB as a Geographically Separate Unit (GSU).

Training of South Vietnamese pilots on the F-5 continued until the collapse of the South Vietnamese government in April 1975, with some pilots being at Williams at the time of the fall of Saigon.

=====F-5E/F Tiger II=====

On 4 April 1973, the first upgraded F-5 Tiger II reached the 425th Tactical Fighter Training Squadron. This squadron was assigned the task of training for crews that had acquired the F-5E under MAP. Pilots from over 20 nations trained at Williams throughout the 1970s and 1980s on the F-5E. The F-5E/Fs assigned to the 425th for training carried USAF serial numbers and were procured through normal aircraft procurement procedures and channels. It initially carried tail code &quot;LZ&quot;. Aircraft were re-coded to the common wing &quot;LA&quot; in 1974.

Although the USAF never did adopt the F-5E as a front-line combat aircraft, it did adopt the F-5E as a specialized aircraft for dissimilar air combat training (DACT). Beginning in 1975, some 70 F-5Es were turned over to the 64th and 65th Fighter Weapons Squadrons of the 57th Tactical Fighter Wing at Nellis AFB, Nevada. F-5Es were allocated to two more units that were created overseas: the 527th Aggressor Squadron of the 10th TRW in the UK at RAF Alconbury and the 26th Aggressor Squadron, 3rd TFW in the Philippines at Clark AB.

The 425th TFTS was reassigned to the 405th Tactical Training Wing as of 29 August 1979 when the 58th TTW was re-designated at Luke AFB.

The last two F-5Es off the production line were delivered to Bahrain on 16 January 1987. However, a few more were assembled from spares, the last ones being delivered on 29 June 1989. That month the squadron&#x27;s F-5 training program terminated after having produced 1,499 graduates, and the 425th was inactivated 1 September 1989

===82d Flying Training Wing===
In 1972 and 1973, ATC inactivated its four digit flying wings and replaced them with two-digit and three-digit wings. All of the newly activated units then had a combat lineage. At Williams the 3525th PTW was re-designated the 82d Flying Training Wing on 1 February. Squadrons were re-designated as follows:
* 3525th Pilot Training Squadron --&gt; 96th Flying Training Squadron (T-37 Tweet)
* 3526th Pilot Training Squadron --&gt; 97th Flying Training Squadron (T-38 Talon)

One of the most dominant features on the ATC landscape in 1974 was the serious jet fuel shortage the command had to contend with for much of the year. The shortage arose when the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) sent oil prices skyrocketing by proclaiming an oil embargo in response to the United States&#x27; support for Israel during the 1973 Yom Kippur War. Almost overnight, the price of aviation fuel tripled. To conserve fuel, ATC made numerous adjustments to the Undergraduate Pilot Training (UPT) syllabus, including a reduction in the number of sorties and flying hours and an increased reliance on the use of synthetic trainers.

In other efforts to cope with the crisis, the USAF initiated base closure and flying training wing inactivation actions at Craig AFB, Alabama and Webb AFB, Texas. ATC also cut overall pilot production goals by 18 percent, with USAF Officer Training School (OTS) not accepting any pilot or navigator applicants for FY 75, 76 or 77, and the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC) initiating a Reduction in Force (RIF) program, rescinding previously promised pilot training and navigator training slots for approximately 75% of those AFROTC cadets in commissioning Year Groups 75, 76 and 77 originally slated for flight training, re-directing them into non-aeronautically rated career fields or offering them opportunities to resign and transfer to officer flight training programs of the Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard or Army. Unaffected by the reductions, USAF Academy (USAFA) cadets/graduates of the same period continued to maintain their guaranteed allotment of approximately 75% of USAFA graduates assigned to UPT, 15% assigned to undergraduate navigator training, and the remaining 10% assigned to non-flying duties.

In September 1976, UPT class 77-08 at Williams became the first UPT class to include female student pilots. All were serving USAF officers at the rank of 2nd Lt, 1st Lt and Capt who had been previously performing non-flying duties in the Air Force. All were OTS and AFROTC graduates; none were USAFA graduates, since USAFA had only begun accepting females in June of that same year. On 30 November 1976, Capt Connie J. Engle became the first female UPT student to solo in a jet aircraft when she took off in her T-37.

In 1988, each UPT wing had two flying training squadrons one for T-37s and the other for T-38s, plus a student squadron. Air Training Command wanted to find out whether training could be
conducted more effectively if student squadrons were eliminated. Instead, all training and administrative duties would be placed in the wings&#x27; two T-37 and two T-38 flying training squadrons. Officials at ATC chose the 82d Flying Training Wing at Williams as the test unit.

Air Training Command activated two additional squadrons at Williams the 98th Flying Training Squadron (T-37) and 99th Flying Training Squadron (T-38) on 1 June 1988. That gave the 82d a total of four flying training squadrons. However, by year&#x27;s end, the test had shown that a fifth squadron was needed to provide operational support. The 82d became the first ATC wing to have five flying training squadrons when, on 1 September 1989, the command activated the 100th Flying Training Squadron (T-37).

However, it did not last long. In December 1990 ATC implemented the objective wing organization. The command&#x27;s UPT wings kept four flying training squadrons each, two for T-37s and two for T-38s.
The fifth squadron was redesignated as an operations support squadron, but fulfilled essentially
the same functions as the old student squadron.

===Closure in the 1990s===
Air Training Command was directed to close four of its training bases as a result of the 1993 Base Realignment and Closure Commission. The non-flying officer and enlisted technical training center at Chanute AFB, Illinois, and the sole undergraduate navigator training base at Mather AFB, California, were chosen to close in round one, with Chanute&#x27;s technical training activities relocating to other USAF technical training centers or similar activities operated by the other services, and the latter UNT activity slated to relocate to Randolph AFB, Texas. The non-flying officer and enlisted technical training center at Lowry AFB, Colorado and Williams AFB as an undergraduate pilot training base were selected in round two.

Air Education and Training Command (AETC), the 1992 successor major command to ATC, inactivated the host unit at Williams AFB, the 82d Flying Training Wing, on 31 March 1993, redesignating it as the 82d Training Wing and transferring it to Sheppard AFB, Texas, where it would control non-flying officer and enlisted technical training, a role it continues to this day. This left the now independent 82d Operations Group to close Williams AFB. The command inactivated the operations group on 30 September 1993, and the approximately base was closed 30 September 1993.

At the official closing ceremony, two men, who as Boy Scouts in 1941 had raised the first flag at Williams Field when it was first officially opened, were there to officially lower the flag at its closing, after a combined fifty years of military service.

Today, Williams continues to serve the Phoenix area as a growing industrial park and commercial airport.

===Major units assigned===
* 89th Base HQ and Air Base Sq (advance detachment), 16 October 1941 – 4 December 1941
* 89th Base HQ and Air Base Sq, 4 December 1941 – 1 May 1944
: Re-designated 3010th Army Air Force Base Unit, 1 May 1944
: Re-designated 3010th Air Force Base Unit, 27 September 1947 – 28 August 1948
* Air Corps (Later Army Air Forces Advanced Flying School), 26 June 1941 – 1 June 1948
* 38th Flying Training Wing, 26 February 1945 – 16 June 1946
* Army Air Forces Pilot School (Specialized Fighter), 1 December 1945
: Re-designated USAF Jet Pilot School, 1 June 1948 – 1 October 1949
* Army Air Forces Pilot School (Advanced Single-Engine), 6 July 1946
: Re-designated USAF Basic Pilot School (Single Engine), 1 June 1948 – 8 January 1956
* 3525th Pilot Training Wing, 26 August 1948
: Re-designated 4530th Combat Crew Training Wing, 1 July 1958
: Re-designated 3525th Pilot Training Group, 1 October 1960 – 1 February 1973
* 1922nd Comm Squadron – Air Force Communications Service (AFCS) – Teletype, Crypto, Computer Maint., MARS Radio, Ground to Air Radio, Ground Radar, ILS, Localizer, Glideslope, Tacan; Lt. Col. Frank Ely – Sq. Commander (1968–1970)
* 4441st Combat Crew Training Squadron, 1 December 1963 (MAP F-5 Support)
: Re-designated 425th Tactical Fighter Training Squadron, 15 October 1969 – 1 September 1989
* 4503rd Tactical Fighter Wing (Provisional), 22 July 1965 – 10 March 1966 (F-5 Skoshi Tiger)
* 82d Flying Training Wing, 1 February 1973 – 30 June 1993

===Major commands assigned===
* Air Corps Flying Training Comd, 23 January 1942
* AAF Flying Training Comd, 15 March 1942
* AAF Training Comd, 31 July 1943
* Tactical Air Command 1 July 1958 – 1 October 1960
* Air Training Command 1 July 1946 – 1 July 1958; 1 October 1960 – June 1993

==Historic sites== 

Historic resources of the Williams Air Force Base were identified in a 1995 study.

Seven separate objects or buildings were listed on the National Register of Historic Places on 19 June 1995. These are:

==Accidents and incidents==
Williams Field suffered its first fatal accident in the six months it had been open as an advanced training base on 3 June 1942 when Curtiss-Wright AT-9-CS Fledgling, &quot;41-5867&quot;, of the 333d School Squadron, crashed five miles NE of the base, apparently flown into the ground, killing John Clifford Eustice, 23, of Salt Lake City, Utah, and Irving C. Frank, 24, of Brooklyn, New York.

==See also==

* Mesa Gateway Airport
* Air Training Command
* Arizona World War II Army Airfields
* 37th Flying Training Wing (World War II)
* List of airports in Arizona
* Arizona Commemorative Air Force Museum

==References==
* Maurer, Maurer (1983). Air Force Combat Units of World War II. Maxwell AFB, Alabama: Office of Air Force History. .
* Shaw, Frederick J. (2004), Locating Air Force Base Sites History&#x27;s Legacy, Air Force History and Museums Program, United States Air Force, Washington DC, 2004.
* Active Air Force Bases Within the United States of America on 17 September 1982 USAF Reference Series, Office of Air Force History, United States Air Force, Washington, D.C., 1989

==External links==
* Global Security
* Williams Army Airfield in World War II
* USAF Patches Gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8020977" start="0" end="23" title="Williams Air Force Base" label="Williams Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="36" end="59" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q58691" start="84" end="108" title="Maricopa County, Arizona" label="Maricopa County, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q49272" start="118" end="126" title="Chandler, Arizona" label="Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="151" end="158" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="179" end="188" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="295" end="324" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q49261" start="543" end="556" title="Mesa, Arizona" label="Mesa, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q493759" start="633" end="653" title="Mesa Gateway Airport" label="Mesa Gateway Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791438" start="745" end="788" title="Arizona State University Polytechnic Campus" label="Arizona State University Polytechnic Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071217" start="793" end="827" title="Chandler-Gilbert Community College" label="Chandler-Gilbert Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49261" start="878" end="891" title="Mesa, Arizona" label="Mesa, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="930" end="949" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="U.S. Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q49272" start="1097" end="1114" title="Chandler, Arizona" label="Chandler, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="1657" end="1671" title="United States Department of War" label="War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q49261" start="1803" end="1816" title="Mesa, Arizona" label="Mesa, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q60526311" start="1824" end="1847" title="George Nicholas Goodman" label="George Nicholas Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="1852" end="1859" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q880129" start="1869" end="1885" title="Sidney Preston Osborn" label="Sidney P. Osborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760125" start="2270" end="2285" title="Higley, Arizona" label="Higley, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q890199" start="2497" end="2509" title="Boeing Model 15" label="Boeing PW-9A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471026" start="2540" end="2552" title="Fort DeRussy Military Reservation" label="Fort DeRussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51684" start="3004" end="3020" title="Gilbert, Arizona" label="Gilbert, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q55316868" start="3061" end="3086" title="Rittenhouse Army Heliport" label="Rittenhouse Army Heliport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791356" start="3095" end="3117" title="Arizona National Guard" label="Arizona National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q51684" start="3142" end="3158" title="Gilbert, Arizona" label="Gilbert, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962644" start="3198" end="3227" title="Casa Grande Municipal Airport" label="Casa Grande Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q79889" start="3231" end="3251" title="Casa Grande, Arizona" label="Casa Grande, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275034" start="3289" end="3316" title="Gila River Memorial Airport" label="Gila River Memorial Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49272" start="3330" end="3347" title="Chandler, Arizona" label="Chandler, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275034" start="3408" end="3435" title="Gila River Memorial Airport" label="Gila River Memorial Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655669" start="3439" end="3451" title="Coolidge AAF" label="Coolidge AAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655669" start="3538" end="3564" title="Coolidge Municipal Airport" label="Coolidge Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435431" start="3569" end="3581" title="Cutter Field" label="Cutter Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435431" start="3621" end="3646" title="San Carlos Apache Airport" label="San Carlos Apache Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5795116" start="3652" end="3667" title="Cutter, Arizona" label="Cutter, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387041" start="3671" end="3678" title="Ajo AAF" label="Ajo AAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387041" start="3764" end="3793" title="Eric Marcus Municipal Airport" label="Eric Marcus Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275693" start="3797" end="3812" title="Gila Bend AAFAF" label="Gila Bend AAFAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4020" end="4032" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984761" start="4109" end="4139" title="West Coast Air Corps Training Center" label="AAF West Coast Training Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057564" start="4173" end="4246" title="38th Flying Training Wing (World War II)" label="38th (Bombardier and Specialized Twin- and 4-Engine) Flying Training Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172913" start="4268" end="4282" title="P-38 Lightning" label="P-38 Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893630" start="4346" end="4359" title="AT-10 Wichita" label="AT-10 Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667635" start="4717" end="4729" title="AT-17 Bobcat" label="AT-17 Bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195935" start="4850" end="4869" title="Curtiss-Wright AT-9" label="Curtiss-Wright AT-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q40021" start="5183" end="5193" title="AT-6 Texan" label="AT-6 Texan"/>
<link wikidata="Q913657" start="5566" end="5582" title="P-61 Black Widow" label="P-61 Black Widow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720229" start="5586" end="5598" title="Hammer Field" label="Hammer Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="5809" end="5836" title="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress" label="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370388" start="6187" end="6202" title="Military history of the United States during World War II" label="entered the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q702659" start="6272" end="6289" title="Republic of China Air Force" label="Chinese Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346991" start="6355" end="6363" title="Luke AFB" label="Luke AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799088" start="6379" end="6396" title="Thunderbird Field No. 1" label="Thunderbird Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q751759" start="7295" end="7313" title="P-80 Shooting Star" label="P-80 Shooting Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698220" start="7409" end="7429" title="Air Training Command" label="Air Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="7840" end="7852" title="P-51 Mustang" label="P-51 Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q207089" start="7855" end="7871" title="P-47 Thunderbolt" label="P-47 Thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q735912" start="7986" end="7999" title="Las Vegas AFB" label="Las Vegas AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q58725" start="8474" end="8492" title="T-33 Shooting Star" label="T-33 Shooting Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="8610" end="8633" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779095" start="9354" end="9387" title="Mutual Defense Assistance Program" label="Mutual Defense Assistance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="9500" end="9506" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q206084" start="9978" end="9989" title="T-28 Trojan" label="T-28 Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q982089" start="10148" end="10160" title="Laughlin AFB" label="Laughlin AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q937064" start="10260" end="10281" title="Strategic Air Command" label="Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q94291" start="10292" end="10312" title="Tactical Air Command" label="Tactical Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q164523" start="11031" end="11041" title="T-38 Talon" label="T-38 Talon"/>
<link wikidata="Q495337" start="11149" end="11166" title="Cessna T-37" label="Cessna T-37 Tweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719037" start="11362" end="11373" title="T-41 Mescalero" label="Cessna T-41"/>
<link wikidata="Q80072" start="11404" end="11412" title="Eloy, AZ" label="Eloy, AZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q308940" start="12037" end="12059" title="F-5 Freedom Fighter" label="F-5A/B Freedom Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12334" end="12370" title="4441st Combat Crew Training Squadron" label="4441st Combat Crew Training Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="12460" end="12466" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="12600" end="12613" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258515" start="12615" end="12619" title="Imperial State of Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="12621" end="12632" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="12634" end="12640" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="12642" end="12653" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="12655" end="12661" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="12663" end="12669" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="12671" end="12678" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="12680" end="12688" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="12690" end="12698" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="12700" end="12705" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="12707" end="12713" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="12715" end="12720" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="12725" end="12730" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="12878" end="12889" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="13052" end="13066" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="13224" end="13245" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q912979" start="13837" end="13845" title="Northrop Corporation" label="Northrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q619905" start="13979" end="13996" title="Bien Hoa Air Base" label="Bien Hoa Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="14481" end="14490" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q248224" start="14491" end="14505" title="A-7 Corsair II" label="A-7 Corsair II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535173" start="14676" end="14705" title="Republic of Vietnam Air Force" label="Republic of Vietnam Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q94291" start="15104" end="15124" title="Tactical Air Command" label="Tactical Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637724" start="15150" end="15190" title="425th Tactical Fighter Training Squadron" label="425th Tactical Fighter Training Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640937" start="15235" end="15270" title="58th Tactical Fighter Training Wing" label="58th Tactical Fighter Training Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346991" start="15274" end="15282" title="Luke AFB" label="Luke AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q482456" start="15573" end="15587" title="fall of Saigon" label="fall of Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q308940" start="15653" end="15665" title="F-5 Tiger II" label="F-5 Tiger II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282777" start="16304" end="16334" title="dissimilar air combat training" label="dissimilar air combat training"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817997" start="16400" end="16404" title="64th Fighter Squadron" label="64th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642114" start="16409" end="16438" title="65th Fighter Weapons Squadron" label="65th Fighter Weapons Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640858" start="16447" end="16473" title="57th Tactical Fighter Wing" label="57th Tactical Fighter Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q735912" start="16477" end="16487" title="Nellis AFB" label="Nellis AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640181" start="16568" end="16592" title="527th Aggressor Squadron" label="527th Aggressor Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q564876" start="16622" end="16635" title="RAF Alconbury" label="RAF Alconbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632489" start="16644" end="16667" title="26th Aggressor Squadron" label="26th Aggressor Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095676" start="16699" end="16707" title="Clark AB" label="Clark AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637339" start="16747" end="16775" title="405th Tactical Training Wing" label="405th Tactical Training Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="16908" end="16915" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644637" start="17439" end="17463" title="82d Flying Training Wing" label="82d Flying Training Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646110" start="17560" end="17589" title="96th Flying Training Squadron" label="96th Flying Training Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646173" start="17643" end="17672" title="97th Flying Training Squadron" label="97th Flying Training Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="17866" end="17911" title="Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries" label="Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="17951" end="17977" title="1973 oil crisis" label="proclaiming an oil embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="18052" end="18066" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180683" start="18470" end="18479" title="Craig AFB" label="Craig AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978640" start="18493" end="18501" title="Webb AFB" label="Webb AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697932" start="18579" end="18602" title="Officer Training School" label="Officer Training School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697942" start="18686" end="18726" title="Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps" label="Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697942" start="18728" end="18734" title="AFROTC" label="AFROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="19144" end="19148" title="U.S. Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="19150" end="19162" title="U.S. Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="19164" end="19175" title="U.S. Coast Guard" label="Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="19179" end="19183" title="U.S. Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="19215" end="19227" title="USAF Academy" label="USAF Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="19229" end="19234" title="USAFA" label="USAFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082820" start="19501" end="19528" title="UPT Class 77-08" label="UPT class 77-08 at Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697932" start="19740" end="19743" title="Officer Training School" label="OTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697942" start="19748" end="19754" title="AFROTC" label="AFROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="19776" end="19781" title="USAFA" label="USAFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646231" start="20540" end="20569" title="98th Flying Training Squadron" label="98th Flying Training Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157599" start="20581" end="20610" title="99th Flying Training Squadron" label="99th Flying Training Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546231" start="20934" end="20964" title="100th Flying Training Squadron" label="100th Flying Training Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588355" start="21437" end="21481" title="1993 Base Realignment and Closure Commission" label="1993 Base Realignment and Closure Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072704" start="21548" end="21559" title="Chanute AFB" label="Chanute AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786927" start="21625" end="21635" title="Mather Air Force Base" label="Mather AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q980034" start="21890" end="21902" title="Randolph AFB" label="Randolph AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694148" start="21976" end="21985" title="Lowry Air Force Base" label="Lowry AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q407064" start="22082" end="22116" title="Air Education and Training Command" label="Air Education and Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644637" start="22213" end="22237" title="82d Training Wing" label="82d Flying Training Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644637" start="22281" end="22298" title="82d Training Wing" label="82d Training Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q176146" start="22322" end="22334" title="Sheppard AFB" label="Sheppard AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="22700" end="22710" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644637" start="24447" end="24471" title="82d Flying Training Wing" label="82d Flying Training Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q94291" start="24663" end="24683" title="Tactical Air Command" label="Tactical Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698220" start="24715" end="24735" title="Air Training Command" label="Air Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="24951" end="24987" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195935" start="25178" end="25210" title="Curtiss-Wright AT-9" label="Curtiss-Wright AT-9-CS Fledgling"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="25369" end="25383" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="25419" end="25427" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q493759" start="25456" end="25476" title="Mesa Gateway Airport" label="Mesa Gateway Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698220" start="25479" end="25499" title="Air Training Command" label="Air Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791469" start="25502" end="25537" title="Arizona World War II Army Airfields" label="Arizona World War II Army Airfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057560" start="25540" end="25580" title="37th Flying Training Wing (World War II)" label="37th Flying Training Wing (World War II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914018" start="25583" end="25610" title="List of airports in Arizona" label="List of airports in Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121187" start="25613" end="25651" title="Arizona Commemorative Air Force Museum" label="Arizona Commemorative Air Force Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180759" wikidata="Q1368362" url="?curid=180759" title="Wolfgang Capito">
<text>Wolfgang Fabricius Capito (also Koepfel) ( – November 1541) was a German Protestant reformer in the Calvinist tradition.

==His life and revolutionary work==

Capito was born circa 1478 to a smith at Hagenau in Alsace. He attended the famous Latin school in Pforzheim, where his friend Philip Melanchthon studied.

He was educated for the medical profession but also studied law. He received a doctorate in theology at Freiburg. Having joined the Benedictines, taught for some time at Freiburg. He acted for three years as pastor in Bruchsal. In 1516 he became cathedral preacher of Basel Minster. Here he made the acquaintance of Zwingli and began to correspond with Luther. He persuaded Johann Froben to publish a collection of Luther&#x27;s works in 1518.

In 1519, he removed to Mainz at the request of Albrecht, archbishop of that city, who soon made him his chancellor. In 1523 he settled at Strasbourg, where he remained until his death in November 1541. He had found it increasingly difficult to reconcile the new religion with the old, and from 1524 was one of the leaders of the reformed faith in Strasbourg. He took a prominent part in the earlier ecclesiastical transactions of the 16th century, was present at the second conference of Zürich and at the conference of Marburg, and along with Martin Bucer drew up the &quot;Confessio Tetrapolitana&quot;.

Capito was always more concerned for the &quot;unity of the spirit&quot; than for dogmatic formularies, and from his endeavours to conciliate the Lutheran and Zwinglian parties in regard to the sacraments, he seems to have incurred the suspicions of his own friends; while from his intimacy with Martin Cellarius and other divines of the Socinian school he drew on himself the charge of Arianism.

In 1532, Capito married Wibrandis Rosenblatt, the widow of Oecolampadius. After Wolfgang Capito&#x27;s death, she married Martin Bucer.

Capito died in Strasbourg.

==Works==
His principal works were:
*&quot;Institutionum Hebraicarum libri duo&quot;
*&quot;Enarrationes in Habacuc et Hoseam Prophetas&quot;
* a life of Oecolampadius and an account of the synod of Bern (1532)
* a Greek version of the &quot;Iliad&quot; in which he refers to himself as or 

==See also==

* Hochstratus Ovans

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1368362" start="0" end="25" title="Wolfgang Capito" label="Wolfgang Fabricius Capito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368362" start="32" end="39" title="Wolfgang Capito" label="Koepfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="66" end="72" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q763779" start="73" end="92" title="Protestant reformer" label="Protestant reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="100" end="109" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q22730" start="200" end="207" title="Hagenau" label="Hagenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="211" end="217" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q682489" start="242" end="267" title="Latin school in Pforzheim" label="Latin school in Pforzheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q76325" start="286" end="304" title="Philip Melanchthon" label="Philip Melanchthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="375" end="378" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418960" start="419" end="427" title="University of Freiburg Faculty of Theology" label="Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="447" end="459" title="Benedictines" label="Benedictines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059" start="533" end="541" title="Bruchsal" label="Bruchsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q666479" start="583" end="596" title="Basel Minster" label="Basel Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="631" end="638" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="668" end="674" title="Martin Luther" label="Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q116611" start="689" end="702" title="Johann Froben" label="Johann Froben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="783" end="788" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q698315" start="817" end="840" title="Archbishop of Mainz" label="archbishop of that city"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="898" end="908" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="1248" end="1254" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869" start="1280" end="1287" title="Marburg" label="Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q318622" start="1304" end="1316" title="Martin Bucer" label="Martin Bucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q319300" start="1335" end="1358" title="Tetrapolitan Confession" label="Confessio Tetrapolitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1513" end="1521" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942962" start="1526" end="1535" title="Zwinglian" label="Zwinglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q86358" start="1663" end="1679" title="Martin Cellarius" label="Martin Cellarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q848929" start="1705" end="1713" title="Socinian" label="Socinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="1754" end="1762" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q120460" start="1789" end="1809" title="Wibrandis Rosenblatt" label="Wibrandis Rosenblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q318622" start="1887" end="1899" title="Martin Bucer" label="Martin Bucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="1917" end="1927" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q123450" start="2084" end="2097" title="Johannes Oecolampadius" label="Oecolampadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="2172" end="2177" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947140" start="2238" end="2255" title="Hochstratus Ovans" label="Hochstratus Ovans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180762" wikidata="Q889833" url="?curid=180762" title="Monarchy of Spain">
<text>The monarchy of Spain or Spanish monarchy () is the constitutional form of government of Spain. It consists of a hereditary monarch who reigns as the head of state, being the highest office of the country. The current King is Felipe VI since 19 June 2014, after the abdication of his father, King Juan Carlos I.

The Spanish monarchy is constitutionally referred to as The Crown (), and it comprises the reigning monarch, his or her royal family, and the Royal Household, which supports and facilitates the sovereign in the exercise of his duties and prerogatives. 

The Royal Family is currently represented by King Felipe VI, Queen Letizia, their daughters Leonor, Princess of Asturias, and Infanta Sofía, and the king&#x27;s parents, King Juan Carlos I and Queen Sofía.

The Spanish Constitution of 1978 re-established a constitutional monarchy as the form of government for Spain after the end of the dictatorship of Francisco Franco and the restoration of democracy in 1977. The 1978 constitution affirmed the role of the King of Spain as the living personification and embodiment of the Spanish nation and a symbol of Spain&#x27;s enduring unity and permanence and is also invested as the &quot;arbitrator and the moderator&quot; of Spanish institutions. Constitutionally, the sovereign is the head of state and commander-in-chief of the Spanish Armed Forces. The constitution codifies the use of royal styles and titulary, royal prerogatives, hereditary succession to the crown, compensation, and a regency-guardianship contingency in cases of the monarch&#x27;s minority or incapacitation. According to the Constitution, the monarch is also instrumental in promoting relations with the &quot;nations of its historical community&quot;. The monarch serves as honorary president of the Organization of Ibero-American States, representing over 700,000,000 people in twenty-four member nations worldwide.

==History==
The monarchy in Spain has its roots in the Visigothic Kingdom and its Christian successor states of Navarre, Asturias (later Leon and Castile) and Aragon, which fought the &quot;Reconquista&quot; or Reconquest of the Iberian peninsula following the Umayyad conquest of Hispania in the 8th century. One of the earliest influential dynasties was the House of Jiménez which united much of Christian Iberia under its leadership in the 11th century. From Sancho III of Navarre (r. 1000–1035) until Urraca of León and Castile (r. 1106–1125), members of the Jiménez family claimed the historic Visigothic title &quot;Imperator totius Hispaniae&quot; or &quot;Emperor of All Spain&quot;. The Jiménez rulers sought to bring their kingdoms into the European mainstream and often engaged in cross-Pyrenees alliances and marriages, and became patrons to Cluniac Reforms (c. 950–c. 1130). Urraca&#x27;s son and heir Alfonso VII of León and Castile, the first of the Spanish branch of the Burgundy Family, was the last to claim the imperial title &quot;of Spain&quot;, but divided his empire among his sons. The Castilian Civil War (1366 to 1369) ended with the death of King Peter (r. 1334–1369) at the hands of his illegitimate half-brother Henry, 1st Count of Trastámara who ruled as Henry II (r. 1369–1379). Henry II became the first of the House of Trastámara to rule over a Spanish kingdom. King Peter&#x27;s heiress, his granddaughter Catherine of Lancaster, married Henry III, reuniting the dynasties in the person of their son, King John II.

===Marital union of the Catholic Monarchs===
In the 15th century, the marriage between Isabella I of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon, both members of the House of Trastámara, known as the Catholic Monarchs, united two important kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula. Each kingdom retained its basic structure. The last pretender of the crown of the Byzantine Empire, Andreas Palaiologos, who styled himself as &quot;Emperor of Constantinople&quot;, bestowed his imperial title to Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile in his last testament, dated 7 April 1502, although the Spanish monarchs have never used the title. In 1492 the Catholic Monarchs conquered the Kingdom of Granada in southern Spain, the last Muslim territory in the Iberian peninsula. The unification of Spain is marked from this date, though the Spanish kingdoms continued past that date. 

The territories of the Spanish Empire overseas were dependencies of the Crown of Castile, and Castile had an outsized influence there. Following the Spanish explorations and settlement in the Caribbean, the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire and the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire, the crown established high courts (&quot;Audiencias&quot;) and viceroyalties in important regions (Mexico, 1535; Panama, 1538, which was later replaced by Lima, 1542). The viceroy (vice-king) and the Audiencias were the effective administrators of royal policy.

===Habsburg Monarchy===

In 1505, the Spanish monarchy passed to the House of Habsburg in the person of King Charles I (also Holy Roman Emperor as Charles V), son of Queen Joanna and King Philip I of Castile (usually Philip the Handsome in English). With the death of Ferdinand II of Aragon in 1516 the Aragonese lands were added to Charles and Joanna&#x27;s territories. With his mother and co-monarch Joanna confined in Tordesillas, claimed to be mad, Charles I was the sole ruler, but the legal situation remained slightly ambiguous until her death in 1555 left Charles the undoubted sole monarch, though as Holy Roman Emperor it was not his principal title. Only in the reign of his son Philip II of Spain from 1556 did &quot;King of Spain&quot; become the usual way to refer to the monarch, in Spain and the rest of Europe. 

Philip&#x27;s reign marked the peak of the Spanish Golden Age (1492–1659), a period of great colonial expansion and trade. The Hispanic Crown retained control over and profited from all operations in overseas colonies (by and large royal assets under a monopoly on trade), including slave trade, developed under the purview of the late-medieval system. The death in 1700 of Charles II, last of the Spanish Habsburgs, triggered the War of the Spanish succession.

===Bourbon Monarchy===

With the death of the childless Charles II, the succession to the throne was disputed. Charles II had designated his sister Maria Theresa&#x27;s grandson, Philip of France, Duke of Anjou, as his heir. The possible unification of Spain with France, the two big European powers at the time, sparked the Spanish War of Succession in the 18th century, culminating in the treaties of Utrecht (1713) and Rastatt (1714), which preserved the European balance of power.

Philip V was the first member of the House of Bourbon (Spanish: &quot;Borbón&quot;) to rule Spain. That dynasty still rules today under Felipe (Philip) VI.

In the mid-eighteenth century, particularly under Charles III of Spain, the Spanish Crown embarked on an ambitious and far-reaching project to implement major reforms in the administration of Spain and the Spanish empire. These changes, collectively known as the Bourbon Reforms, attempted to rationalize administration and produce more revenue from the overseas empire.

During the Napoleonic Wars, the French Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte forced Ferdinand VII to abdicate in 1808, and the Bourbons became a focus of popular resistance against French rule. However, Ferdinand&#x27;s rejection of the liberal Spanish Constitution of 1812, as well as his ministerial appointments, particularly the exclusion of liberals, gradually eroded popular support for the Spanish monarchy. With the Pragmatic Sanction of 1830, Ferdinand set aside the Salic law, introduced by Philip V, that prohibited women from becoming sovereigns of Spain. Thereby, as had been customary before the arrival of the Bourbons, Ferdinand VII&#x27;s eldest daughter Isabella became his heiress presumptive. Opponents of the Pragmatic Sanction argued that it was never officially promulgated, claiming Ferdinand VII&#x27;s younger brother, Prince Carlos, the rightful heir to the crown according to the Salic Law.

===First Spanish Republic===

In September 1873, the First Spanish Republic was founded. A coup d&#x27;état restored the Bourbon dynasty to the throne in 1874.

===Second Spanish Republic and dictatorship of Francisco Franco===


In 1931 Spanish local elections produced victories (particularly in urban areas) for candidates favoring an end to the monarchy and the establishment of a republic. Faced with unrest in the cities, Alfonso XIII went into exile, but did not abdicate. The ensuing provisional government evolved into the relatively short-lived Second Spanish Republic. The Spanish Civil War began in 1936 and ended on 1 April 1939 with the victory of General Francisco Franco and his coalition of allied organizations commonly referred to as the Nationalists. Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany aided Franco in the Spanish Civil War. The Soviet Union backed the Republican Government as did Mexico under the government of Lázaro Cárdenas.

After sixteen years without monarchy or kingdom, in 1947, Spain was made a Kingdom again by General Franco, who claimed to rule Spain as &quot;Head of state of the Kingdom of Spain&quot; through the Law of Succession. However, without a king on the throne, he ruled through a coalition of allied organizations from the Spanish Civil War including, but not limited to, the Falange political party, the supporters of the Bourbon royal family, and the Carlists, until his death in 1975.

===Re-establishment of the Monarchy===

Despite Franco&#x27;s alliance with the Carlists, Franco appointed Juan Carlos I de Borbón as his successor, who is credited with presiding over Spain&#x27;s transition from dictatorship to democracy by fully endorsing political reforms.

Impatient with the pace of democratic reforms, the new king, known for his formidable personality, dismissed Carlos Arias Navarro and appointed the reformer Adolfo Suárez as President of the Government in 1977.

The next year the king signed into law the new liberal democratic Constitution of Spain, which was approved by 88% of voters. Juan Carlos&#x27; &quot;quick wit and steady nerve&quot; cut short the attempted military coup in 1981 when the king used a specially designed command communications center in the Zarzuela Palace to denounce the coup and command the military&#x27;s eleven captains general to stand down.

Following the events of 1981, Juan Carlos led a less eventful life, according to author John Hooper. Juan Carlos did not preside over ceremonies such as the opening of hospitals and bridges as often as monarchs in other nations. Instead, he worked towards establishing reliable political customs when transitioning one government administration to another, emphasizing constitutional law and protocol, and representing the Spanish State domestically and internationally, all the while aiming to maintain a professionally non-partisan yet independent monarchy.

==Crown, constitution, and royal prerogatives==

The Crown of Spain (&quot;la Corona de España&quot;), with its roots in the Visigothic kingdom from the 5th century and subsequent successor states, is recognized in Title II &quot;The Crown&quot;, Articles 56 through 65 of the Spanish Constitution of 1978. Constitutionally the monarch embodies and personifies the &quot;indissoluble&quot; unity and permanence of the Spanish State, and represents the legal personality of the State and by extension fulfills the role of &quot;Father of the Nation&quot;. As a unifying figure for the nation, in 2010 King Juan Carlos worked towards &quot;bridging the gap&quot; between Spain&#x27;s rival polarized political parties to develop a unified strategy in response to the country&#x27;s on-going late-2000s economic crisis.

According to the Spanish Constitution voted in referendum, the sovereign power emanates from the people, so it is the very same people who give the king the power to reign:

The monarch &quot;arbitrates and moderates the regular functioning of the institutions&quot; and assumes the highest representation of the Spanish State in international relations. 
The monarch exercises the functions expressly conferred on him by the constitution and the laws.

Upon accession to the crown and being proclaimed before the Cortes Generales, the king swears an oath to faithfully carry out his constitutional duties and to abide by the constitution and laws of the state. Additionally, the constitution gives the king the added responsibility to ensure that the constitution is obeyed. Lastly, the king swears to respect the rights of Spanish citizens and of the self-governing communities. The Prince of Asturias, upon reaching the age of majority, in addition to any regent(s) upon assuming the office, swears the same oath as that of the king along with a further oath of loyalty to the monarch.

The oath reads as follows:


The 1978 Constitution, Title II &quot;The Crown&quot;, Article 62, delineates the powers of the king, while Title IV &quot;Government and Administration&quot;, Article 99, defines the king&#x27;s role in the appointment of the prime minister and the formation of the council of ministers/government. Title VI &quot;Judicial Power&quot;, Article 117, Articles 122 through 124, outlines the king&#x27;s role in the country&#x27;s independent judiciary. However, by constitutional convention established by Juan Carlos I, the king exercises his prerogatives having solicited government advice while maintaining a politically non-partisan and independent monarchy. Receiving government advice does not necessarily bind the monarch into executing the advice, except where prescribed by the constitution. His acts shall always be countersigned in the manner established in section 64. Without such countersignature they shall not be valid, except as provided under section 65(2).

===Styles, titles, and the fount of Honour===

The 1978 constitution confirms the title of the monarch is the &quot;King of Spain&quot;, but that he may also use other titles historically associated with the Crown.

According to Royal Decree 1368/1987, regulating the titles, treatments and honours of the royal family and the regents, the king and his wife, the queen consort, will formally be addressed as &quot;His Majesty and Her Majesty&quot; (&quot;Their Majesties&quot;, Spanish: &quot;Su Majestad&quot;, &quot;Su&quot; represents &quot;His or Her&quot;) rather than the traditional &quot;Catholic Majesty&quot; (&quot;Su Católica Majestad&quot;). A prince consort, the husband of a queen regnant, will have the style &quot;His Royal Highness&quot; (&quot;Su Alteza Real&quot;).&lt;ref name=&quot;Royal Decree 1368/1987&quot;&gt;Real Decreto 1368/1987, de 6 de noviembre, sobre régimen de títulos, tratamientos y honores de la Familia Real y de los Regentes . Boletin Oficial del Estado (BOE) no. 271, 12 November 1987, p. 33717. (Reference: BOE-A-1987-25284)&lt;/ref&gt; The widows and widowers of monarchs are to retain these styles until they remarry. The heir from birth shall hold the title of Prince of Asturias and the other titles historically associated with the heir apparent. These additional titles include &quot;Prince of Viana&quot;, historically associated with the heir apparent to the Kingdom of Navarre; with the titles &quot;Prince of Girona&quot; and &quot;Duke of Montblanc&quot; historically associated with the heir apparent for the Crown of Aragon, among others. Other children of the monarch, and the children of the heir apparent, shall have the title and rank of &quot;Infante&quot; or &quot;Infanta&quot; (prince or princess), and styled &quot;His or Her Royal Highness&quot; (&quot;Su Alteza Real&quot;). Children of an Infante or Infanta of Spain &quot;shall have the consideration of Spanish Grandees&quot;, and the address of &quot;Your Excellency&quot;. The royal decree further limits the ability of any regent to use or create titles during the minority or incapacitation of a monarch. No further constitutional language prescribes titles or forms of address to the fourth generation, or great grandchildren, of a reigning monarch.

Following his abdication in 2014, Juan Carlos I and his wife Sofía retain courtesy titles of King and Queen of Spain.&lt;ref name=&quot;Royal Decree 470/2014&quot;&gt;Real Decreto 470/2014, de 13 de junio, por el que se modifica el Real Decreto 1368/1987, de 6 de noviembre, sobre régimen de títulos, tratamientos y honores de la Familia Real y de los Regentes . Boletin Oficial del Estado (BOE) no. 149, 19 June 2014, p. 46399–46400. (Reference: BOE-A-2014-6477)&lt;/ref&gt;

The monarch&#x27;s position as the fount of honour within Spain is codified in Article 62 (f); It is incumbent upon the monarch to &quot;confer civil and military positions and award honors and distinctions in conformity of the law&quot;. According to the Spanish Ministry of Justice, nobility and grandee titles are created by the &quot;sovereign grace of the king&quot;, and may be passed on to the recipient&#x27;s heirs, who may not sell the title. Titles may revert to the Crown when their vacancy is observed. Succession of titles may follow one of several courses listed on the &quot;Title of Concession&quot; when the title is created. As a general rule, most titles are now inherited by absolute Cognatic Primogeniture (as of 2006), in which the first born inherits all titles regardless of gender. However, a title holder may designate his successor, &quot;Succession by Assignment&quot;, or disperse his titles among his children – with the eldest getting the highest-ranking title, &quot;Succession by Distribution&quot;.

During his reign between 1975 and 2014, King Juan Carlos awarded peerages to two of his former prime ministers who had retired from active politics: Adolfo Suárez, who was created 1st Duke of Suárez; and Leopoldo Calvo-Sotelo who was created 1st Marquess of la Ría de Ribadeo. All successive politicians remain active within politics.

The king grants not only military and civil orders, but also grants awards of distinction, customarily on the advice of government. The Order of the Golden Fleece, one of the oldest surviving orders of chivalry, is the highest honor the king of Spain can bestow. The second in order the king may award is the Order of Charles III to &quot;citizens who, with their effort, initiative and work, have brought a distinguished and extraordinary service to the Nation&quot;. The Laureate Cross of Saint Ferdinand is Spain&#x27;s highest military award for gallantry. Other orders, decorations, and medals include the Order of Isabella the Catholic, the Order of Alfonso X, the Royal and Military Order of Saint Hermenegild, the Order of Saint Raimundo de Penafort, the Order of Military Merit, the Order of Naval Merit, the Order of Aerial Merit, the Order of Civil Merit, the Order of Cultural Merit, the Order of Calatrava, the Order of the Knights of Santiago, the Order of Sant Jordi d&#x27;Alfama, and the Order of Alcántara, among others.

===Inviolability and lèse-majesté===
The Spanish monarch is personally immune from prosecution for acts committed by government ministers in the king&#x27;s name. Although he is nominally chief executive, he is not responsible for exercising his powers. His acts are only valid if countersigned by a minister, who then assumes political and legal responsibility for the act in question. This legal convention mirrors the concept of sovereign immunity which evolved in similar constitutional monarchies. The legal concept of sovereign immunity evolved into other aspects of immunity law in similar liberal democracies, such as parliamentary immunity, judicial immunity, and qualified immunity in the United States. As the reigning monarch the king of Spain has absolute sovereign immunity, he cannot be charged in any court of law in the Spanish state. This immunity applies to both civil and criminal cases. Sovereign immunity is reserved exclusively for the current holder of the Office of King. It does not apply to any other member of the royal family. When Juan Carlos I abdicated the throne to his successor Felipe VI he automatically forfeited his constitutional sovereign immunity and can be charged in a court of law. However, special legislation was passed by parliament prior to his abdication that states he may only be tried by Spain&#x27;s Supreme Court and no other.

The concept of lèse-majesté (&quot;lesa-majestad&quot;) exists in Spanish jurisprudence, which is the crime or offense violating the dignity of the head-of-state or the State itself. According to Article 56 of the 1978 Constitution the monarch and the dignity of the Spanish State are one and the same: &quot;The King is Head of State, the symbol of its unity and permanence&quot;. Breaching Spain&#x27;s &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; laws may carry fines and up to two years in prison. The concept is within the same legal sphere as legislation prohibiting flag desecration in other democratic countries. Additionally, &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; extends to any foreign heads-of-state visiting Spain, and other members of the royal family, and to the Spanish President of the Government as the king&#x27;s appointed officer.

The Spanish satirical magazine &quot;El Jueves&quot; was fined for violation of Spain&#x27;s &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; laws after publishing an issue with a caricature of the Prince and Princess of Asturias engaging in sexual intercourse on their cover in 2007. In 2008, 400 Catalonia separatists burned images of the king and queen in Madrid, and in 2009 two Galician separatists were fined for burning effigies of the king.

===Succession and regency===

According to Article 57 the Crown of Spain is inherited by the successors of King Juan Carlos I de Borbón through &quot;male preference primogeniture&quot;. While drafting the new constitution, lawyer and liberal congressman Joaquín Satrústegui (1909–1992) insisted that the phrase &quot;the legitimate heir of the historic dynasty&quot; be included in the text to underscore that the monarchy was a historic institution predating the constitution or the prior regime. 

Male-preference cognatic primogeniture has been practiced in Spain since the 11th century in the various Visigothic successor states and codified in the &quot;Siete Partidas&quot;, with women able to inherit in certain circumstances. However, with the succession of Philip V in 1700, the first of the Spanish Bourbons, women were barred from succession until Ferdinand VII reintroduced the right and designated his elder daughter Isabella as his heir presumptive by 1833.

The debate on amending the Crown&#x27;s succession law came to the forefront on 31 October 2005, when Infanta Leonor was born to the current King and Queen of Spain. Amending the law to absolute primogeniture would allow the first-born to inherit the throne, whether the heir be male or female. The Zapatero administration of the day proclaimed its intention to amend the succession law; however, with the birth of the king&#x27;s second daughter the issue was postponed. Paving the way, in 2006 King Juan Carlos issued a decree reforming the succession to noble titles from male preference primogeniture to absolute primogeniture. Since the order of succession to the Crown is codified in the Constitution, its reform mandates a complicated process that involves a dissolution of parliament, a constitutional election, and a referendum.

If all lines designated by law become extinct, the constitution reserves the right for the Cortes Generales to provide for the succession &quot;in the manner most suitable for Spain&quot;. The 1978 constitution disinherits members of the royal family (as well as their descendants) from succession if they marry against the expressed prohibition of the monarch and the Cortes Generales. Lastly, Article 57 further provides that &quot;Abdications and renunciations and any doubt in fact or in law that may arise in connection with the succession to the Crown shall be settled by an organic act&quot;.

Constitutionally, the current heirs of Felipe VI are:
# The Princess of Asturias, elder daughter of the King
# The Infanta Sofía, younger daughter of the King
# The Infanta Elena, Duchess of Lugo, elder daughter of King Juan Carlos I.
# Felipe Juan Froilán de Marichalar y de Borbón, son of Infanta Elena.
# Victoria Federica de Marichalar y de Borbón, daughter of Infanta Elena.
# The Infanta Cristina, younger daughter of King Juan Carlos I.
# Juan Urdangarín y de Borbón, eldest son of Infanta Cristina.
# Pablo Urdangarín y de Borbón, middle son of Infanta Cristina.
# Miguel Urdangarín y de Borbón, youngest son of Infanta Cristina.
# Irene Urdangarín y de Borbón, daughter of Infanta Cristina.

The constitution outlines the regency of the monarchy and guardianship of the person of the monarch in the event of his minority or incapacitation. The office of Regent(s) and the Guardianship of the monarch (whether the monarch is in his minority or incapacitated) may not necessarily be the same person. In the event of the minority of the monarch, the surviving mother or father, or oldest relative of legal age who is nearest in line to the throne, would immediately assume the office of Regent, who in any case must be Spanish. If a monarch becomes incapacitated, and that incapacitation is recognized by the Cortes Generales, then the Prince of Asturias (the heir apparent), shall immediately become Regent, if he is of age. If the Prince of Asturias is himself a minor, then the Cortes Generales shall appoint a Regency which may be composed of one, three, or five persons. The person of the king in his minority shall fall under the guardianship of the person designated in the will of the deceased monarch, provided that he or she be of age and of Spanish nationality. If no guardian has been appointed in the will, then the father or mother will then assume the guardianship, as long as they remain widowed. Otherwise, the Cortes Generales shall appoint both the Regent(s) and the guardian, who in this case may not be held by the same person, except by the father or mother of direct relation of the king.

===King, the government, and the Cortes Generales===

The constitution defines the government&#x27;s responsibilities. The government consists of the President of the Government and ministers of state. The government conducts domestic and foreign policy, civil and military administration, and the defense of the nation all in the name of the king. Additionally, the government exercises executive authority and statutory regulations. The most direct prerogative the monarch exercises in the formation of Spanish governments is in the nomination and appointment process of the President of the Government (&quot;Presidente del Gobierno de España&quot;). Following the General Election of the Cortes Generales (&quot;Cortes&quot;), and other circumstances provided for in the constitution, the king meets with and interviews the political party leaders represented in the Cortes, and then consults with the Speaker of the Congress (who, in this instance, represents the &quot;whole&quot; of the Cortes Generales).

Constitutionally, the monarch may nominate anyone he sees fit as is his prerogative. However, it remains pragmatic for him to nominate the person most likely to enjoy the confidence of the Cortes and form a government, usually the political leader whose party commands the most seats in the Cortes. For the Crown to nominate the political leader whose party controls the Cortes can be seen as a royal endorsement of the democratic process, a fundamental concept enshrined in the 1978 constitution. By political custom, the king&#x27;s nominees have all been from parties who hold the most seats in the Cortes. The king is normally able to announce his nominee the day following a General Election.

The king&#x27;s nominee is presented before the Cortes by the Speaker where the nominee and his political agenda are debated and submitted for a Vote of Confidence (&quot;Cuestión de confianza&quot;) by the Cortes. A simple majority confirms the nominee and his program. After the nominee is deemed confirmed by the Speaker of the Congress of Deputies, the king appoints him as the new President of the Government in a ceremony performed at the &quot;Salón de Audiencias&quot; in the la Zarzuela Palace, the official residence of the king. During the inauguration ceremony, the President of the Government takes an oath of office over an open Constitution next to the Bible. The oath as taken by President Zapatero on his second term in office on 17 April 2004 was:

However, if no overall majority was obtained on the first vote of confidence, then the same nominee and program is resubmitted for a second vote within forty-eight hours. Following the second vote, if confidence by the Cortes is still unreached, then the monarch again meets with political leaders and the Speaker, and submits a new nominee for a vote of confidence. If, within two months, no candidate has won the confidence of the Cortes then the king dissolves the Cortes and calls for a new General Election. The king&#x27;s royal decree is countersigned by the Speaker of the Congress.

In the political life of Spain, the king would already be familiar with the various political leaders in a professional capacity, and perhaps less formally in a more social capacity, facilitating their meeting following a General Election. Conversely, nominating the party leader whose party maintains a plurality and who are already familiar with their party manifesto facilitates a smoother nomination process. In the event of coalitions, the political leaders would customarily have met beforehand to hammer out a coalition agreements before their meeting with the king. Once appointed, the President of the Government forms an administration whose ministers are appointed and removed by the king on the president&#x27;s advice. No minister may take up his appointment until after they give their oath of office to obey the constitution with loyalty to the king.

As early as 1975, Juan Carlos expressed his view that his role in the government of a &quot;crowned democracy&quot; would be for him to counsel and orient an administration&#x27;s &quot;thrust in action&quot;, but for the government to take the initiative without the need for it to involve the king unnecessarily in its decisions. Therefore, Juan Carlos abstained from presiding over cabinet meetings except under special occasions or circumstances. Generally, the king presides over cabinet meetings once or twice a year (more regularly if needed) to be directly informed by ministers of non-partisan national and international concerns. However, the king does meet weekly, usually on Tuesday mornings, with the President of the Government. During the late-2000s economic recession which gripped the nation, the king discreetly used his influence to facilitate a bi-partisan response to the crisis.

Governments and the Cortes sit for a term no longer than four years when the president tenders his resignation to the king and advises the king to dissolve the Cortes, prompting a General Election. It remains within the king&#x27;s prerogative to dissolve the Cortes if, at the conclusion of the four years, the president has not asked for its dissolution, according to Title II Article 56. The president may call for earlier elections, but no sooner than a year after the prior General Election. Additionally, if the Government loses the confidence of the Cortes, then it must resign. In the event that a president dies or becomes incapacitated while in office, then the government as a whole resigns and the process of royal nomination and appointment takes place. The vice president would take over the day-to-day operations in the meantime, even while vice president himself may be nominated by the king.

===Royal assent, judiciary, and promulgation of the laws===
The constitution vests the sanction (royal assent) and promulgation (publication) of the laws with the king, while Title III &quot;The Cortes Generals&quot;, Chapter 2 &quot;Drafting of Bills&quot; outlines the method with which bills are passed. According to Article 91, within fifteen days that a bill has been passed by the Cortes Generales, the king shall give his assent and publish the new law. Article 92 invests the king with the right to call for referendum on the advice of the president and the previous authorization of Congress.

No provision within the constitution invests the king with the ability to veto legislation directly; however, no provision prohibits the king from withholding royal assent, effectively a veto. When the media asked King Juan Carlos if he would endorse the 2005 bill legalizing gay marriages (the implication being that he may not endorse the bill), he answered (&quot;I am the King of Spain, not of Belgium&quot;) – a reference to King Baudouin of Belgium who had refused to sign the Belgian law legalising abortion in Belgium.

According to Title VI of the constitution, Justice in Spain &quot;emanates from the people and is administered on behalf of the King by judges and magistrates members of the Judicial Power&quot;. It remains a royal prerogative for the king to appoint the twenty members to the General Council of the Judicial Power of Spain (Spain&#x27;s Supreme Court), and then appoint the President of the Supreme Court nominated by the General Council, according to Article 122, Subsection 3, of the constitution. However, by convention the king&#x27;s nominations have been with the advice of the government of the day.

Additionally, the king appoints the State Public Prosecutor on the advice of the government, according to Article 124. The king may grant clemency in accordance with the law; however, the king may not authorize a general pardon of government ministers who have been found criminally liable or guilty of treason by the Criminal Article of the Supreme Court, according to Articles 62 and 102.

===King and international diplomacy===

Constitutionally the king accredits Spanish ambassadors to international states and governments, and foreign representatives to Spain are accredited before him. However, the government of the day manages diplomatic policy on behalf of the monarch. Additionally, it remains the responsibility for the monarch to express the state&#x27;s assent to international commitments and treaties, which must be in conformity with the Spanish constitution.

During his reign, Juan Carlos followed a foreign policy during the first decade of his kingship coined &quot;Reencounter and Reconciliation&quot;, which greatly improved Spain&#x27;s standing on the world stage. The king reconciled long standing historic tensions with the Netherlands and cultivated relationships with France and Germany which led directly to Spain&#x27;s entry into the European Community and into NATO. Following the tensions between Franco and the Papacy over the reforms of the Second Vatican Council, Juan Carlos&#x27; personal relations with successive popes greatly improved diplomatic relations between the Holy See and Spain, and with Pope Paul VI blessing Juan Carlos&#x27; democratic reforms. According to historian Charles Powell, it was the king&#x27;s goal to win Spain&#x27;s full acceptance by other European powers. The king, a self-described &quot;Europeanist&quot;, was awarded the prestigious Charlemagne Award in 1982 for his steadfast work towards democracy and for supporting European unity. The constitution gives the monarch special responsibility in promoting Spanish relations with members of its historic community, the nations formerly part of the Spanish Empire and also relations with Portugal and Brazil. Fulfilling this responsibility, the king of Spain serves as president of the twenty-three member Ibero-American States Organization. With his support of democracy, various elements within Ibero-America political society have sought the king&#x27;s advice on how to transition from a dictatorship to a democracy. For his efforts, by 2008 the king was voted the most popular leader in all of the Ibero-American community. The yacht, known as the &quot;Fortuna&quot;, is also owned by the State and administered by the Patrimonio Nacional.

===Annual budget and taxation===
Constitutionally the monarch is entitled to compensation from the annual state budget for the maintenance of his family and household administration, and freely distributes these funds in accordance with the laws. According to the Royal Household, &quot;[T]he purpose of these resources is to ensure that the Head of State may carry out his tasks with the independence which is inherent to his constitutional functions, as well as with due effectiveness and dignity&quot;. The annual budget pays the remunerations for senior management staff, management staff and career civil servants, other minor staffing positions, and for general office expenses. The Head of Household, Secretary General, and other management staff salaries must be comparable to other administration ministers within the government, though in no way do they form part of the government or administration. As such, the management staff experience increases, decreases, or freezes to their pay in accordance with the fluctuations of government minister salaries. Additionally, the annual budget pays for the maintenance and expenses of senior members of the royal family who undertake royal duties; which includes grocery, clothing, and toiletries allotments. The budget approved by the Cortes for 2010 was just under 7.4 million euros, a budget only slightly larger than that spent on the Luxembourg monarchy. In 2011 the king addressed the perennial critique of the monarchy; that of how the annual budget awarded to the monarchy and royal household is spent. The report revealed that only 9.6% of the 8.4 million euros budgeted that year for the monarchy are paid to royal family members as &#x27;salaries and representative duties&#x27;, with the difference marked for royal household operational expenses such as household staff salaries, various insurance premiums and liabilities, services, and &#x27;supplementals&#x27; such as overhead. In 2012, the monarchy volunteered an additional 7% pay-cut in solidarity with government officials.

Not included in the annual budget is the maintenance and upkeep of Spanish royal sites, which are owned by the state and made available to the king as the head-of-state, but administered by Patrimonio Nacional on behalf of the government of the day. Spanish royal sites are open to the public when members of the royal family are not in residence. Maintenance and upkeep includes groundskeeping, domestic staffing and catering. The budget is administered with professional Public Administration accounting procedures, and is audited by government auditors. All members of the royal family are subject to taxation and annually submit Income Tax and Wealth Tax returns and effect the relevant payments.

==See also==
* List of Spanish monarchs
* List of Spanish consorts
* Line of succession to the Spanish throne
* 45 Grupo de Fuerzas Aéreas
* Carlism
* Republicanism in Spain
* Contemporary history of Spain

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 

; Spanish government websites
* The Royal Household of His Majesty the King 
* Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas 
* National Heritage official website 

; News articles
* BBC News
* Expatica.com
* Monsters and Critics news
* Notiemail News
* Telegraph

; Wikisource
* Título II. De la Corona, Wikisource 

; Other sources
* Queen Sofía Foundation 
* Prince of Asturias Foundation
* Codespa Foundation
==External links==
*Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas
*National Heritage official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="4" end="21" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="monarchy of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="25" end="41" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="Spanish monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="52" end="64" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="89" end="94" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="113" end="131" title="Hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="150" end="163" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q191045" start="226" end="235" title="Felipe VI" label="Felipe VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="297" end="310" title="Juan Carlos I" label="Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="369" end="378" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="The Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q173053" start="413" end="420" title="List of Spanish monarchs" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320639" start="455" end="470" title="Royal Household of Spain" label="Royal Household"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414413" start="571" end="583" title="Spanish royal family" label="Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q191045" start="612" end="626" title="Felipe VI" label="King Felipe VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q201589" start="628" end="641" title="Queen Letizia" label="Queen Letizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214369" start="659" end="687" title="Leonor, Princess of Asturias" label="Leonor, Princess of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q847010" start="693" end="706" title="Infanta Sofía" label="Infanta Sofía"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="737" end="755" title="Juan Carlos I" label="King Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q156548" start="760" end="771" title="Queen Sofía of Spain" label="Queen Sofía"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="778" end="806" title="Spanish Constitution of 1978" label="Spanish Constitution of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="824" end="847" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="905" end="937" title="dictatorship of Francisco Franco" label="dictatorship of Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310933" start="974" end="978" title="1977 Spanish general election" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="1300" end="1313" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="1318" end="1336" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q326991" start="1344" end="1364" title="Spanish Armed Forces" label="Spanish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q214214" start="1383" end="1391" title="Codification (law)" label="codifies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="1430" end="1447" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="1450" end="1484" title="Primogeniture" label="hereditary succession to the crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q206874" start="1486" end="1498" title="Civil list" label="compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="1506" end="1513" title="regent" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q170079" start="1570" end="1578" title="Minor (law)" label="minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q889137" start="1582" end="1596" title="Capacity (law)" label="incapacitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q421023" start="1791" end="1828" title="Organization of Ibero-American States" label="Organization of Ibero-American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="1964" end="1982" title="Visigothic Kingdom" label="Visigothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054283" start="2001" end="2017" title="successor states" label="successor states"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="2021" end="2028" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q231392" start="2030" end="2038" title="Kingdom of Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q175276" start="2046" end="2050" title="kingdom of Leon" label="Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="2055" end="2062" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="2068" end="2074" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="2170" end="2198" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="Umayyad conquest of Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q938786" start="2269" end="2285" title="Jiménez dynasty" label="House of Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q296652" start="2371" end="2392" title="Sancho III of Navarre" label="Sancho III of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q128701" start="2414" end="2440" title="Urraca of León and Castile" label="Urraca of León and Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038896" start="2573" end="2593" title="Imperator totius Hispaniae" label="Emperor of All Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="2707" end="2715" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q326484" start="2763" end="2778" title="Cluniac Reforms" label="Cluniac Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q312767" start="2824" end="2855" title="Alfonso VII of León and Castile" label="Alfonso VII of León and Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q852111" start="2896" end="2911" title="Anscarids" label="Burgundy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205962" start="3019" end="3038" title="Castilian Civil War" label="Castilian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q310963" start="3078" end="3088" title="Peter of Castile" label="King Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q262363" start="3150" end="3180" title="Henry II of Castile" label="Henry, 1st Count of Trastámara"/>
<link wikidata="Q269876" start="3252" end="3271" title="House of Trastámara" label="House of Trastámara"/>
<link wikidata="Q231150" start="3349" end="3371" title="Catherine of Lancaster" label="Catherine of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q312104" start="3381" end="3390" title="Henry III of Castile" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q297278" start="3444" end="3456" title="John II of Castile" label="King John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="3546" end="3567" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Isabella I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="3572" end="3594" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269876" start="3616" end="3635" title="House of Trastámara" label="House of Trastámara"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="3650" end="3667" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="3706" end="3723" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q845929" start="3777" end="3786" title="pretender" label="pretender"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3807" end="3823" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q499876" start="3825" end="3844" title="Andreas Palaiologos" label="Andreas Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="4131" end="4149" title="Kingdom of Granada" label="Kingdom of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="4351" end="4365" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="4535" end="4571" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q636771" start="4580" end="4615" title="Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire" label="Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="4680" end="4693" title="viceroyalties" label="viceroyalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747501" start="4716" end="4722" title="Real Audiencia of Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226748" start="4730" end="4736" title="Real Audiencia of Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573022" start="4772" end="4776" title="Real Audiencia of Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="4949" end="4966" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="4989" end="4998" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="5005" end="5023" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q171136" start="5052" end="5058" title="Joanna of Castile" label="Joanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q157098" start="5068" end="5087" title="Philip I of Castile" label="Philip I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q157098" start="5097" end="5116" title="Philip the Handsome" label="Philip the Handsome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="5148" end="5170" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q286004" start="5302" end="5313" title="Tordesillas" label="Tordesillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="5571" end="5589" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q530936" start="5754" end="5772" title="Spanish Golden Age" label="Spanish Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="5804" end="5822" title="Spanish Empire" label="colonial expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="5994" end="6005" title="History of slavery" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q36174" start="6085" end="6095" title="Charles II of Spain" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="6142" end="6171" title="War of the Spanish succession" label="War of the Spanish succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q152549" start="6322" end="6335" title="Maria Theresa of Spain" label="Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="6353" end="6369" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q770768" start="6371" end="6384" title="Duke of Anjou" label="Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="6499" end="6524" title="Spanish War of Succession" label="Spanish War of Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="6577" end="6591" title="Treaty of Utrecht (1713)" label="Utrecht (1713)"/>
<link wikidata="Q163236" start="6596" end="6610" title="First Congress of Rastatt" label="Rastatt (1714)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125082" start="6641" end="6657" title="Balance of power in international relations" label="balance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="6660" end="6668" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6697" end="6713" title="House of Bourbon#Bourbons of Spain and Italy" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="6867" end="6887" title="Charles III of Spain" label="Charles III of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734662" start="7080" end="7095" title="Bourbon Reforms" label="Bourbon Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="7200" end="7215" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="7236" end="7254" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="7262" end="7275" title="Ferdinand VII of Spain" label="Ferdinand VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="7279" end="7287" title="abdicate" label="abdicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421412" start="7423" end="7451" title="Spanish Constitution of 1812" label="Spanish Constitution of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q943851" start="7602" end="7628" title="Pragmatic Sanction of 1830" label="Pragmatic Sanction of 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="7654" end="7663" title="Salic law" label="Salic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q183085" start="7850" end="7858" title="Isabella II of Spain" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017754" start="7870" end="7889" title="Early life of Isabella II of Spain" label="heiress presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q343621" start="8023" end="8036" title="Infante Carlos, Count of Molina" label="Prince Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q497777" start="8151" end="8173" title="First Spanish Republic" label="First Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="8189" end="8205" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587316" start="8331" end="8359" title="1931 Spanish local elections" label="1931 Spanish local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q18363" start="8526" end="8538" title="Alfonso XIII of Spain" label="Alfonso XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="8653" end="8676" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Second Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="8682" end="8699" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="8768" end="8784" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="9027" end="9042" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258402" start="9244" end="9261" title="Law of Succession to the Headship of the State" label="Law of Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249339" start="9417" end="9424" title="FET y de las JONS" label="Falange"/>
<link wikidata="Q679189" start="9494" end="9502" title="Carlism" label="Carlists"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="9637" end="9660" title="Juan Carlos I of Spain" label="Juan Carlos I de Borbón"/>
<link wikidata="Q874209" start="9715" end="9769" title="Spain&amp;#x27;s transition to democracy" label="Spain&amp;#x27;s transition from dictatorship to democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q365172" start="9918" end="9938" title="Carlos Arias Navarro" label="Carlos Arias Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q214367" start="9966" end="9979" title="Adolfo Suárez" label="Adolfo Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="10087" end="10108" title="Spanish Constitution of 1978" label="Constitution of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q215337" start="10218" end="10249" title="23-F" label="attempted military coup in 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="11274" end="11302" title="Spanish Constitution of 1978" label="Spanish Constitution of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="11415" end="11428" title="Spain" label="Spanish State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="11449" end="11461" title="legal person" label="legal person"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918497" start="11524" end="11544" title="Father of the Nation" label="Father of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479178" start="11786" end="11812" title="2008–2009 Spanish financial crisis" label="late-2000s economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931618" start="11862" end="11872" title="1978 Spanish constitutional referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q389256" start="12007" end="12075" title="Reserve power" label="arbitrates and moderates the regular functioning of the institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q774482" start="12366" end="12370" title="oath of office" label="oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059233" start="13362" end="13383" title="Independence of the judiciary" label="independent judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="13397" end="13422" title="Constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049542" start="13556" end="13568" title="non-partisan" label="non-partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q719039" start="14272" end="14285" title="queen consort" label="queen consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736387" start="14505" end="14521" title="Catholic Majesty" label="Catholic Majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329104" start="14566" end="14580" title="prince consort" label="prince consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q19643" start="14599" end="14612" title="queen regnant" label="queen regnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q835706" start="15115" end="15133" title="Prince of Asturias" label="Prince of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q643888" start="15241" end="15256" title="Prince of Viana" label="Prince of Viana"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="15318" end="15336" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Kingdom of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q687246" start="15360" end="15376" title="Prince of Girona" label="Prince of Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q502443" start="15393" end="15410" title="Duchy of Montblanc" label="Duke of Montblanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="15472" end="15487" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213594" start="15612" end="15619" title="Infante" label="Infante"/>
<link wikidata="Q213594" start="15635" end="15642" title="Infanta" label="Infanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="15839" end="15846" title="Grandee" label="Grandee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="16218" end="16231" title="Juan Carlos I of Spain" label="Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304081" start="16258" end="16273" title="courtesy titles" label="courtesy titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884636" start="16696" end="16711" title="fount of honour" label="fount of honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181035" start="16925" end="16944" title="Ministry of Justice (Spain)" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="16978" end="16985" title="Letters patent" label="created"/>
<link wikidata="Q214367" start="17845" end="17858" title="Adolfo Suárez" label="Adolfo Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313108" start="17880" end="17894" title="Duke of Suárez" label="Duke of Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q273129" start="17900" end="17921" title="Leopoldo Calvo-Sotelo, 1st Marquess of la Ría de Ribadeo" label="Leopoldo Calvo-Sotelo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17942" end="17971" title="Marquess of la Ría de Ribadeo" label="Marquess of la Ría de Ribadeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q465774" start="18168" end="18194" title="Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Order of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q751275" start="18341" end="18361" title="Order of Charles III" label="Order of Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406126" start="18505" end="18538" title="Laureate Cross of Saint Ferdinand" label="Laureate Cross of Saint Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528285" start="18599" end="18630" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Spain" label="orders, decorations, and medals"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="18643" end="18673" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18679" end="18697" title="Order of Alfonso X" label="Order of Alfonso X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028995" start="18703" end="18748" title="Royal and Military Order of Saint Hermenegild" label="Royal and Military Order of Saint Hermenegild"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18754" end="18789" title="Order of Saint Raimundo de Penafort" label="Order of Saint Raimundo de Penafort"/>
<link wikidata="Q129508" start="18795" end="18818" title="Order of Military Merit (Spain)" label="Order of Military Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482427" start="18824" end="18844" title="Order of Naval Merit (Spain)" label="Order of Naval Merit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18850" end="18871" title="Order of Aerial Merit (Spain)" label="Order of Aerial Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703201" start="18877" end="18897" title="Order of Civil Merit (Spain)" label="Order of Civil Merit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18903" end="18926" title="Order of Cultral Merit (Spain)" label="Order of Cultural Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q756910" start="18932" end="18950" title="Order of Calatrava" label="Order of Calatrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q757097" start="18956" end="18988" title="Knights of Santiago" label="Order of the Knights of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078978" start="18994" end="19027" title="Order of Sant Jordi d&amp;#x27;Alfama" label="Order of Sant Jordi d&amp;#x27;Alfama"/>
<link wikidata="Q594890" start="19037" end="19055" title="Order of Alcántara" label="Order of Alcántara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457196" start="19504" end="19522" title="sovereign immunity" label="sovereign immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="19669" end="19688" title="liberal democracies" label="liberal democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q837859" start="19698" end="19720" title="parliamentary immunity" label="parliamentary immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302979" start="19722" end="19739" title="judicial immunity" label="judicial immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268667" start="19745" end="19763" title="qualified immunity" label="qualified immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134057" start="20469" end="20481" title="lèse-majesté" label="lèse-majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="20528" end="20541" title="jurisprudence" label="jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="20602" end="20615" title="head-of-state" label="head-of-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426793" start="21007" end="21023" title="flag desecration" label="flag desecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q844587" start="21206" end="21233" title="Prime Minister of Spain" label="President of the Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q959665" start="21310" end="21319" title="El Jueves" label="El Jueves"/>
<link wikidata="Q191045" start="21447" end="21453" title="Felipe, Prince of Asturias" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q201589" start="21458" end="21478" title="Letizia, Princess of Asturias" label="Princess of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="21491" end="21509" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="21865" end="21878" title="primogeniture" label="primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891842" start="21954" end="21973" title="Joaquín Satrústegui" label="Joaquín Satrústegui"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="22200" end="22238" title="Male-preference cognatic primogeniture" label="Male-preference cognatic primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q168021" start="22359" end="22373" title="Siete Partidas" label="Siete Partidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="22559" end="22572" title="Ferdinand VII" label="Ferdinand VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q183085" start="22630" end="22638" title="Isabella II of Spain" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017754" start="22646" end="22662" title="Early life of Isabella II of Spain" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q214369" start="22775" end="22789" title="Infanta Leonor" label="Infanta Leonor"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="22859" end="22881" title="absolute primogeniture" label="absolute primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q214369" start="24169" end="24193" title="Leonor, Princess of Asturias" label="The Princess of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q847010" start="24224" end="24241" title="Infanta Sofía of Spain" label="The Infanta Sofía"/>
<link wikidata="Q54386" start="24274" end="24308" title="Infanta Elena of Spain" label="The Infanta Elena, Duchess of Lugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239518" start="24350" end="24395" title="Felipe Juan Froilán de Marichalar y de Borbón" label="Felipe Juan Froilán de Marichalar y de Borbón"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232562" start="24421" end="24464" title="Victoria Federica de Marichalar y de Borbón" label="Victoria Federica de Marichalar y de Borbón"/>
<link wikidata="Q230580" start="24495" end="24515" title="Infanta Cristina of Spain" label="The Infanta Cristina"/>
<link wikidata="Q230580" start="24559" end="24586" title="Juan Valentín Urdangarín y de Borbón" label="Juan Urdangarín y de Borbón"/>
<link wikidata="Q230580" start="24622" end="24650" title="Pablo Nicolás Sebastián Urdangarin y de Borbón" label="Pablo Urdangarín y de Borbón"/>
<link wikidata="Q230580" start="24686" end="24715" title="Miguel Urdangarín y de Borbón" label="Miguel Urdangarín y de Borbón"/>
<link wikidata="Q230580" start="24753" end="24781" title="Irene Urdangarín y de Borbón" label="Irene Urdangarín y de Borbón"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="24844" end="24851" title="Regent" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058576" start="26382" end="26432" title="Council of Ministers of Spain" label="President of the Government and ministers of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q869439" start="26471" end="26485" title="Foreign relations of Spain" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q326991" start="26530" end="26551" title="Spanish Armed Forces" label="defense of the nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q844587" start="26809" end="26836" title="Prime Minister of Spain" label="President of the Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540467" start="26900" end="26916" title="Elections in Spain" label="General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="26924" end="26940" title="Cortes Generales" label="Cortes Generales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208246" start="27060" end="27083" title="List of political parties in Spain" label="political party leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q539149" start="27138" end="27161" title="Congress of Deputies (Spain)" label="Speaker of the Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194749" start="27446" end="27463" title="Government of Spain" label="form a government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="27747" end="27763" title="Constitutional convention (political custom)" label="political custom"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="28090" end="28108" title="Vote of Confidence" label="Vote of Confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q604921" start="28429" end="28447" title="Palacio de la Zarzuela" label="la Zarzuela Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q774482" start="28560" end="28574" title="oath of office" label="oath of office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="28613" end="28618" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q46337" start="29664" end="29673" title="manifesto" label="manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="29733" end="29743" title="coalition government" label="coalitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479178" start="30925" end="30954" title="2008–2009 Spanish financial crisis" label="late-2000s economic recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="32080" end="32092" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029273" start="32423" end="32430" title="Boletín Oficial del Estado" label="publish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="32805" end="32816" title="Juan Carlos" label="Juan Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17423" start="32862" end="32875" title="Same-sex marriage in Spain" label="gay marriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12976" start="33021" end="33040" title="Baudouin of Belgium" label="Baudouin of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="33092" end="33100" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q520406" start="33391" end="33437" title="General Council of the Judicial Power of Spain" label="General Council of the Judicial Power of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29934477" start="33489" end="33519" title="President of the Supreme Court (Spain)" label="President of the Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="33772" end="33782" title="Prosecutor" label="Prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="34989" end="35007" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="35100" end="35122" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="35233" end="35241" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="35262" end="35274" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294864" start="35484" end="35495" title="Pan-European identity" label="Europeanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q152337" start="35531" end="35548" title="Charlemagne Award" label="Charlemagne Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="35795" end="35809" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q421023" start="35952" end="35986" title="Ibero-American States Organization" label="Ibero-American States Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q377916" start="36249" end="36262" title="Ibero-America" label="Ibero-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276071" start="37787" end="37806" title="Monarchy of Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098937" start="38824" end="38838" title="groundskeeping" label="groundskeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q54128" start="38840" end="38857" title="Domestic worker" label="domestic staffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173053" start="39161" end="39185" title="List of Spanish monarchs" label="List of Spanish monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q878242" start="39188" end="39212" title="List of Spanish consorts" label="List of Spanish consorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193364" start="39215" end="39255" title="Line of succession to the Spanish throne" label="Line of succession to the Spanish throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638187" start="39258" end="39284" title="45 Grupo de Fuerzas Aéreas" label="45 Grupo de Fuerzas Aéreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q679189" start="39287" end="39294" title="Carlism" label="Carlism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11265529" start="39297" end="39319" title="Republicanism in Spain" label="Republicanism in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204133" start="39322" end="39351" title="Contemporary history of Spain" label="Contemporary history of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q263" start="39672" end="39682" title="Wikisource" label="Wikisource"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180763" wikidata="Q152838" url="?curid=180763" title="University of Göttingen">
<text>The University of Göttingen, officially the Georg August University of Göttingen (, commonly referred to as Georgia Augusta), is a public research university in the city of Göttingen, Lower Saxony, Germany. Founded in 1734 by George II, King of Great Britain and Elector of Hanover, it began instruction in 1737 and is recognized as the oldest university in Lower Saxony.

Recognized for its historic and traditional significance, the university has affiliations with 47 Nobel Prize winners by its own count. Previously backed by the German Universities Excellence Initiative, the University of Göttingen is a member of the U15 Group of major German research universities and the Coimbra Group of major European research universities, denoting its research prominence. The university is also closely linked with a number of leading Göttingen-based research institutions like the Max Planck Society, the Leibniz Association, the Fraunhofer Society, and the Helmholtz Association. With its extensive collection, the Göttingen State and University Library stands among Germany&#x27;s largest libraries.

==History==
=== Inauguration ===
In 1734, King George II of Great Britain and Elector of Hanover, commanded his Prime Minister in Hanover, Gerlach Adolph von Münchhausen, to establish a university in Göttingen to spread the ideals of the Enlightenment. Napoleon famously remarked, &quot;Göttingen belongs neither to a State, nor to Germany, and is the University of Europe&quot;.

The initial university infrastructure was modest, comprising only a riding hall and a fencing house, with lectures held in the Paulinerkirche, Dominican monastery, or professors&#x27; homes. A university auditorium wasn&#x27;t constructed until the 19th century.
===18th–19th centuries===
Throughout the 18th century, the University of Göttingen was renowned among German universities for its commitment to the free spirit and scientific exploration. Georg Christoph Lichtenberg, a prominent scholar, held one of the first professorships dedicated to experimental physics in Germany from 1769 to 1799. By 1812, Göttingen had established itself as a modern, internationally recognized university, boasting a library with over 200,000 volumes. This period marked Göttingen&#x27;s ascendancy in academic circles, emphasizing its role in fostering an environment conducive to scientific inquiry and innovation.

In the first years of the University of Göttingen, it became known especially for its Faculty of Law. In the 18th century Johann Stephan Pütter, a scholar of public law at that time, taught jus publicum for half a century. The subject had attracted students such as Klemens Wenzel Lothar von Metternich, later diplomat and Prime Minister of Austria, and Wilhelm von Humboldt, who later established the University of Berlin. In the 19th century, Gustav Hugo, Karl Friedrich Eichhorn, and Georg Friedrich Sartorius, who taught law here, became the pioneers of the German Historical School of Jurisprudence. At the time, Göttingen was a very popular place for the study of law in Germany: Even the great German poet Heinrich Heine obtained a doctorate in law here in 1825. Otto von Bismarck, the main creator and the first Chancellor of the second German Empire, also studied law in Göttingen in 1833: he lived in a tiny house on the &quot;Wall&quot;, now known as &quot;Bismarck Cottage&quot;. According to oral tradition, he lived there because his rowdiness had caused him to be banned from living within the city walls. By the university&#x27;s centenary in 1837, it was known as the &quot;university of law&quot;, as the students enrolled by the faculty of law often made up more than half of the university&#x27;s students. At the end of the 19th century, the famous civil law scholar Rudolf von Jhering, who created the theory of &quot;culpa in contrahendo&quot; (fault in conclusion of a contract), remained a law professor in Göttingen until he died. Lassa Francis Lawrence Oppenheim, known as the father of the modern discipline of international law and author of the famous two-volume &quot;International Law: A Treatise&quot;, earned his doctorate in law from the University of Göttingen in 1881.

Likewise, the Faculty of Theology in conjunction with other orientalists and ancient historians across the university became an international center for the study of religion and antiquity.

In 1809, Arthur Schopenhauer, the German philosopher best known for his work &quot;The World as Will and Representation&quot;, became a student at the university, where he studied metaphysics and psychology under Gottlob Ernst Schulze, who advised him to concentrate on Plato and Kant.

During this time, the University of Göttingen achieved renown for its critical work on history as well. An Enlightenment institution, it produced the Göttingen school of history. Later, Max Weber, one of the most important theorists of the development of modern Western society, also studied history in Göttingen.
The Brothers Grimm, the best-known storytellers of folktales like &quot;Cinderella&quot;, &quot;The Frog Prince&quot;, &quot;Little Red Riding Hood&quot;, &quot;Sleeping Beauty&quot;, and &quot;Snow White&quot;, taught here and compiled the first German dictionary. 

However, political disturbances, in which both professors and students were implicated, lowered the attendance to 860 in 1834. The expulsion in 1837 of the seven professors – the so-called &quot;Die Göttinger Sieben&quot; (the Germanist Wilhelm Eduard Albrecht (1800–1876), the historian Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann (1785–1860), the orientalist Georg Heinrich August Ewald (1803–1875), the historian Georg Gottfried Gervinus (1805–1875), the physicist Wilhelm Eduard Weber (1804–1891), and the philologist brothers Jakob (1785–1863) and Wilhelm Grimm (1786–1859)) – for protesting against the revocation by Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover, of the liberal constitution of 1833 hurt the reputation of the city and the university.

===Turn of the 20th century===
At the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century, the University of Göttingen achieved its academic peak. Göttingen maintained a strong focus on natural science, especially mathematics. The tradition began with Carl Friedrich Gauss, who was known as &quot;the Prince of Mathematicians&quot; and taught here in the 18th century. Thereafter, Dirichlet and Riemann took over the chair successively and made significant contributions in the fields of algebra, geometry, and number theory. By 1900, David Hilbert and Felix Klein had attracted mathematicians from around the world to Göttingen, which made it a leading center of mathematics by the turn of the 20th century.

In 1903, its teaching staff numbered 121 and its students 1529. Edmund Husserl, a famous philosopher known as the father of phenomenology, moved to Göttingen to teach. Ludwig Prandtl joined the University of Göttingen in 1904, and developed it into a leader in fluid mechanics and in aerodynamics over the next two decades. In 1925, Prandtl was appointed as the director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Fluid Mechanics. He introduced the concept of boundary layer and founded mathematical aerodynamics by calculating air flow in the down wind direction. Many of Prandtl&#x27;s students went on to make fundamental contributions to aerodynamics. Between 1921 and 1933, the physics theory group was led by Max Born, who, during this time, became one of the three discoverers of the non-relativistic theory of quantum mechanics. He may also have been the first to propose its probabilistic relationship with classical physics. It was one of the main centers of the development of modern physics. Oppenheimer, the American scientist and &quot;father of the atomic bomb&quot;, was one of Max Born&#x27;s most famous students and received his doctorate here.
During this time, the German language became an international academic language. A number of dissertations in the UK and the US had German titles. One might be considered having had a complete academic training only when one had studied in Germany. Thus, many American students were proud of having studied in Germany, and the University of Göttingen had profound impacts on the US. A number of American politicians, lawyers, historians and writers received their education from both Harvard and Göttingen. For example, Edward Everett, once Secretary of State and President of Harvard University, stayed in Göttingen for two years of study. George Ticknor spent two years studying classics in Göttingen. Even John Lothrop Motley, a diplomat and historian, had personal friendship with Otto von Bismarck during his two-year-long study in Göttingen. George Bancroft, a politician and historian, received his PhD from the University of Göttingen in 1820. 

===&quot;Great purge&quot; of 1933===
In the 1930s, the university became a focal point for the Nazi crackdown on &quot;Jewish physics&quot;, as represented by the work of Albert Einstein. In what was later called the &quot;great purge&quot; of 1933, academics including Max Born, Victor Goldschmidt, James Franck, Eugene Wigner, Leó Szilárd, Edward Teller, Edmund Landau, Emmy Noether, and Richard Courant were expelled or fled. Most of them fled Nazi Germany for places like the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Following the great purge, in 1934 David Hilbert, by then a symbol of German mathematics, was dining with Bernhard Rust, the Nazi minister of education. Rust asked, &quot;How is mathematics at Göttingen, now that it is free from the Jewish influence?&quot; Hilbert replied, &quot;There is no mathematics in Göttingen anymore.&quot;

===Renovation after War===
After World War II, the University of Göttingen was the first university in the western Zones to be re-opened under British control in 1945. Göttingen&#x27;s glorious history of affiliation with numerous celebrities continued: Jürgen Habermas, a famous German philosopher and sociologist, pursued his study in Göttingen. Later, Richard von Weizsäcker, a late President of Germany, earned his doctorate in law here. Gerhard Schröder, a former Chancellor of Germany, also graduated from the Faculty of Law in Göttingen. Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission, studied economics in Göttingen, where she met her husband Heiko von der Leyen.

==Campus==

The university is spread out in several locations around the city.

The central university complex with the Central Library and &quot;Mensa&quot; (student refectory/dining hall) is located right next to the inner city and comprises the faculties for Theology, Social sciences, Law, Economics/Business Administration and Linguistics. The departments of Ancient History, Classics, various languages, Psychology and Philosophy are nearby. Located to the south of the city is the Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science with its main building, the Mathematisches Institut, on the same street as the German Aerospace Center and the Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organisation. In other parts of the city are the departments of Anthropology and Educational Sciences as well as the Medical Faculty with its associated hospitals.

Just north of the city a new scientific center has been built in which most of the natural sciences (chemistry, biology, plant pathology, agronomy, forestry, geology, physics, computer science) are now located, including the GZMB. Other institutes are set around the inner city.

=== Library ===
Closely linked with the university is the Göttingen State and University Library (German: Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen, or SUB Göttingen). With around 9 million media units and precious manuscripts, the library is designed for Göttingen University as well as the central library for the German State of Lower Saxony (with its central catalogue) and for the Göttingen Academy of Sciences, founded as the &#x27;Royal Society for Sciences&#x27;.

===Gardens===
The university maintains three botanical gardens: the Alter Botanischer Garten der Universität Göttingen, the Neuer Botanischer Garten der Universität Göttingen, and the Forstbotanischer Garten und Pflanzengeographisches Arboretum der Universität Göttingen.

==Organisation==

As of 2023, the university consists of 13 faculties and around 22,484 students are enrolled. 535 professors and over 4,000 academic staff work at the university, assisted by a technical and administrative staff of over 7,000. The post-war expansion of the university led to the establishment of a new, modern &quot;university quarter&quot; in the north of the city. The architecture of the old university can still be seen in the Auditorium Maximum (1826/1865) and the Great Hall (1835/1837) at Wilhelmsplatz.

=== Faculties, centers, and institutes ===
The University of Göttingen encompasses 13 faculties and a total of 38 additional centers and institutes (including associated centers and institutes but excluding institutes or departments within the faculties themselves).

;Faculties

* Faculty of Agricultural Sciences
* Faculty of Biology and Psychology
* Faculty of Chemistry
* Faculty of Forest Sciences and Forest Ecology
* Faculty of Geoscience and Geography
* Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
* Faculty of Physics
* Faculty of Law
* Faculty of Social Sciences
* Faculty of Economic Sciences
* Faculty of Humanities
* Faculty of Theology
* Medical Center (Universitätsmedizin Göttingen)
;Centers and institutes
Humanities and Theology
* Centre for Global Migration Studies (CeMig)
* Centre for Modern East Asian Studies (CeMEAS)
* Centre for Modern Indian Studies (CeMIS)
* Centrum Orbis Orientalis et Occidentalis (CORO) – Centre for Ancient and Oriental Studies
* The Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities (GCDH)
* Göttinger Center for Gender Studies (GCG)
* International Writing Centre 
* Centre for Medieval and Early Modern Studies (ZMF)
* Center of Modern Humanities (ZTMK)
* Forum for Interdisciplinary Religious Studies (FIRSt)

Natural Sciences, Mathematics, and Informatics
* Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Göttingen (BCCN)
* Courant Research Center Higher Order Structures in Mathematics
* European Neuroscience Institute (ENI)
* Geoscience Centre
* Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences (GZMB)
* Göttingen Campus Institute for Dynamics of Biological Networks
* International Center for Advanced Studies of Energy Conversion (ICASEC)
* Leibniz-ScienceCampus Primate Cognition
* Center for Computational Sciences
* Centre of Biodiversity and sustainable Land Use
* Center for Integrated Breeding Research
* Centre for Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular Physiology of the Brain (CNMPB)
* Center for Systems Neuroscience
* Centre for Statistics (ZfS)

Law, Economic Sciences, and Social Sciences
* Center for European, Governance and Economic Development Research (cege)
* Courant Research Centre Poverty, Equity and Growth in Developing Countries
* Göttingen Center for Genderstudies (GGG)
* Diversity Research Institute
* Interdisciplinary Center for Sustainable Development (IZNE)
* Center for Social Science Methods (MZS)
* Centre for Empirical Research into Teaching and Schools (ZeUS)
* Centre for Medical Law

Associated Institutes
* Academic Confucius Institute (AKI)
* Information Network of Departments of Dermatology (IVDK)
* Institute of Sugar Beet Research
* Institute of Applied Plant Nutrition (IAPN)
* Sociological Research Institute (SOFI)
* Institute for Economics in Small Business Economics

==Academics==

=== Rankings ===
In the QS World University Rankings 2024, it was placed the 232nd internationally and the 13th nationally. The Times Higher Education World University Rankings for 2024 ranked it as 111th globally and 10th at the national level. According to the 2023 ARWU World Rankings, the university holds a position within the 151–200 range internationally and between the 6th and 9th domestically. In the 2023 Center for World University Rankings (CWUR), the University of Göttingen was ranked the 97th worldwide and the 6th nationwide. In the 2022-2023 US News Best Global Universities Rankings, it was ranked the 163rd globally and the 8th nationally.




Within the framework of the 2006–07 German Universities Excellence Initiative, it won funding for its future concept &quot;Tradition, Innovation, Autonomy,&quot; its graduate school &quot;Neurosciences and Molecular Biosciences,&quot; and its research cluster &quot;Microscopy at the Nanometer Range.&quot; In the 2012 Excellence Initiative, Göttingen succeeded in obtaining funds for its graduate school &quot;Neurosciences and Molecular Biosciences&quot; and its research cluster &quot;Microscopy at the Nanometer Range&quot;. In September 2018, Göttingen succeeded in gaining funds for its research cluster &quot;Multiscale Bioimaging&quot;.

=== Historical reputation and impact ===
The University of Göttingen is a traditional institution with a significant historical standing. This is substantiated by a scientific study on the historical development of world university rankings starting in 2013, which examined a web dataset from 24 Wikipedia language versions, covering 59% of the world&#x27;s population and accounting for 68% of all Wikipedia articles across 287 languages. This comprehensive analysis identified the most influential universities globally over the past ten centuries, resulting in the &quot;2017 Wikipedia World University Rankings&quot;, where the University of Göttingen ranked the 20th in terms of &quot;web page rank&quot; (search engine data), the 8th on account of &quot;chei rank&quot; (interactive citation data), and the 6th in the world on &quot;2D rank&quot; combining both categories of data.

As of 2002, the University of Göttingen was associated with 44 Nobel laureates according to an official count released by the University of Göttingen in that year. By this number alone, the University of Göttingen ranked among the global top 15 universities. Recent Nobel laureates associated with the university are Klaus Hasselmann (Nobel Prize in Physics, 2021), Stefan Hell (Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 2014), Thomas C. Südhof (Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, 2013), and Thomas Arthur Steitz (Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 2009). Klaus Hasselmann received his PhD in physics from the University of Göttingen in 1957. Stefan Hell has been a lecturer (in Privatdozent capacity) at the University of Göttingen since 2004 and the director of the Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry in the Göttingen Campus since 2002. Thomas Südhof, currently a professor at Stanford University, worked on his doctoral thesis at the Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry in the lab of British biochemist Victor P. Whittaker and received his PhD in medical science from the University of Göttingen in 1982. Thomas Arthur Steitz was a Macy Fellow at the University of Göttingen during 1976–1977.

Today, a number of judges in national and international courts of the highest level are still affiliated with the Faculty of Law. As of 2021, four out of sixteen in-office Justices of the Federal Constitutional Court (; abbreviated: &quot;&quot;), Germany&#x27;s supreme constitutional court, are affiliated with the University of Göttingen: two of them (Andreas Paulus &amp; Christine Langenfeld) are, currently, professors at the Faculty of Law of the University of Göttingen, while two others (Ines Härtel &amp; Henning Radtke) obtained their PhD in law (Dr.iur) from the University of Göttingen. Also in 2021, Georg Nolte, a former professor of public international law at the University of Göttingen, took office as Judge of the International Court of Justice on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany. Hsu Tzong-li, a Taiwanese judge who has served as the President of the Judicial Yuan (Taiwan&#x27;s constitutional court) since 2016, earned his doctorate in law from University of Göttingen in 1986.

=== Partner institutions ===
Within the Göttingen Campus the university is organizationally and personally interlinked with the following independent and semi-independent institutions:

* Bernstein Network Computational Neuroscience
* European Neuroscience Institute Göttingen (ENI-G)
* Fraunhofer Institute for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology (ITMP)
* Application Center for Plasma and Photonics of the Fraunhofer Institute for Surface Engineering and Thin Films IS
* German Aerospace Center
* German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) – Helmholtz Centre
* German Primate Center – Leibniz Institute for Primate Research
* Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, formerly Max Planck Institute for Flow Research
* Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, a 2022 merger of formerly Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry and formerly Max Planck Institute for Experimental Medicine
* Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research, formerly Max Planck Institute for Aeronomy
* Max Planck Institute for the Study of Religious and Ethnic Diversity, formerly Max Planck Institute for History

===Exchange programs===

As Germany is a member of the European Union, university students have the opportunity to participate in the Erasmus Programme. The university also has exchange programs and partnerships with reputable universities outside Europe such as Tsinghua University, Peking University and Fudan University in China, Kyoto University and Waseda University in Japan and Amherst College in the United States.

== Traditions ==

The most famous tradition of the university is that PhD students who have just passed their &quot;Rigorosum&quot; (oral doctoral examination) or dissertation defense sit in a wagon – decorated with flowers and balloons and accompanied by relatives and friends, drive around the inner city and arrive at the Marktplatz – the central square where the old town hall and the Gänseliesel statue are located. The &quot;newly born doctor&quot; shall climb up to the statue of Gänseliesel (a poor princess in an old fairy tale who was compelled to keep geese by a wicked woman and later regained her identity), kiss the Gänseliesel and give bouquets to her.

== Student life ==
There is an old saying about life in Göttingen, still inscribed in Latin nowadays on the wall of the entrance to the Ratskeller (the restaurant located in the basement of the old town hall): (&quot;There is no life outside Göttingen. Even if it is life, it is no life like here&quot;).


The university offers eight snack shops and six &quot;Mensas&quot; serving lunch at low prices for the students. One &quot;Mensa&quot; also provides dinner for students.

== Notable people ==

Apart from those celebrities mentioned above, notable people that have studied or taught at Georg-August University include the American banker J. P. Morgan, the seismologist Beno Gutenberg, the endocrinologist Hakaru Hashimoto, who studied there before World War I, and several notable Nobel laureates like Max Planck and Werner Heisenberg. Anthropologist Marlina Flassy earned her doctorate in Göttingen, before becoming the first woman and indigenous Papuan to be appointed Dean at Cenderawasih University. The German inventor of the jet engine, Pabst von Ohain, also studied aerodynamics under Ludwig Prandtl. Professor Gunther Heinrich von Berg (Doctor of Law), taught at the University of Göttingen between 1794 and 1800 before he entered politics.

==See also==

* Göttinger Digitalisierungszentrum
* List of early modern universities in Europe
* List of universities in Germany
* List of forestry universities and colleges
==References==
==Further reading==

* Iggers, Georg G. &quot;The University of Göttingen, 1760–1800, and the Transformation of Historical Scholarship&quot; (Council on International Studies, State University of New York at Buffalo, 1980).
* Iggers, Georg G. &quot;The University of Göttingen, 1760–1800, and the Transformation of Historical Scholarship&quot; &quot;Storia della Storiografia&quot; (1982), Issue 2, pp 11–37.
* Constance Reid, &quot;Hilbert&quot;, Springer, 1996, .

==External links==
* The University of Göttingen – home page
* Shame at Göttingen , detailing the 1933 purge
*Scholars and Literati at the University of Göttingen (1603–1800), Repertorium Eruditorum Totius Europae – RETE</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="4" end="27" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="44" end="80" title="University of Göttingen" label="Georg August University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="108" end="123" title="University of Göttingen" label="Georgia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="131" end="157" title="Public university" label="public research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="173" end="182" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="226" end="235" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="263" end="281" title="Electorate of Hanover" label="Elector of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q705657" start="534" end="575" title="German Universities Excellence Initiative" label="German Universities Excellence Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699438" start="624" end="633" title="U15 (German Universities)" label="U15 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q211620" start="680" end="693" title="Coimbra Group" label="Coimbra Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q158085" start="879" end="897" title="Max Planck Society" label="Max Planck Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q680090" start="903" end="922" title="Leibniz Association" label="Leibniz Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q161057" start="928" end="946" title="Fraunhofer Society" label="Fraunhofer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q679913" start="956" end="977" title="Helmholtz Association" label="Helmholtz Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q564783" start="1014" end="1052" title="Göttingen State and University Library" label="Göttingen State and University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="1148" end="1174" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="1179" end="1197" title="Elector of Hanover" label="Elector of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="1339" end="1352" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1354" end="1362" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503155" start="1550" end="1561" title="riding hall" label="riding hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="1568" end="1575" title="fencing" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290262" start="1609" end="1623" title="Paulinerkirche, Göttingen" label="Paulinerkirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="1625" end="1634" title="Dominican order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q57554" start="1933" end="1960" title="Georg Christoph Lichtenberg" label="Georg Christoph Lichtenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5626736" start="2476" end="2490" title="Göttingen University Faculty of Law" label="Faculty of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q215666" start="2512" end="2533" title="Johann Stephan Pütter" label="Johann Stephan Pütter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156043" start="2580" end="2592" title="jus publicum" label="jus publicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="2656" end="2692" title="Klemens Wenzel Lothar von Metternich" label="Klemens Wenzel Lothar von Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q77888" start="2744" end="2764" title="Wilhelm von Humboldt" label="Wilhelm von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="2792" end="2812" title="University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q67446" start="2835" end="2846" title="Gustav Hugo" label="Gustav Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q564888" start="2848" end="2871" title="Karl Friedrich Eichhorn" label="Karl Friedrich Eichhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q73090" start="2877" end="2902" title="Georg Friedrich Sartorius" label="Georg Friedrich Sartorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q695746" start="2952" end="2976" title="German historical school" label="German Historical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="3103" end="3117" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="3160" end="3177" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3235" end="3248" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q62605" start="3778" end="3796" title="Rudolf von Jhering" label="Rudolf von Jhering"/>
<link wikidata="Q77956" start="3947" end="3979" title="L. F. L. Oppenheim" label="Lassa Francis Lawrence Oppenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643432" start="4211" end="4230" title="Faculty of Theology, University of Göttingen" label="Faculty of Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="4397" end="4416" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="4568" end="4579" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="4584" end="4594" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q77381" start="4601" end="4622" title="Gottlob Ernst Schulze" label="Gottlob Ernst Schulze"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="4658" end="4663" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="4668" end="4672" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324607" start="4825" end="4852" title="Göttingen school of history" label="Göttingen school of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="4861" end="4870" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="4993" end="5007" title="Brothers Grimm" label="Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11841" start="5061" end="5071" title="Cinderella" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q11850" start="5085" end="5100" title="The Frog Prince" label="The Frog Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838" start="5114" end="5136" title="Little Red Riding Hood" label="Little Red Riding Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11824" start="5150" end="5165" title="Sleeping Beauty" label="Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11831" start="5183" end="5193" title="Snow White" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q632130" start="5456" end="5472" title="Göttinger Sieben" label="Göttinger Sieben"/>
<link wikidata="Q69189" start="5494" end="5517" title="Wilhelm Eduard Albrecht" label="Wilhelm Eduard Albrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q76589" start="5545" end="5573" title="Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann" label="Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q62686" start="5603" end="5630" title="Georg Heinrich August Ewald" label="Georg Heinrich August Ewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q61648" start="5658" end="5682" title="Georg Gottfried Gervinus" label="Georg Gottfried Gervinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76707" start="5710" end="5730" title="Wilhelm Eduard Weber" label="Wilhelm Eduard Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701" start="5773" end="5778" title="Jakob Grimm" label="Jakob"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714" start="5795" end="5808" title="Wilhelm Grimm" label="Wilhelm Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q162302" start="5865" end="5897" title="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover" label="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="6238" end="6258" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q29193" start="6367" end="6376" title="Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet" label="Dirichlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="6381" end="6388" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="6521" end="6534" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q76641" start="6539" end="6550" title="Felix Klein" label="Felix Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="6760" end="6774" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="6820" end="6833" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q76683" start="6864" end="6878" title="Ludwig Prandtl" label="Ludwig Prandtl"/>
<link wikidata="Q172145" start="6957" end="6972" title="fluid mechanics" label="fluid mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="6980" end="6992" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q708038" start="7074" end="7098" title="Kaiser Wilhelm Institute" label="Kaiser Wilhelm Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q752193" start="7149" end="7163" title="boundary layer" label="boundary layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58978" start="7404" end="7412" title="Max Born" label="Max Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="7507" end="7524" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q658544" start="7677" end="7691" title="modern physics" label="modern physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="7693" end="7704" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58978" start="7783" end="7791" title="Max Born" label="Max Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="8337" end="8344" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q434905" start="8373" end="8387" title="Edward Everett" label="Edward Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="8394" end="8412" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="8430" end="8448" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408091" start="8494" end="8508" title="George Ticknor" label="George Ticknor"/>
<link wikidata="Q689281" start="8562" end="8581" title="John Lothrop Motley" label="John Lothrop Motley"/>
<link wikidata="Q741482" start="8701" end="8716" title="George Bancroft" label="George Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="8903" end="8907" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="8979" end="8994" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q457260" start="9025" end="9056" title="Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service" label="&amp;quot;great purge&amp;quot; of 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q58978" start="9078" end="9086" title="Max Born" label="Max Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q213668" start="9088" end="9106" title="Victor Goldschmidt" label="Victor Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q57066" start="9108" end="9120" title="James Franck" label="James Franck"/>
<link wikidata="Q155790" start="9122" end="9135" title="Eugene Wigner" label="Eugene Wigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q153238" start="9137" end="9148" title="Leó Szilárd" label="Leó Szilárd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733" start="9150" end="9163" title="Edward Teller" label="Edward Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q58750" start="9165" end="9178" title="Edmund Landau" label="Edmund Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099" start="9180" end="9192" title="Emmy Noether" label="Emmy Noether"/>
<link wikidata="Q61046" start="9198" end="9213" title="Richard Courant" label="Richard Courant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="9255" end="9267" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="9370" end="9383" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q57698" start="9441" end="9454" title="Bernhard Rust" label="Bernhard Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9701" end="9713" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="9775" end="9788" title="Allied Occupation Zones in Germany" label="western Zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q76357" start="9922" end="9937" title="Jürgen Habermas" label="Jürgen Habermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567" start="10023" end="10045" title="Richard von Weizsäcker" label="Richard von Weizsäcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q25223" start="10054" end="10074" title="President of Germany" label="President of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530" start="10110" end="10126" title="Gerhard Schröder" label="Gerhard Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="10137" end="10158" title="Chancellor of Germany (Federal Republic)" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5626736" start="10184" end="10211" title="Göttingen University Faculty of Law" label="Faculty of Law in Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772" start="10213" end="10233" title="Ursula von der Leyen" label="Ursula von der Leyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8882" start="10235" end="10271" title="President of the European Commission" label="President of the European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q108594" start="10331" end="10350" title="Heiko von der Leyen" label="Heiko von der Leyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q564783" start="11542" end="11580" title="Göttingen State and University Library" label="Göttingen State and University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5626736" start="13308" end="13322" title="Göttingen University Faculty of Law" label="Faculty of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643432" start="13409" end="13428" title="Faculty of Theology, University of Göttingen" label="Faculty of Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="15575" end="15603" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="15679" end="15727" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="Times Higher Education World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="15819" end="15838" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="ARWU World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q25143635" start="16111" end="16152" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report Best Global Universities Ranking" label="US News Best Global Universities Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q705657" start="16251" end="16292" title="German Universities Excellence Initiative" label="German Universities Excellence Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q109370" start="18067" end="18083" title="Klaus Hasselmann" label="Klaus Hasselmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="18085" end="18107" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q91410" start="18116" end="18127" title="Stefan Hell" label="Stefan Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="18129" end="18153" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q97270" start="18162" end="18178" title="Thomas C. Südhof" label="Thomas C. Südhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="18180" end="18217" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q109559" start="18230" end="18250" title="Thomas A. Steitz" label="Thomas Arthur Steitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="18252" end="18276" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q836125" start="18497" end="18543" title="Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry" label="Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q97270" start="18580" end="18593" title="Thomas C. Südhof" label="Thomas Südhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="18620" end="18639" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q109559" start="18860" end="18880" title="Thomas A. Steitz" label="Thomas Arthur Steitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5626736" start="19063" end="19077" title="Göttingen University Faculty of Law" label="Faculty of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q56025" start="19137" end="19165" title="Federal Constitutional Court" label="Federal Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q190752" start="19212" end="19219" title="supreme court" label="supreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q32766" start="19220" end="19240" title="constitutional court" label="constitutional court"/>
<link wikidata="Q103083" start="19304" end="19318" title="Andreas Paulus" label="Andreas Paulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q91315" start="19563" end="19574" title="Georg Nolte" label="Georg Nolte"/>
<link wikidata="Q728656" start="19670" end="19713" title="Judge of the International Court of Justice" label="Judge of the International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="19731" end="19758" title="Federal Republic of Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068556" start="19760" end="19772" title="Hsu Tzong-li" label="Hsu Tzong-li"/>
<link wikidata="Q31041" start="19831" end="19844" title="Judicial Yuan" label="Judicial Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57770273" start="20001" end="20017" title="The Göttingen Campus" label="Göttingen Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q826802" start="20149" end="20193" title="Bernstein Network Computational Neuroscience" label="Bernstein Network Computational Neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q157332" start="20438" end="20461" title="German Aerospace Center" label="German Aerospace Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206136" start="20464" end="20508" title="German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases" label="German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205899" start="20537" end="20558" title="German Primate Center" label="German Primate Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q277098" start="20602" end="20657" title="Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization" label="Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q110636214" start="20709" end="20760" title="Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences" label="Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q836125" start="20788" end="20834" title="Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry" label="Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912106" start="20848" end="20894" title="Max Planck Institute for Experimental Medicine" label="Max Planck Institute for Experimental Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q470648" start="20897" end="20943" title="Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research" label="Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q470648" start="20954" end="20987" title="Max Planck Institute for Aeronomy" label="Max Planck Institute for Aeronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638442" start="20990" end="21058" title="Max Planck Institute for the Study of Religious and Ethnic Diversity" label="Max Planck Institute for the Study of Religious and Ethnic Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638442" start="21069" end="21101" title="Max Planck Institute for History" label="Max Planck Institute for History"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="21158" end="21172" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q254168" start="21237" end="21254" title="Erasmus Programme" label="Erasmus Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955" start="21366" end="21385" title="Tsinghua University" label="Tsinghua University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952" start="21387" end="21404" title="Peking University" label="Peking University"/>
<link wikidata="Q495015" start="21409" end="21425" title="Fudan University" label="Fudan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q336264" start="21436" end="21452" title="Kyoto University" label="Kyoto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q274486" start="21457" end="21474" title="Waseda University" label="Waseda University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="21488" end="21503" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099387" start="21643" end="21652" title="Oral exam" label="Rigorosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18624915" start="21916" end="21927" title="Gänseliesel" label="Gänseliesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18624915" start="22014" end="22025" title="Gänseliesel" label="Gänseliesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18624915" start="22157" end="22168" title="Gänseliesel" label="Gänseliesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614417" start="22332" end="22342" title="Ratskeller" label="Ratskeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="22840" end="22852" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q76770" start="22871" end="22885" title="Beno Gutenberg" label="Beno Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q748624" start="22907" end="22923" title="Hakaru Hashimoto" label="Hakaru Hashimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="22950" end="22961" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="22983" end="22998" title="Nobel laureates" label="Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="23004" end="23014" title="Max Planck" label="Max Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="23019" end="23036" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q110193617" start="23053" end="23067" title="Marlina Flassy" label="Marlina Flassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130435" start="23181" end="23204" title="Cenderawasih University" label="Cenderawasih University"/>
<link wikidata="Q76541" start="23245" end="23260" title="Pabst von Ohain" label="Pabst von Ohain"/>
<link wikidata="Q76683" start="23294" end="23308" title="Ludwig Prandtl" label="Ludwig Prandtl"/>
<link wikidata="Q628106" start="23468" end="23501" title="Göttinger Digitalisierungszentrum" label="Göttinger Digitalisierungszentrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261639" start="23504" end="23547" title="List of early modern universities in Europe" label="List of early modern universities in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q330041" start="23550" end="23581" title="List of universities in Germany" label="List of universities in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621074" start="23584" end="23626" title="List of forestry universities and colleges" label="List of forestry universities and colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q450415" start="24053" end="24067" title="Constance Reid" label="Constance Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q176916" start="24090" end="24098" title="Springer Science and Business Media" label="Springer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180768" wikidata="Q61525" url="?curid=180768" title="Wilhelm Gesenius">
<text>Heinrich Friedrich Wilhelm Gesenius (3 February 178623 October 1842) was a German orientalist, lexicographer, Christian Hebraist, Lutheran theologian, Biblical scholar and critic.

== Biography ==
Gesenius was born at Nordhausen. In 1803 he became a student of philosophy and theology at the University of Helmstedt, where Heinrich Henke was his most influential teacher; but the latter part of his university course was taken at Göttingen, where Johann Gottfried Eichhorn and Thomas Christian Tychsen were then at the height of their popularity. In 1806, shortly after graduation, he became &quot;Repetent&quot; and &quot;Privatdozent&quot; (or &quot;Magister legens&quot;) at Göttingen; and, as he was later proud to say, had August Neander for his first pupil in Hebrew language. On 8 February 1810 he became &quot;professor extraordinarius&quot; in theology, and on 16 June 1811 was promoted to &quot;ordinarius&quot;, at the University of Halle, where, in spite of many offers of high preferment elsewhere, he spent the rest of his life.

He taught with great regularity for over thirty years. He was a gifted lecturer whose lectures were so interesting that his lecture room was consistently filled; by 1810 his lectures were attended by more than 500 students – nearly half the student population of the university. The only interruptions occurred in 1813–1814, occasioned by the German War of Liberation (War of the Sixth Coalition), during which the university was closed, and those occasioned by two prolonged literary tours, first in 1820 to Paris, London and Oxford with his colleague Johann Karl Thilo (1794–1853) for the examination of rare oriental manuscripts, and in 1835 to England and the Netherlands in connection with his Phoenician studies. He became the most popular teacher of Hebrew and of Old Testament introduction and exegesis in Germany; during his later years his lectures were attended by nearly five hundred students. Among his pupils the most eminent were Peter von Bohlen, C. P. W. Gramberg, A. G. Hoffmann, Hermann Hupfeld, Emil Rödiger, J. C. F. Tuch, J. K. W. Vatke and Theodor Benfey.

His first Hebrew lexicon (with German text) was worked up during the winter of 1806–1807, and published a few years later by F. C. W. Vogel, whose printing house in Leipzig thereafter published all the editions of his lexicons. This was followed by a somewhat abridged version (about half the bulk of the first lexicon but with significant improvements) in 1815, which went to four German editions (each substantially larger and improved than its previous editions) and one Latin edition (although intended merely as a translation of the German edition, this too was a reworked revisions). His large lexicon of Biblical Hebrew and Chaldee (Aramaic) was first published in 1829, and its revision and expansion, under the editorship of Rödiger, continued after Gesenius&#x27;s death until 1858. His textbook on Hebrew grammar first appeared, as a small book of a mere 202 pages, in 1813, and went through 13 editions in Gesenius&#x27;s lifetime and as many afterward. He also published some smaller works, in German, on the grammatical anomalies found in the Hebrew text of the Old Testament. He also wrote extensively on the Samaritans and their version of the Pentateuch, and on the Phoenicians and their language, most notably with the publication of &quot;Scripturae Linguaeque Phoeniciae&quot;.

In 1827, after declining an invitation to take Eichhorn&#x27;s place at Göttingen, Gesenius was made a . In 1830 there were violent verbal attacks to which he, along with his friend and colleague Julius Wegscheider, were subjected by E. W. Hengstenberg and his party in the &quot;Evangelische Kirchenzeitung&quot;, on account of his rationalism and his lecture comments treating lightly the Biblical accounts of miracles. He was thereafter troubled with personal stresses; in 1833 he nearly died of lung disease, in 1835 three of his children died, and subsequently he was tormented by various physical complaints. His death in 1842 came after prolonged misery from gall stones. There is however some discrepancy as to how many of Gesenius&#x27;s children died before their father.

Gesenius died at Halle and is buried near the university. According to tradition, theology students in Halle put stones on his grave as a token of respect every year before their examinations.

Gesenius takes much of the credit for having freed Semitic philology from the trammels of theological and religious prepossession, and for inaugurating the strictly scientific (and comparative) method which has since been so fruitful. As an exegete he exercised a powerful influence on theological investigation. He may also be considered as a founder of Phoenician studies. Gesenius was keenly aware of previous efforts at dictionaries of Biblical Hebrew (he provided an extensive survey of Hebrew lexicography in the 1823 edition of his Hebrew lexicon for schools), and, compared to previous lexicons which had simply translated Hebrew expressions as whatever other versions (primarily the Septuagint and the Vulgate) had in the same verses, his own contribution to that field was the inclusion of insights obtained from the study of other languages, ancient and non-semitic. From his extensive body of work, the products most familiar to modern English-speaking readers are his Hebrew Grammar, best represented by an English translation of the 28th German edition, published by Oxford University Press in 1910, and his dictionary of Biblical Hebrew and Aramaic, known through a number of English translations, including the &quot;Gesenius&#x27;s Hebrew and Chaldee Lexicon to the Old Testament Scriptures&quot;, a 1853 edition revised by Samuel Prideaux Tregelles and the &quot;Brown–Driver–Briggs&quot;, a 1907 edition revised by Francis Brown, Samuel Rolles Driver and Charles A. Briggs. As indicated by the title pages, the German editions of these works were carried forward by several revised editions, after Gesenius&#x27;s death, by other scholars, most conspicuously Emil Rödiger. The newest edition is the 18th which was published in 2013.

Edward Robinson, an acquaintance of Gesenius, and his principal English translator and biographer, said of him,So clear were his own conception, that he never uttered a sentence, no scarcely ever wrote one, which even the dullest intellect did not at once comprehend. In this respect, he may be said to stand out almost alone among modern German scholars. ... In all that fell within the proper sphere of his own researches, he never rested upon the authority of others, but investigated for himself, with all the minute accuracy and closeness of detail and unwearied industry for which German learning is celebrated. His one great object was philological truth. He had no preconceived theories, to the support of which he was at all hazards committed, and in connection with which only he sought for truth. These traits, combined with his extensive learning, inspired a confidence in his researches and opinions on topics connected with Hebrew philology, such as has been bestowed on few scholars.

== Works ==
* &quot;Versuch über die maltesische Sprache&quot; (1810).
* &quot;Hebräisches Lesebuch&quot; (1814).
* &quot;De Pentateuchi Samaritani origine, indole et auctoriate&quot; (1815).
* &quot;Geschichte der hebräischen Sprache und Schrift&quot; (1815).
* &quot;Hebräisch-deutsches Handwörterbuch&quot;, 2 vols. (1810–12). English translation by Leo (1825–1828).
** &quot;Hebräisches und chaldäisches Handwörterbuch über das Alte Testament&quot; (1815; 18th ed. 2013). After the tenth edition &quot;chaldäisches&quot; was changed into &quot;aramäisches&quot;. Various editions of this work have been translated into English by Gibbs (1824, 1827, 1832), Robinson (1836, 1854), and Tregelles (1859).
*** Brown–Driver–Briggs (2nd ed. 1907; corrected impression 1963) is based on Gesenius&#x27;s work.
* &quot;Hebräische Grammatik&quot; (1813, 29th ed. 1929 by Gotthelf Bergsträsser [incomplete]). English translation by Arthur E. Cowley (2nd ed. 1910).
* &quot;Ausführliches grammatisch-kritisches Lehrgebäude der hebräischen Sprache mit Vergleichung der verwandten Dialekte&quot; (1817).
* &quot;De Samaritanorum theologia ex fontibus ineditis commentatio&quot; (1822).
* &quot;Paläographische Studien über Phönizische und Punische Schrift&quot; (1835).
* &quot;Scripturae Linguaeque Phoeniciae&quot; (1837).
* &quot;Programma. Commentatio de Samaritanorum theologia&quot; (1824).
* &quot;Carmina samaritana e Codicibus Londinensibus et Gothanis&quot; (1824).
* &quot;Programma. De inscriptione phoenicio-graeca in Cyrenaica&quot; (1825).
* &quot;Genesis, Hebraice ad optima exemplaria accuratissime expressa&quot; (1828).
* &quot;Der Prophet Jesaia&quot;, 3 vols. (1820–21, 2nd ed. 1829).
* &quot;Liber Job ad optima exemplaria accuratissime expressus&quot; (1829).
* &quot;Thesaurus philologicus criticus linguae Hebraeae et Chaldaeae veteris testamenti&quot;, 3 vols. (started in 1829, completed posthumously by Emil Rödiger in 1858). Contains references to talmudic works and Jewish Bible commentators such as Rashi, Abraham ibn Ezra, David Kimhi.
* &quot;Disputatio de inscriptione punico-libyca&quot; (1835).
* &quot;De Bar Alio et Bar Bahlulo&quot;, 2 vols. (1834–39).
* &quot;Über die Himjaritische Sprache und Schrift&quot; (1841).

Gesenius also contributed extensively to Ersch and Gruber&#x27;s &quot;Encyclopädie&quot;, and enriched the German translation of Johann Ludwig Burckhardt&#x27;s &quot;Travels in Syria and the Holy Land&quot; with valuable geographical notes. For many years he also edited the &quot;Halle Allgemeine Litteraturzeitung&quot;. A sketch of his life was published by Rudolf Haym in 1843 (&quot;Gesenius: eine Erinnerung für seine Freunde&quot;), and another by Hermann Gesenius, &quot;Wilhelm Gesenius, ein Erinnerungsblatt an den hundertjährigen Geburtstag am 3. Februar 1886&quot;, in 1886.

==Notes==
== References ==
* 
* . 105 pages.

==External links==
* ; written by Wilhelm Gesenius; 1910 edition, edited and enlarged by Emil Kautzsch; translated by Arthur Ernest Cowley; scanned and digitized public domain book
* The Old Testament Hebrew Lexicon, a search tool based on the Brown-Driver-Briggs Gesenius
* &quot;Hebraisch-Deutsches Handworterbuch uber die Schriften des Alten Testaments&quot;, Volume 1, 1810.
* &quot;Hebraisch-Deutsches Handworterbuch uber die Schriften des Alten Testaments&quot;, Volume 2, 1812. 
* &quot;Neues Hebraisch-Deutsches Handworterbuch uber das Alte Testament mit Einschlufs des Biblischen Chaldaismus&quot;, 1815.
* &quot;Hebraisches un chaldaisches Handworterbuch uber das Alte Testament&quot;, Third Edition 1828.
* &quot;Hebraisches un chaldaisches Handworterbuch uber das Alte Testament&quot;, Fourth Edition 1834.
* &quot;Hebraisches un chaldaisches Handworterbuch uber das Alte Testament&quot;, Fifth Edition, 1857.
* &quot;Hebraisches un chaldaisches Handworterbuch uber das Alte Testament&quot;, Seventh Edition, 1868.
* &quot;Hebraisches un chaldaisches Handworterbuch uber das Alte Testament&quot;, Eighth Edition, 1878.
* &quot;Hebraisches un chaldaisches Handworterbuch uber das Alte Testament&quot;, Ninth Edition, 1883.
* &quot;Lexicon Manuale Hebraicum et Chaldaicum in Veteris Testamenti libros&quot;, 1833.
* &quot;A Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament, including the Biblical Chaldee&quot;, - Edward Robinson, English Translation of the above, 1844.
* &quot;Thesaurus Philologicus Criticus Linguae Hebraeae et Chaldaeae Veteris Testamenti&quot;, Volume 1, Second Edition 1835.
* &quot;Thesaurus Philologicus Criticus Linguae Hebraeae et Chaldaeae Veteris Testamenti&quot;, Volume 2, Second Edition 1835.
* &quot;Thesaurus Philologicus Criticus Linguae Hebraeae et Chaldaeae Veteris Testamenti&quot;, Volume 3, Second Edition 1853.
* Digitized works by Wilhelm Gesenius at the Leo Baeck Institute, New York</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q61525" start="0" end="35" title="Wilhelm Gesenius" label="Heinrich Friedrich Wilhelm Gesenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="75" end="81" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="82" end="93" title="Oriental studies" label="orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="95" end="108" title="lexicographer" label="lexicographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084115" start="110" end="128" title="Christian Hebraist" label="Christian Hebraist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="130" end="149" title="Lutheran theology" label="Lutheran theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="151" end="167" title="Biblical scholar" label="Biblical scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="172" end="178" title="Biblical criticism" label="critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033" start="218" end="228" title="Nordhausen, Thuringia" label="Nordhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="261" end="271" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="276" end="284" title="Christian theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q314466" start="292" end="315" title="University of Helmstedt" label="University of Helmstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q95546" start="323" end="337" title="Heinrich Philipp Konrad Henke" label="Heinrich Henke"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="430" end="439" title="University of Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q66355" start="447" end="472" title="Johann Gottfried Eichhorn" label="Johann Gottfried Eichhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q214230" start="477" end="501" title="Thomas Christian Tychsen" label="Thomas Christian Tychsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="623" end="635" title="Privatdozent" label="Privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q67183" start="728" end="742" title="August Neander" label="August Neander"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="766" end="781" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew language"/>
<link wikidata="Q32120" start="930" end="949" title="University of Halle" label="University of Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q138107" start="1413" end="1439" title="War of the Sixth Coalition" label="War of the Sixth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1553" end="1558" title="Paris, France" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1560" end="1566" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="1571" end="1577" title="Oxford, England" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485546" start="1597" end="1614" title="Johann Karl Thilo" label="Johann Karl Thilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1743" end="1752" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="1815" end="1828" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="1846" end="1854" title="exegesis" label="exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78113" start="1989" end="2005" title="Peter von Bohlen" label="Peter von Bohlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040632" start="2007" end="2024" title="Carl Peter Wilhelm Gramberg" label="C. P. W. Gramberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q124908" start="2026" end="2040" title="Andreas Gottlieb Hoffmann" label="A. G. Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q78265" start="2042" end="2057" title="Hermann Hupfeld" label="Hermann Hupfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371426" start="2059" end="2071" title="Emil Rödiger" label="Emil Rödiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q214722" start="2073" end="2086" title="Johann Christian Friedrich Tuch" label="J. C. F. Tuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q74896" start="2088" end="2102" title="Johann Karl Wilhelm Vatke" label="J. K. W. Vatke"/>
<link wikidata="Q76162" start="2107" end="2121" title="Theodor Benfey" label="Theodor Benfey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="2141" end="2148" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="2289" end="2296" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q117384058" start="3382" end="3414" title="Scripturae Linguaeque Phoeniciae" label="Scripturae Linguaeque Phoeniciae"/>
<link wikidata="Q215684" start="3619" end="3637" title="Julius August Ludwig Wegscheider" label="Julius Wegscheider"/>
<link wikidata="Q653677" start="3657" end="3675" title="Ernst Wilhelm Hengstenberg" label="E. W. Hengstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="3756" end="3767" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="4223" end="4228" title="Halle an der Saale" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="4451" end="4458" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="4459" end="4468" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="4641" end="4648" title="Exegesis" label="exegete"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="4755" end="4764" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="5092" end="5102" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="5111" end="5118" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="5481" end="5504" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q546298" start="5741" end="5766" title="Samuel Prideaux Tregelles" label="Samuel Prideaux Tregelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926329" start="5781" end="5800" title="Brown–Driver–Briggs" label="Brown–Driver–Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480346" start="5834" end="5847" title="Francis Brown (theologian)" label="Francis Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5624605" start="5849" end="5869" title="Samuel Rolles Driver" label="Samuel Rolles Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q330596" start="5874" end="5891" title="Charles Augustus Briggs" label="Charles A. Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371426" start="6078" end="6090" title="Emil Rödiger" label="Emil Rödiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q629131" start="6153" end="6168" title="Edward Robinson (scholar)" label="Edward Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7506" end="7509" title="Christopher Leo" label="Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290664" start="7787" end="7792" title="Josiah Willard Gibbs Sr." label="Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q629131" start="7813" end="7821" title="Edward Robinson (scholar)" label="Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q546298" start="7840" end="7849" title="Samuel Prideaux Tregelles" label="Tregelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926329" start="7862" end="7881" title="Brown–Driver–Briggs" label="Brown–Driver–Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q70123" start="8017" end="8038" title="Gotthelf Bergsträsser" label="Gotthelf Bergsträsser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798351" start="8077" end="8093" title="Arthur Cowley (librarian)" label="Arthur E. Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q117384058" start="8420" end="8452" title="Scripturae Linguaeque Phoeniciae" label="Scripturae Linguaeque Phoeniciae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371426" start="9073" end="9085" title="Emil Rödiger" label="Emil Rödiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="9119" end="9125" title="talmud" label="talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q26456" start="9172" end="9177" title="Rashi" label="Rashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="9179" end="9195" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Abraham ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q733619" start="9197" end="9208" title="David Kimhi" label="David Kimhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675759" start="9441" end="9489" title="Allgemeine Encyclopädie der Wissenschaften und Künste" label="Ersch and Gruber&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Encyclopädie&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q39691" start="9530" end="9554" title="Johann Ludwig Burckhardt" label="Johann Ludwig Burckhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q66880" start="9763" end="9774" title="Rudolf Haym" label="Rudolf Haym"/>
<link wikidata="Q65613" start="10125" end="10138" title="Emil Kautzsch" label="Emil Kautzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798351" start="10154" end="10174" title="Arthur Ernest Cowley" label="Arthur Ernest Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242248" start="11942" end="11971" title="Leo Baeck Institute, New York" label="Leo Baeck Institute, New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180770" wikidata="Q74896" url="?curid=180770" title="Johann Karl Wilhelm Vatke">
<text>Johann Karl Wilhelm Vatke, known as Wilhelm Vatke (March 14, 1806April 18, 1882) was a German Protestant theologian, born in Behnsdorf, near Magdeburg. After acting as &quot;Privatdozent&quot; in Berlin, he was appointed in 1837 professor extraordinarius.

Vatke was one of the founders of the newer Hexateuch criticism. In the same year in which David Strauss published his &quot;Life of Jesus&quot;, Vatke issued his book, &quot;Die Religion des Alten Testaments nach den kanonischen Büchern entwickelt&quot;, which contained the seeds of a revolution in the ideas held about the Old Testament. Since, however, his book was too philosophical to be popular, the author&#x27;s theories were practically unnoticed for a generation, and the new ideas are now associated especially with the names of Abraham Kuenen and Julius Wellhausen.

His other works include: &quot;Die menschliche Freiheit in ihrem Verhältniss zur Sünde und zur göttlichen Gnade&quot; (1841), &quot;Historisch-kritische Einleitung in das Alte Testament&quot; (1886), and &quot;Religionsphilosophie&quot; (1888). See O Pfleiderer, &quot;Development of Theology&quot; (1890), and TK Cheyne, &quot;Founders of Old Testament Criticism&quot; (1893).

He died in Berlin.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q74896" start="0" end="25" title="Johann Karl Wilhelm Vatke" label="Johann Karl Wilhelm Vatke"/>
<link wikidata="Q74896" start="36" end="49" title="Johann Karl Wilhelm Vatke" label="Wilhelm Vatke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="94" end="104" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q706409" start="125" end="134" title="Behnsdorf" label="Behnsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733" start="141" end="150" title="Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="174" end="186" title="Privatdozent" label="Privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="196" end="202" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903178" start="229" end="254" title="extraordinary professor" label="professor extraordinarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q245719" start="300" end="309" title="Hexateuch" label="Hexateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q57219" start="347" end="360" title="David Friedrich Strauss" label="David Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="582" end="595" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q330188" start="797" end="811" title="Abraham Kuenen" label="Abraham Kuenen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76897" start="816" end="833" title="Julius Wellhausen" label="Julius Wellhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q75053" start="1085" end="1097" title="Otto Pfleiderer" label="O Pfleiderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607653" start="1147" end="1156" title="Thomas Kelly Cheyne" label="TK Cheyne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180772" wikidata="Q39691" url="?curid=180772" title="Johann Ludwig Burckhardt">
<text>Johann Ludwig (also known as John Lewis, Jean Louis) Burckhardt (24 November 1784 – 15 October 1817) was a Swiss traveller, geographer and Orientalist. Burckhardt assumed the alias &quot;Sheikh Ibrahim Ibn Abdallah&quot; during his travels in Arabia. He wrote his letters in French and signed &quot; Louis&quot;. He is best known for rediscovering two of the world&#x27;s most famous examples of rock-cut architecture – the ruins of the ancient Nabataean city of Petra in Jordan and the temples of Abu Simbel in Egypt.

==Youth and early travels==
Burckhardt was born on 24 November 1784 in Lausanne, Switzerland to a wealthy Basel family of silk merchants, the Burckhardt family. His father was named Rudolf, son of Gedeon Burckhardt, an affluent silk ribbon manufacturer; his mother, Sara Rohner, was Rudolf&#x27;s second wife following a brief marriage to the daughter of the mayor of Basel which ended in divorce. After studying at the universities of Leipzig and Göttingen, he travelled to England in the summer of 1806 with goal of obtaining employment in the civil service. Unsuccessful, he took employment with the African Association with the objective of resolving some of the problems of the course of the Niger River. The expedition called for an overland journey from Cairo to Timbuktu. To prepare for the journey, he attended Cambridge University and studied Arabic, science and medicine. At this time he also began to adopt Arabian costume. In 1809 he left England and travelled to Aleppo, Syria to perfect his Arabic and Muslim customs. En route to Syria, he stopped in Malta and learned of Ulrich Jasper Seetzen who had left Cairo in search of the lost city of Petra and had subsequently been murdered. Once in Syria, he adopted the alias Sheikh Ibrahim Ibn Abdallah to hide his true European identity. While in Syria, he investigated local languages and archaeological sites and became the first European discoverer of Hittite or Luwian hieroglyphs. He suffered setbacks during his time in Syria having been robbed of his belongings more than once by people he had paid to guarantee his protection. After more than 2 years living and studying as a Muslim in Aleppo, he felt he could travel safely and not be questioned on his identity. To test his disguise, he made 3 journeys in the area of Syria, Lebanon, Palestine and Transjordan travelling as a poor Arab, sleeping on the ground and eating with camel drivers. With these trips being successful, he prepared to continue his journey to Cairo. He left Aleppo in early 1812 and headed south through Damascus, Ajloun, and Amman. In Kerak, he trusted his security to the local governor, Sheikh Youssef. The governor, under the guise of concern for his guest, liberated him of his most valuable belongings and then sent him south with an unscrupulous guide. The guide soon after took the remainder of his belongings and abandoned him in the desert. Burckhardt found a nearby Bedouin encampment and obtained a new guide and continued his journey south.

==Discoveries and death==
On the road to Cairo along the more dangerous inland route to Aqaba, Burckhardt encountered rumours of ancient ruins in a narrow valley near the supposed biblical tomb of Aaron, the brother of Moses. This region was the former Roman province of Arabia Petraea leading him to believe these were the ruins he had heard about in Malta. Telling his guide that he wished to sacrifice a goat at the tomb, he was led through the narrow valley where on 22 August 1812, he became the first modern European to lay eyes on the ancient Nabataean city of Petra:

He could not remain long at the ruins or take detailed notes due to his fears of being unmasked as a treasure-seeking infidel. Seeing no evidence of the name of the ruins, he could only speculate that they were in fact the ruins of Petra which he had been informed about on his journey to Syria. He continued his travels and after crossing the southern deserts of Transjordan and the Sinai Peninsula, he arrived at Cairo on 4 September 1812.
After spending four months in Cairo with no westbound caravans across the Sahara available, Burckhardt decided to journey up the Nile River to Upper Egypt and Nubia. He justified this to his employer with the argument that the information he would collect on African cultures would help him in his planned journey to west Africa. In January 1813, he departed Cairo travelling up the Nile river over land via donkey. He planned to reach Dongola in what is now modern-day Sudan. He was eventually blocked by hostile people less than 160 km from his goal near the third cataract of the Nile river. Journeying north, he came across the sand-choked ruins of the Great Temple of Ramesses II at Abu Simbel in March 1813. After considerable effort, he was unable to excavate the entrance to the temple. He later told his friend Giovanni Belzoni about the ruins and it was he who later returned in 1817 to excavate the temple. Burckhardt continued north to Esmé. He later made an additional trip to Nubia travelling as far as Shendi near the Pyramids of Meroë. From here his journey took him to the Red Sea, where he resolved to make the pilgrimage to Mecca as this would enhance his credentials as a Muslim on his passage to Timbuktu.

Burckhardt wrote of his travels in Egypt and Nubia, where he witnessed slave trading: &quot;I frequently witnessed scenes of the most shameless indecency, which the traders, who were the principal actors, only laughed at. I may venture to state, that very few female slaves who have passed their tenth year, reach Egypt or Arabia in a state of virginity.&quot;

After crossing the Red Sea, he entered Jeddah on 18 July 1814 and became sick with dysentery for the first time in his travels. Here he proved his credentials as a Muslim and was permitted to travel to Mecca. He spent several months in Mecca performing the various rituals associated with the Hajj which was unheard of for a European. He wrote of his detailed observations of the city and the deportment and culture of the local inhabitants. His journals were a valuable source of information for the African explorer Richard Burton who also later travelled to Mecca a few decades later. He later made a side trip to Medina where he again became sick with dysentery and spent three months recovering. Departing Arabia, he arrived in a state of great exhaustion in the Sinai peninsula and travelled overland to Cairo, arriving on 24 June 1815.

Burckhardt witnessed the plague epidemics that ravaged the Hejaz and Egypt between 1812 and 1816. He wrote: &quot;In five or six days after my arrival [in Yanbu] the mortality increased; forty or fifty persons died in a day, which, in a population of five or six thousand, was a terrible mortality.&quot;

Burckhardt spent the remaining two years of his life editing his journals and living modestly in Cairo while waiting and preparing for the caravan that would take him west across the Sahara to Timbuktu and the Niger river. He made a trip to Alexandria and another to Mount Sinai where he visited Saint Catherine&#x27;s Monastery before returning to Cairo. In Cairo, he met and introduced The Great Belzoni to Henry Salt, the British consul to Egypt, who commissioned Belzoni to remove the colossal bust of Ramesses II from Thebes to the British Museum. He was again stricken with dysentery and died in Cairo on 15 October 1817, never having made his intended journey to the Niger. He was buried as a Muslim, and the tombstone over his grave bears the name that he assumed on his travels in Arabia.

He had from time to time carefully transmitted to England his journals and notes, and a copious series of letters, so very few details of his journeys have been lost. He bequeathed his collection of 800 volumes of oriental manuscripts to the library of Cambridge University.

==Publications==
His works were posthumously published by the African Association:
* &quot;Travels in Nubia&quot; (to which is prefixed a biographical memoir) (1819)
* &quot;Travels in Syria and the Holy Land&quot; (1822)
* &quot;Travels in Arabia&quot; (1829)
* &quot;Arabic Proverbs, or the Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians&quot; (1830)
* (1830).

==References==
==Sources==
* Paul Lunde, &quot;The Lure of Mecca,&quot; &quot;Saudi Aramco World&quot;, November/December 1974, pp. 14–21.
* &quot;The Blue Nile&quot;, Alan Moorehead, Harper and Row, 1962.
* Eduard His: Johann Ludwig Burckhardt (Scheik Ibrahim), in: Basler Gelehrte des 19. Jahrhunderts. Benno Schwabe &amp; Co., Basel 1941, S. 25 – 31.

==External links==
* 
* &quot;Travels in Arabia&quot; from 1892, featuring Johann Ludwig Burckhardt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39691" start="0" end="13" title="Johann Ludwig Burckhardt" label="Johann Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q39691" start="29" end="39" title="Johann Ludwig Burckhardt" label="John Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39691" start="41" end="51" title="Johann Ludwig Burckhardt" label="Jean Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39691" start="53" end="63" title="Johann Ludwig Burckhardt" label="Burckhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="139" end="150" title="Oriental studies" label="Orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11587139" start="396" end="417" title="rock-cut architecture" label="rock-cut architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11029653" start="445" end="454" title="Nabataean Kingdom" label="Nabataean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="463" end="468" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q134140" start="498" end="508" title="Abu Simbel" label="Abu Simbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="591" end="599" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="601" end="612" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="626" end="631" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q281711" start="662" end="672" title="Burckhardt" label="Burckhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="956" end="963" title="Leipzig University" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="968" end="977" title="University of Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q383975" start="1123" end="1142" title="African Association" label="African Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="1217" end="1228" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="1281" end="1286" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="1290" end="1298" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="1340" end="1360" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1373" end="1379" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="1497" end="1503" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1505" end="1510" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="1586" end="1591" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q215751" start="1607" end="1628" title="Ulrich Jasper Seetzen" label="Ulrich Jasper Seetzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="1937" end="1944" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q521323" start="1948" end="1966" title="Anatolian hieroglyphs" label="Luwian hieroglyphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="2166" end="2172" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="2317" end="2324" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="2326" end="2335" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834492" start="2340" end="2351" title="Transjordan (region)" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="2568" end="2576" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141858" start="2578" end="2584" title="Ajloun" label="Ajloun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="2590" end="2595" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q31572" start="2600" end="2605" title="Al Karak" label="Kerak"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="2941" end="2948" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180522" start="3107" end="3112" title="Aqaba" label="Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165296" start="3208" end="3221" title="tomb of Aaron" label="tomb of Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="3238" end="3243" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q221353" start="3290" end="3304" title="Arabia Petraea" label="Arabia Petraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="3979" end="3994" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="4196" end="4201" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q821321" start="4473" end="4480" title="Dongola" label="Dongola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="4507" end="4512" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134140" start="4694" end="4721" title="Temple of Ramesses II" label="Great Temple of Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q134140" start="4725" end="4735" title="Abu Simbel" label="Abu Simbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180339" start="4857" end="4873" title="Giovanni Battista Belzoni" label="Giovanni Belzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q21008848" start="4985" end="4989" title="Esmé" label="Esmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q997838" start="5054" end="5060" title="Shendi" label="Shendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780" start="5070" end="5087" title="Meroë" label="Pyramids of Meroë"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="5127" end="5134" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="5180" end="5185" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="5254" end="5262" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057915" start="5336" end="5349" title="Slavery in Africa" label="slave trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="5666" end="5672" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="5710" end="5719" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q125057" start="6145" end="6159" title="Richard Francis Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="6244" end="6250" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18341002" start="6496" end="6512" title="Second plague pandemic" label="plague epidemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="6530" end="6535" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="7018" end="7028" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q377485" start="7044" end="7055" title="Mount Sinai" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q185362" start="7073" end="7105" title="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery" label="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7165" end="7182" title="Giovanni Battista Belzoni#Egyptian antiquities" label="The Great Belzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q733780" start="7186" end="7196" title="Henry Salt (Egyptologist)" label="Henry Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="7283" end="7294" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="7300" end="7306" title="Thebes (Egypt)" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="7314" end="7328" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180777" wikidata="Q7550835" url="?curid=180777" title="Social Security Trust Fund">
<text>The Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund (collectively, the Social Security Trust Fund or Trust Funds) are trust funds that provide for payment of Social Security (Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance; OASDI) benefits administered by the United States Social Security Administration.

The Social Security Administration collects payroll taxes and uses the money collected to pay Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance benefits by way of trust funds. When the program runs a surplus, the excess funds increase the value of the Trust Fund. As of 2021, the Trust Fund contained (or alternatively, was owed) $2.908 trillion. The Trust Fund is required by law to be invested in non-marketable securities issued and guaranteed by the &quot;full faith and credit&quot; of the federal government. These securities earn a market rate of interest.

Excess funds are used by the government for non-Social Security purposes, creating the obligations to the Social Security Administration and thus program recipients. However, Congress could cut these obligations by altering the law. Trust Fund obligations are considered &quot;intra-governmental&quot; debt, a component of the &quot;public&quot; or &quot;national&quot; debt. As of December 2022 (estimated), the intragovernmental debt was $6.18 trillion of the $31.4 trillion national debt. Of this $6.18 trillion, $2.7 trillion is an obligation to the Social Security Administration.

According to the Social Security Trustees, who oversee the program and report on its financial condition, program costs are expected to exceed non-interest income from 2010 onward. However, due to interest (earned at a 3.6% rate in 2014) the program will run an overall surplus that adds to the fund through the end of 2019. Under current law, the securities in the Trust Fund represent a legal obligation the government must honor when program revenues are no longer sufficient to fully fund benefit payments. However, when the Trust Fund is used to cover program deficits in a given year, the Trust Fund balance is reduced. One projection scenario estimates that, by 2035, the Trust Fund could be exhausted. Thereafter, payroll taxes are projected to only cover approximately 83% of program obligations.

There have been various proposals to address this shortfall, including: reducing government expenditures, such as by raising the retirement age; tax increases; investment diversification and, borrowing.

==Structure==
The &quot;Social Security Trust Fund&quot; comprises two separate funds that hold federal government debt obligations related to what are traditionally thought of as Social Security benefits. The larger of these funds is the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) Trust Fund, which holds in trust special interest-bearing federal government securities bought with surplus OASI payroll tax revenues. The second, smaller fund is the Disability Insurance (DI) Trust Fund, which holds in trust more of the special interest-bearing federal government securities, bought with surplus DI payroll tax revenues.

The trust funds are &quot;off-budget&quot; and treated separately in certain ways from other federal spending, and other trust funds of the federal government. From the U.S. Code:

EXCLUSION OF SOCIAL SECURITY FROM ALL BUDGETS
, title XIII, Sec. 13301(a), Nov. 5, 1990, , provided that:
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the receipts and disbursements of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund shall not be counted as new budget authority, outlays, receipts, or deficit or surplus for purposes of -
(1) the budget of the United States Government as submitted by the President,
(2) the congressional budget, or
(3) the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.

The trust funds run surpluses in that the amount paid in by current workers is more than the amount paid out to current beneficiaries. These surpluses are invested in special U.S. government securities, which are deposited into the trust funds. If the trust funds begin running deficits, meaning more in benefits are paid out than contributions paid in, the Social Security Administration is empowered to redeem the securities and use those funds to cover the deficit.

==Governance==
The Board of Trustees of the Trust Funds is composed of six members:

* Secretary of the Treasury (the Managing Trustee),
* Secretary of Labor,
* Secretary of Health and Human Services,
* Commissioner of Social Security, and
* Two members appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate for a term of four years. These may not be members of the same political party. They may serve after the expiration their term until the next report to Congress is issued by the board, or until their successor takes office, whichever is earlier.
===Board members===
The current board members as of September 24, 2024:
The Board of Trustees holds the trust funds. The Managing Trustee is responsible for investing the funds, which has been delegated to the Bureau of the Fiscal Service.

==History==
The Social Security system is primarily a pay-as-you-go system, meaning that payments to current retirees come from current payments into the system. The program was initially established in 1935 in response to the Great Depression. The first to file for Social Security was Ida Mae Fuller in 1940. Fuller paid $24.75 in taxes during her three years working under the social security program, and drew an aggregate of $22,889 in benefits before passing at age 100. This represents a ratio of $925 in benefits for every dollar she paid into the program.

In 1977, President Jimmy Carter and the 95th Congress increased the FICA tax to fund Social Security, phased in gradually into the 1980s. In the early 1980s, financial projections of the Social Security Administration indicated near-term revenue from payroll taxes would not be sufficient to fully fund near-term benefits (thus raising the possibility of benefit cuts). The federal government appointed the National Commission on Social Security Reform, headed by Alan Greenspan (who had not yet been named Chairman of the Federal Reserve), to investigate what additional changes to federal law were necessary to shore up the fiscal health of the Social Security program. The Greenspan Commission projected that the system would be solvent for the entirety of its 75-year forecast period with certain recommendations. The changes to federal law enacted in 1983 and signed by President Reagan and pursuant to the recommendations of the Greenspan Commission advanced the time frame for previously scheduled payroll tax increases (though it raised slightly the payroll tax for the self-employed to equal the employer-employee rate), changed certain benefit calculations, and raised the retirement age to 67 by the year 2027. As of the end of calendar year 2010, the accumulated surplus in the Social Security Trust Fund stood at just over $2.6 trillion.

Social Security benefits are paid from a combination of social security payroll taxes paid by current workers and interest income earned by the Social Security Trust Fund. According to the projections of the Social Security Administration, the Trust Fund will continue to show net growth until 2022 because the interest generated by its bonds and the revenue from payroll taxes exceeds the amount needed to pay benefits. After 2022, without increases in Social Security taxes or cuts in benefits, the Fund is projected to decrease each year until being fully exhausted in 2034. At this point, if legislative action is not taken, the benefits would be reduced.

==Recent activity and financial status==

The 2015 Trustees Report Press Release (which covered 2014 statistics) stated:
*&quot;Income including interest to the combined OASDI Trust Funds amounted to $884 billion in 2014. ($756 billion in net contributions, $30 billion from taxation of benefits, $98 billion in interest, and less than $1 billion in reimbursements from the General Fund of the Treasury—almost exclusively resulting from the 2012 payroll tax legislation) 
*Total expenditures from the combined OASDI Trust Funds amounted to $859 billion in 2014.
*Non-interest income fell below program costs in 2010 for the first time since 1983. Program costs are projected to exceed non-interest income throughout the remainder of the 75-year period.
*The asset reserves of the combined OASDI Trust Funds increased by $25 billion in 2014 to a total of $2.79 trillion.
*During 2014, an estimated 166 million people had earnings covered by Social Security and paid payroll taxes.
*Social Security paid benefits of $848 billion in calendar year 2014. There were about 59 million beneficiaries at the end of the calendar year. 
*The cost of $6.1 billion to administer the program in 2014 was 0.7 percent of total expenditures.
*The combined Trust Fund asset reserves earned interest at an effective annual rate of 3.6 percent in 2014.&quot;

Some basic equations for understanding the fund balance include:
*Fund ending balance for a given year = Fund starting balance + program revenues + interest - program payouts
*Program annual surplus (or deficit if negative) = program revenues + interest - program expenses
*Program annual cash surplus (or deficit if negative) = program revenues - program expenses

&quot;Program revenues&quot; has several components, including payroll tax contributions, taxation of benefits, and an accounting entry to reflect recent payroll tax cuts during 2011 and 2012, to make the fund &quot;whole&quot; as if these tax cuts had not occurred. These all add to the program revenues.

During 2016, the initial balance as of January 1 was $2,780 billion. An additional $710 billion in payroll tax revenue and $87 billion in interest added to the Fund during 2016, while expenses of $776 billion were removed from the Fund, for a December 31, 2016 balance of $2,801 billion (i.e., $2,780 + $710 + $87 - $776 = $2,801).

In an annually issued report released in August 2021, the U.S. Treasury Department announced that the Old-Age and Survivors Trust Fund was projected to be able to pay scheduled benefits until 2033 while the Disability Insurance Trust Fund was projected to be able to pay its benefits through 2057 (and through 2034 when the funds were hypothetically combined), 1 year and 8 years earlier respectively than the previous report found. In June 2022, the Treasury Department issued an updated report for the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust Funds with revised projections for their ability to pay scheduled benefits to 2034 and 2057 respectively and by 2035 when hypothetically combined due to accelerated recovery from the COVID-19 recession. In March 2023, the Treasury Department issued the annual trustees report for the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust Funds with depletion date projections for the funds estimated at 2033 and 2097 respectively and by 2034 when combined.

In May 2024, the annual trustees report was released with depletion date projections for the funds estimated at 2033 and 2098 respectively and by 2035 when combined. The 1990 board of trustees annual report estimated the depletion date of the combined funds would be in 2043, the 2000 and 2010 annual reports estimated the depletion date of the combined funds would be in 2037, and the 2020 annual report estimated the depletion date of the combined funds would be in 2035. In a survey of 210 members of the American Economics Association published in November 2006, 85 percent agreed with the statement: &quot;The gap between Social Security funds and expenditures will become unsustainably large within the next fifty years if current policies remain unchanged.&quot;

==Recent attention==

=== Under George W. Bush ===
On February 2, 2005, President George W. Bush made Social Security a prominent theme of his State of the Union Address. One consequence was increased public attention to the nature of the Social Security Trust Fund. Unlike a typical private pension plan, the Social Security Trust Fund does not hold any marketable assets to secure workers&#x27; paid-in contributions. Instead, it holds non-negotiable United States Treasury bonds and U.S. securities backed &quot;by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government&quot;. The trust funds have been invested primarily in non-marketable Treasury debt, first, because the Social Security Act prohibits &quot;prefunding&quot; by investment in equities or corporate bonds and, second, because of a general desire to avoid large swings in the Treasuries market that would otherwise result if Social Security invested large sums of payroll tax receipts in marketable government bonds or redeemed these marketable government bonds to pay benefits.

The Office of Management and Budget has described the distinction as follows:

Other public officials have argued that the trust funds do have financial or moral value, similar to the value of any other Treasury bill, note or bond. This confidence stems largely from the &quot;full faith and credit&quot; guarantee. &quot;If one believes that the trust fund assets are worthless,&quot; argued former Representative Bill Archer, then similar reasoning implies that &quot;Americans who have bought EE savings bonds should go home and burn them because they&#x27;re worthless because the money has already been spent.&quot; At a Senate hearing in July 2001, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan was asked whether the trust fund investments are &quot;real&quot; or merely an accounting device. He responded, &quot;The crucial question: Are they ultimate claims on real resources? And the answer is yes.&quot;

Like other U.S. government debt obligations, the government bonds held by the trust funds are guaranteed by the &quot;full faith and credit&quot; of the U.S. government. To escape paying either principal or interest on the &quot;special&quot; bonds held by the trust funds, the government would have to default on these obligations. This cannot be done by executive order or by the Social Security Administration. Congress would have to pass legislation to repudiate these particular government bonds. This action by Congress could involve some political risk and, because it involves the financial security of older Americans, seems unlikely.

An alternative to repudiating these bonds would be for Congress to simply cap Social Security spending at a level below that which would require the bonds to be redeemed. Again, this would be politically risky, but would not require a &quot;default&quot; on the bonds.

From the point of view of the Social Security trust funds, the holdings of &quot;special&quot; government bonds are an investment that returned 5.5% to the trust funds in 2005. The trust funds cannot resell these &quot;special&quot; government bonds on the secondary bond market, although the interest rate is determined based on market interest rates. Instead, the &quot;specials&quot; can be sold back to the government at face value, which is an advantage when interest rates are rising.

The week after his State of the Union speech, Bush downplayed the importance of the Trust Fund:

Some in our country think that Social Security is a trust fund – in other words, there&#x27;s a pile of money being accumulated. That&#x27;s just simply not true. The money – payroll taxes going into the Social Security are spent. They&#x27;re spent on benefits and they&#x27;re spent on government programs. There is no trust.

These comments were criticized as &quot;lay[ing] the groundwork for defaulting on almost two trillion dollars&#x27; worth of US Treasury bonds&quot;.

However, even right-leaning politicians have been inconsistent with the language they use when referencing Social Security. For example, Bush has referred to the system going &quot;broke&quot; in 2042. That date arises from the anticipated depletion of the Trust Fund, so Bush&#x27;s language &quot;seem[s] to suggest that there&#x27;s &quot;something&quot; there that goes away in 2042.&quot; Specifically, in 2042 and for many decades thereafter, the Social Security system can continue to pay benefits, but benefit payments will be constrained by the revenue base from the 12.4% FICA (Social Security payroll) tax on wages. According to the Social Security trustees, continuing payroll tax revenues at the rate of 12.4% will enable Social Security to pay about 74% of promised benefits during the 2040s, with this ratio falling to about 70% by the end of the forecast period in 2080.

=== Under Barack Obama ===

In 2011 and 2012, the federal government temporarily extended the reduction in the employees&#x27; share of payroll taxes from 6.2% to 4.2% of compensation. The resulting shortfall was appropriated from the general Government funds. This increased public debt, but did not advance the year of depletion of the Trust Fund.

=== Under Joe Biden ===
Joe Biden&#x27;s campaign platform proposed new payroll taxes for those making $400,000 or more per year (but after taking office, his tax proposal included only Medicare tax changes).

== An economic perspective ==

===Overview===
The Trust Fund represents a legal obligation of the federal government to program beneficiaries. Under current law, when the program goes into an annual cash deficit, the government has to seek alternate funding beyond the payroll taxes dedicated to the program to cover the shortfall. This reduces the trust fund balance to the extent this occurs. The program deficits are expected to exhaust the fund by 2034. Thereafter, since Social Security is only authorized to pay beneficiaries what it collects in payroll taxes dedicated to the program, program payouts will fall by an estimated 21%.

The trust fund is expected to peak in 2021 at approximately $3.0 trillion. If the parts of the budget outside of Social Security are in deficit, which the Congressional Budget Office and multiple budget expert panels assume for the foreseeable future, there are several implications:
*Additional debt must be issued to investors to obtain the funding necessary to pay this obligation. This will increase &quot;debt held by the public&quot; while simultaneously reducing the &quot;intragovernmental debt&quot; represented by the trust fund.
*CBO reported in 2015 that: &quot;Continued growth in the debt might lead investors to doubt the government&#x27;s willingness or ability to pay its obligations, which would require the government to pay much higher interest rates on its borrowing.&quot;
*Other parts of the budget may be modified, with higher taxes and lower expenditures in other areas to fund Social Security.
*Debate regarding whether the proper debt-to-GDP ratio for evaluating U.S. credit risk is the &quot;debt held by the public&quot; or &quot;total debt&quot; (i.e., debt held by the public plus intragovernmental debt) will be rendered moot, as the amounts will converge substantially.

On the other hand, if other parts of the budget are in surplus and program recipients can be paid from the general fund, then no additional debt need be issued. However, this scenario is highly unlikely.

===Commentary===
Some commentators believe that whether the trust fund is a fact or fiction comes down to whether the trust fund contributes to national savings or not. If $1 added to the fund increases national savings, or replaces borrowing from other lenders, by $1, the trust fund is real. If $1 added to the fund does not replace other borrowing or otherwise increase national savings, the trust fund is not &quot;real&quot;. Some economic research argues that the trust funds have led to only a small to modest increase in national savings and that the bulk of the trust fund has been &quot;spent&quot;. Others suggest a more significant savings effect.

==See also==
*2023 United States banking crisis - Treasury Securities sold before maturity at an inopportune time lead to large unforeseen balance sheet losses

==References==
==Further reading==
* Mamta Murthi, J. Michael Orszag, and Peter R. Orszag, &quot;The Charge Ratio on individual accounts: Lessons from the UK Experience,&quot; Birkbeck College Working Paper 99–2. March 1999
* Eric M. Patashnik. 2000. &quot;&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* https://www.ssa.gov/news/press/factsheets/WhatAreTheTrust.htm

==External links==
* Social Security: The Trust Fund Congressional Research Service
* Social Security Trust Fund Cash Flows and Reserves Social Security Bulletin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7550835" start="4" end="54" title="Social Security Trust Fund" label="Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550835" start="59" end="98" title="Social Security Trust Fund" label="Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550835" start="118" end="144" title="Social Security Trust Fund" label="Social Security Trust Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550835" start="148" end="159" title="Social Security Trust Fund" label="Trust Funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q854022" start="165" end="176" title="trust funds" label="trust funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="205" end="220" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824618" start="318" end="348" title="Social Security Administration" label="Social Security Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="760" end="770" title="Security (finance)" label="securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="4436" end="4461" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q967750" start="4488" end="4506" title="United States Secretary of Labor" label="Secretary of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305968" start="4510" end="4548" title="United States Secretary of Health and Human Services" label="Secretary of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824618" start="4552" end="4583" title="Commissioner of Social Security" label="Commissioner of Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="4620" end="4629" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4651" end="4657" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849153" start="5114" end="5142" title="Bureau of the Fiscal Service" label="Bureau of the Fiscal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364792" start="5199" end="5212" title="PAYGO" label="pay-as-you-go"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604553" start="6118" end="6163" title="National Commission on Social Security Reform" label="National Commission on Social Security Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="6175" end="6189" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="6234" end="6249" title="Federal Reserve System" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="10128" end="10152" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="U.S. Treasury Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q88599208" start="10820" end="10838" title="COVID-19 recession" label="COVID-19 recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q464096" start="11612" end="11642" title="American Economics Association" label="American Economics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="11947" end="11956" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="11957" end="11971" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="12018" end="12044" title="State of the Union Address" label="State of the Union Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561771" start="12342" end="12355" title="Treasury bond" label="Treasury bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508034" start="12397" end="12418" title="full faith and credit" label="full faith and credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="12922" end="12953" title="Office of Management and Budget" label="Office of Management and Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125991" start="18055" end="18082" title="Congressional Budget Office" label="Congressional Budget Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559695" start="18857" end="18874" title="debt-to-GDP ratio" label="debt-to-GDP ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q117084939" start="19984" end="20017" title="2023 United States banking crisis" label="2023 United States banking crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q730580" start="20205" end="20220" title="Peter R. Orszag" label="Peter R. Orszag"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="20542" end="20572" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20626" end="20650" title="Social Security Bulletin" label="Social Security Bulletin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180778" wikidata="Q1066148" url="?curid=180778" title="Power Pad">
<text>The Power Pad (known in Japan as Family Trainer, and in Europe and briefly in the United States as Family Fun Fitness) is a floor mat game controller for the Nintendo Entertainment System. It is a gray mat with twelve pressure-sensors embedded between two layers of flexible plastic. It was originally developed by Bandai.

Bandai first released the accessory in 1986 as the &quot;Family Trainer&quot; pack for the Famicom in Japan, and later released in the United States. Nintendo released it in 1988 as the Power Pad, along with the game &quot;World Class Track Meet&quot;, which was a rebranding of an earlier game.

==Overview==
The Power Pad was originally released by Bandai as the &quot;Family Trainer&quot; in Japan in 1986, and as the &quot;Family Fun Fitness&quot; both in North America and Europe in 1987 and 1988 respectively. In 1988, Nintendo acquired the rights from Bandai for the accessory in North America and renamed it the Power Pad, with the remaining Family Fun Fitness mats recalled from stores. Bandai retained the rights to the product outside of North America. The Power Pad sold 500,000 units in North America.
The Power Pad accessory is laid out in front of the video display for various games, generally plugged into the second NES controller port, with players stepping on the large buttons to control gameplay. There are two illustrated sides to the pad: Side A, which is rarely used, has eight buttons, while side B has twelve buttons numbered 1-12.

Games using the Power Pad often test players on their timing and coordination, memory, &quot;running&quot; speed, or allow them to play music with their steps. Games such as &quot;Dance Dance Revolution&quot; can trace the lineage of their control mechanisms back to the Power Pad (see dance pad).

==Revival==
In 2007, Namco Bandai Games announced that the Power Pad would see a reappearance for the original Wii. This version of the pad, called the Mat Controller, will also work in conjunction with the Wii Remote, and connects physically to the Wii console via its built-in GameCube controller ports. For later Wii models, it is incompatible as they drop the GameCube ports. It was released along with &quot;Active Life: Outdoor Challenge&quot; in North America (known as &quot;Family Trainer Athletic World&quot; in Japan and &quot;Family Trainer&quot; in Europe) in 2008. Its sequel &quot;Active Life: Extreme Challenge&quot; was released in 2009. A third game, &quot;Active Life: Explorer&quot;, was released in 2010.

==Compatible games==
The following is a list of all 11 video games which were created for use with the accessory. The games were developed by Human Entertainment except for the last three entries in the series. All but one of them were published by Bandai, though some were localized in North America by Nintendo.

==See also==
* Dance pad
* List of Nintendo Entertainment System accessories

==References==
== External links ==
*Technical information
*&quot;Short Order &amp; Eggsplode&quot; at NinDB</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1066148" start="4" end="13" title="Power Pad" label="Power Pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="24" end="29" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066148" start="33" end="47" title="Power Pad" label="Family Trainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="56" end="62" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="82" end="95" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066148" start="99" end="117" title="Power Pad" label="Family Fun Fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="158" end="187" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q507269" start="315" end="321" title="Bandai" label="Bandai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="415" end="422" title="Nintendo Entertainment System#The Nintendo Family Computer" label="Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569964" start="547" end="569" title="Stadium Events" label="World Class Track Meet"/>
<link wikidata="Q908392" start="1664" end="1686" title="Dance Dance Revolution" label="Dance Dance Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365323" start="1770" end="1779" title="dance pad" label="dance pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194689" start="1804" end="1822" title="Namco Bandai Games" label="Namco Bandai Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="1894" end="1897" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q56898" start="1990" end="2000" title="Wii Remote" label="Wii Remote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231718" start="2062" end="2081" title="GameCube controller" label="GameCube controller"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2196" end="2226" title="Active Life: Outdoor Challenge" label="Active Life: Outdoor Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2379" end="2409" title="Active Life: Extreme Challenge" label="Active Life: Extreme Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2458" end="2479" title="Active Life: Explorer" label="Active Life: Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408214" start="2652" end="2671" title="Human Entertainment" label="Human Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365323" start="2840" end="2849" title="Dance pad" label="Dance pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245625" start="2852" end="2901" title="List of Nintendo Entertainment System accessories" label="List of Nintendo Entertainment System accessories"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180781" wikidata="Q193664" url="?curid=180781" title="Pietism">
<text>Pietism (), also known as Pietistic Lutheranism, is a movement within Lutheranism that combines its emphasis on biblical doctrine with an emphasis on individual piety and living a holy Christian life. 

Although the movement is aligned with Lutheranism, it has had a tremendous impact on Protestantism worldwide, particularly in North America and Europe. Pietism originated in modern Germany in the late 17th century with the work of Philipp Spener, a Lutheran theologian whose emphasis on personal transformation through spiritual rebirth and renewal, individual devotion, and piety laid the foundations for the movement. Although Spener did not directly advocate the quietistic, legalistic, and semi-separatist practices of Pietism, they were more or less involved in the positions he assumed or the practices which he encouraged.

Pietism spread from Germany to Switzerland, the rest of German-speaking Europe, and to Scandinavia and the Baltics, where it was heavily influential, leaving a permanent mark on the region&#x27;s dominant Lutheranism, with figures like Hans Nielsen Hauge in Norway, Peter Spaak and Carl Olof Rosenius in Sweden, Katarina Asplund in Finland, and Barbara von Krüdener in the Baltics, and to the rest of Europe. It was further taken to North America, primarily by German and Scandinavian immigrants. There, it influenced Protestants of other ethnic and other (non-Lutheran) denominational backgrounds, contributing to the 18th-century foundation of evangelicalism, an interdenominational movement within Protestantism that today has some 300 million followers.

In the middle of the 19th century, Lars Levi Laestadius spearheaded a Pietist revival in Scandinavia that upheld what came to be known as Laestadian Lutheran theology, which is adhered to today by the Laestadian Lutheran Churches as well as by several congregations within other mainstream Lutheran Churches, such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland. The Eielsen Synod and Association of Free Lutheran Congregations are Pietist Lutheran bodies that emerged in the Pietist Lutheran movement in Norway, which was spearheaded by Hans Nielsen Hauge. In 1900, the Church of the Lutheran Brethren was founded and it adheres to Pietist Lutheran theology, emphasizing a personal conversion experience. The Ethiopian Evangelical Church Mekane Yesus, a Lutheran denomination with a largely Pietistic following with some Presbyterian and Pentecostal influence and primarily based in Ethiopia and among the Ethiopian diaspora, is the largest individual member Lutheran denomination within the Lutheran World Federation.

Whereas Pietistic Lutherans stayed within the Lutheran tradition, adherents of a related movement known as Radical Pietism believed in separating from the established Lutheran Churches. Some of the theological tenets of Pietism also influenced other traditions of Protestantism, inspiring the Anglican priest John Wesley to begin the Methodist movement and Alexander Mack to begin the Anabaptist Schwarzenau Brethren movement.

The word &quot;pietism&quot; (in lower case spelling) is also used to refer to an &quot;emphasis on devotional experience and practices&quot;, or an &quot;affectation of devotion&quot;, &quot;pious sentiment, especially of an exaggerated or affected nature&quot;, not necessarily connected with Lutheranism or even Christianity.

==Beliefs==
Pietistic Lutherans meet together in conventicles, &quot;apart from Divine Service in order to mutually encourage piety&quot;. They believe &quot;that any true Christian could point back in his or her life to an inner struggle with sin that culminated in a crisis and ultimately a decision to start a new, Christ-centered life.&quot; Pietistic Lutherans emphasize following &quot;biblical divine commands of believers to live a holy life and to strive for holy living, or sanctification&quot;.

== By country ==
=== Germany ===
Pietism did not die out in the 18th century, but was alive and active in the American (German Evangelical Church Society of the West, based in Gravois, Missouri, later German Evangelical Synod of North America and still later the Evangelical and Reformed Church, a precursor of the United Church of Christ.) The church president from 1901 to 1914 was a pietist named Jakob Pister. Some vestiges of Pietism were still present in 1957 at the time of the formation of the United Church of Christ. In the 21st century Pietism is still alive in groups inside the Evangelical Church in Germany. These groups are called and emerged in the second half of the 19th century in the so-called .

The 19th century saw a revival of confessional Lutheran doctrine, known as the neo-Lutheran movement. This movement focused on a reassertion of the identity of Lutherans as a distinct group within the broader community of Christians, with a renewed focus on the Lutheran Confessions as a key source of Lutheran doctrine. Associated with these changes was a renewed focus on traditional doctrine and liturgy, which paralleled the growth of Anglo-Catholicism in England.

===Scandinavia===
In Denmark, Pietistic Lutheranism became popular in 1703. There, the faithful were organized into conventicles that &quot;met for prayer and Bible reading&quot;.

Pietistic Lutheranism entered Sweden in the 1600s after the writings of Johann Arndt, Philipp Jakob Spener, and August Hermann Francke became popular. Pietistic Lutheranism gained patronage under Archbishop Erik Benzelius, who encouraged the Pietistic Lutheran practices.

Laestadian Lutheranism, a form of Pietistic Lutheranism, continues to flourish in Scandinavia, where Church of Sweden priest Lars Levi Laestadius spearheaded the revival in the 19th century.

==History==
===Forerunners===
As the forerunners of the Pietists in the strict sense, certain voices had been heard bewailing the shortcomings of the church and advocating a revival of practical and devout Christianity. Amongst them were the Christian mystic Jakob Böhme (Behmen); Johann Arndt, whose work, &quot;True Christianity&quot;, became widely known and appreciated; Heinrich Müller, who described the font, the pulpit, the confessional, and the altar as &quot;the four dumb idols of the Lutheran Church&quot;; the theologian Johann Valentin Andrea, court chaplain of the Landgrave of Hesse; Schuppius, who sought to restore the Bible to its place in the pulpit; and Theophilus Grossgebauer (d. 1661) of Rostock, who from his pulpit and by his writings raised what he called &quot;the alarm cry of a watchman in Sion&quot;.

===Founding===

The direct originator of the movement was Philipp Spener. Born at Rappoltsweiler in Alsace, now in France, on 13 January 1635, trained by a devout godmother who used books of devotion like Arndt&#x27;s &quot;True Christianity&quot;, Spener was convinced of the necessity of a moral and religious reformation within German Lutheranism. He studied theology at Strasbourg, where the professors at the time (and especially Sebastian Schmidt) were more inclined to &quot;practical&quot; Christianity than to theological disputation. He afterwards spent a year in Geneva, and was powerfully influenced by the strict moral life and rigid ecclesiastical discipline prevalent there, and also by the preaching and the piety of the Waldensian professor Antoine Leger and the converted Jesuit preacher Jean de Labadie.

During a stay in Tübingen, Spener read Grossgebauer&#x27;s &quot;Alarm Cry&quot;, and in 1666 he entered upon his first pastoral charge at Frankfurt with a profound opinion that the Christian life within Evangelical Lutheranism was being sacrificed to zeal for rigid Lutheran orthodoxy. Pietism, as a distinct movement in the German Church, began with religious meetings at Spener&#x27;s house (&quot;collegia pietatis&quot;) where he repeated his sermons, expounded passages of the New Testament, and induced those present to join in conversation on religious questions. In 1675, Spener published his &quot;Pia desideria&quot; or &quot;Earnest Desire for a Reform of the True Evangelical Church&quot;, the title giving rise to the term &quot;Pietists&quot;. This was originally a pejorative term given to the adherents of the movement by its enemies as a form of ridicule, like that of &quot;Methodists&quot; somewhat later in England.

In &quot;Pia desideria&quot;, Spener made six proposals as the best means of restoring the life of the church:

# The earnest and thorough study of the Bible in private meetings, &quot;ecclesiolae in ecclesia&quot; (&quot;little churches within the church&quot;)
# The Christian priesthood being universal, the laity should share in the spiritual government of the church
# A knowledge of Christianity must be attended by the practice of it as its indispensable sign and supplement
# Instead of merely didactic, and often bitter, attacks on the heterodox and unbelievers, a sympathetic and kindly treatment of them
# A reorganization of the theological training of the universities, giving more prominence to the devotional life
# A different style of preaching, namely, in the place of pleasing rhetoric, the implanting of Christianity in the inner or new man, the soul of which is faith, and its effects the fruits of life

This work produced a great impression throughout Germany. While large numbers of orthodox Lutheran theologians and pastors were deeply offended by Spener&#x27;s book, many other pastors immediately adopted Spener&#x27;s proposals.

===Early leaders===

In 1686 Spener accepted an appointment to the court-chaplaincy at Dresden, which opened to him a wider though more difficult sphere of labor. In Leipzig, a society of young theologians was formed under his influence for the learned study and devout application of the Bible. Three magistrates belonging to that society, one of whom was August Hermann Francke, subsequently the founder of the famous orphanage at Halle (1695), commenced courses of expository lectures on the Scriptures of a practical and devotional character, and in the German language, which were zealously frequented by both students and townsmen. The lectures aroused the ill-will of the other theologians and pastors of Leipzig, and Francke and his friends left the city, and with the aid of Christian Thomasius and Spener founded the new University of Halle. The theological chairs in the new university were filled in complete conformity with Spener&#x27;s proposals. The main difference between the new Pietistic Lutheran school and the orthodox Lutherans arose from the Pietists&#x27; conception of Christianity as chiefly consisting in a change of heart and consequent holiness of life. Orthodox Lutherans rejected this viewpoint as a gross simplification, stressing the need for the church and for sound theological underpinnings.

Spener died in 1705, but the movement, guided by Francke and fertilized from Halle, spread through the whole of Middle and North Germany. Among its greatest achievements, apart from the philanthropic institutions founded at Halle, were the revival of the Moravian Church in 1727 by Count von Zinzendorf, formerly a pupil in Francke&#x27;s School for Young Noblemen in Halle, and the establishment of Protestant missions. In particular, Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg (10 July 1682 – 23 February 1719) became the first Pietist missionary to India.

Spener stressed the necessity of a new birth and separation of Christians from the world (see Asceticism). Many Pietists maintained that the new birth always had to be preceded by agonies of repentance, and that only a regenerated theologian could teach theology. The whole school shunned all common worldly amusements, such as dancing, the theatre, and public games. Some believe this led to a new form of justification by works. Its &quot;ecclesiolae in ecclesia&quot; also weakened the power and meaning of church organization. These Pietistic attitudes caused a counter-movement at the beginning of the 18th century; one leader was Valentin Ernst Löscher, superintendent at Dresden.

===Establishment reaction===
Authorities within state-endorsed Churches were suspicious of pietist doctrine which they often viewed as a social danger, as it &quot;seemed either to generate an excess of evangelical fervor and so disturb the public tranquility or to promote a mysticism so nebulous as to obscure the imperatives of morality. A movement which cultivated religious feeling almost as an end itself&quot;. While some pietists (such as Francis Magny) held that &quot;mysticism and the moral law went together&quot;, for others (like his pupil Françoise-Louise de la Tour) &quot;pietist mysticism did less to reinforce the moral law than to take its place… the principle of &#x27;guidance by inner light&#x27; was often a signal to follow the most intense of her inner sentiments… the supremacy of feeling over reason&quot;. Religious authorities could bring pressure on pietists, such as when they brought some of Magny&#x27;s followers before the local consistory to answer questions about their unorthodox views or when they banished Magny from Vevey for heterodoxy in 1713. Likewise, pietism challenged the orthodoxy via new media and formats: Periodical journals gained importance versus the former pasquills and single thesis, traditional disputation was replaced by competitive debating, which tried to gain new knowledge instead of defending orthodox scholarship.

===Hymnody===
===Later history===

As a distinct movement, Pietism had its greatest strength by the middle of the 18th century; its very individualism in fact helped to prepare the way for the Enlightenment (&quot;Aufklärung&quot;), which took the church in an altogether different direction. Yet some claim that Pietism contributed largely to the revival of Biblical studies in Germany and to making religion once more an affair of the heart and of life and not merely of the intellect.

It likewise gave a new emphasis to the role of the laity in the church. Rudolf Sohm claimed that &quot;It was the last great surge of the waves of the ecclesiastical movement begun by the Reformation; it was the completion and the final form of the Protestantism created by the Reformation. Then came a time when another intellectual power took possession of the minds of men.&quot; Dietrich Bonhoeffer of the German Confessing Church framed the same characterization in less positive terms when he called Pietism the last attempt to save Christianity as a religion: Given that for him religion was a negative term, more or less an opposite to revelation, this constitutes a rather scathing judgment. Bonhoeffer denounced the basic aim of Pietism, to produce a &quot;desired piety&quot; in a person, as unbiblical.

Pietism is considered the major influence that led to the creation of the &quot;Evangelical Church of the Union&quot; in Prussia in 1817. The King of Prussia ordered the Lutheran and Reformed churches in Prussia to unite; they took the name &quot;Evangelical&quot; as a name both groups had previously identified with. This union movement spread through many German lands in the 1800s. Pietism, with its looser attitude toward confessional theology, had opened the churches to the possibility of uniting. The unification of the two branches of German Protestantism sparked the Schism of the Old Lutherans. Many Lutherans, called Old Lutherans formed free churches or emigrated to the United States and Australia, where they formed bodies that would later become the Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod and the Lutheran Church of Australia, respectively. (Many immigrants to America, who agreed with the union movement, formed German Evangelical Lutheran and Reformed congregations, later combined into the Evangelical Synod of North America, which is now a part of the United Church of Christ.)
In the middle of the 19th century, Lars Levi Laestadius spearheaded a Pietist revival in Scandinavia that upheld what came to be known as Laestadian Lutheran theology, which is heralded today by the Laestadian Lutheran Church as well as by several congregations within mainstream Lutheran Churches, such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland and the Church of Sweden. After encountering a Sami woman who experienced a conversion, Laestadius had a similar experience that &quot;transformed his life and defined his calling&quot;. As such, Laestadius &quot;spend the rest of his life advancing his idea of Lutheran pietism, focusing his energies on marginalized groups in the northernmost regions of the Nordic countries&quot;. Laestadius called on his followers to embrace their Lutheran identity and as a result, Laestadian Lutherans have remained a part of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland, the national Church in that country, with some Laestadian Lutherans being consecrated as bishops. In the United States, Laestadian Lutheran Churches were formed for Laestadian Pietists. Laestadian Lutherans observe the Lutheran sacraments, holding classical Lutheran theology on infant baptism and the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, and also heavily emphasize Confession. Uniquely, Laestadian Lutherans &quot;discourage watching television, attending movies, dancing, playing card games or games of chance, and drinking alcoholic beverages&quot;, as well as avoiding birth control – Laestadian Lutheran families usually have four to ten children. Laestadian Lutherans gather in a central location for weeks at a time for summer revival services in which many young adults find their future spouses.

R. J. Hollingdale, who translated Friedrich Nietzsche&#x27;s &quot;Thus Spake Zarathustra&quot; into English, argued that a number of the themes of the work (especially &quot;amor fati&quot;) originated in the Lutheran Pietism of Nietzsche&#x27;s childhood – Nietzsche&#x27;s father, Carl Ludwig Nietzsche, was a Lutheran pastor who supported the Pietist movement.

In 1900, the Church of the Lutheran Brethren was founded and it adheres to Pietist Lutheran theology, emphasizing a personal conversion experience.

==Pietistic Lutheran denominations==
Pietistic Lutheranism influenced existing Lutheran denominations such as the Church of Norway and many Pietistic Lutherans have remained in them, though other Pietistic Lutherans have established their own Synods too. In the middle of the 19th century, Lars Levi Laestadius spearheaded a Pietist revival in Scandinavia that upheld what came to be known as Laestadian Lutheran theology, which is adhered to today by the Laestadian Lutheran Churches as well as by several congregations within other mainstream Lutheran Churches, such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland. The Eielsen Synod and Association of Free Lutheran Congregations are Pietist Lutheran bodies that emerged in the Pietist Lutheran movement in Norway, which was spearheaded by Hans Nielsen Hauge. In 1900, the Church of the Lutheran Brethren was founded and it adheres to Pietist Lutheran theology, emphasizing a personal conversion experience.

==Cross-denominational influence==

=== Radical Pietism ===
Radical Pietism are those Christian Churches who decided to break with denominational Lutheranism in order to emphasize certain teachings regarding holy living. Churches in the Radical Pietist movement include the Mennonite Brethren Church, Community of True Inspiration (Inspirationalists), the Baptist General Conference, members of the International Federation of Free Evangelical Churches (such as the Evangelical Covenant Church and the Evangelical Free Church), the Templers, the River Brethren (inclusive of the Brethren in Christ Church, the Calvary Holiness Church, the Old Order River Brethren and the United Zion Church), as well as the Schwarzenau Brethren (that include Old Order groups such as the Old Brethren German Baptist, Conservative groups such as the Dunkard Brethren Church, and mainline groups such as the Church of the Brethren).

=== Influence on the Methodists ===
As with Moravianism, Pietism was a major influence on John Wesley and others who began the Methodist movement in 18th-century Great Britain. John Wesley was influenced significantly by Moravians (e.g., Zinzendorf, Peter Boehler) and Pietists connected to Francke and Halle Pietism. The fruit of these Pietist influences can be seen in the modern American Methodists, especially those who are aligned with the Holiness movement.

=== Influence on religion in America ===
Pietism had an influence on religion in America, as many German immigrants settled in Pennsylvania, New York, and other areas. Its influence can be traced in certain sectors of Evangelicalism. Balmer says that:

Evangelicalism itself, I believe, is a quintessentially North American phenomenon, deriving as it did from the confluence of Pietism, Presbyterianism, and the vestiges of Puritanism. Evangelicalism picked up the peculiar characteristics from each strain – warmhearted spirituality from the Pietists (for instance), doctrinal precisionism from the Presbyterians, and individualistic introspection from the Puritans – even as the North American context itself has profoundly shaped the various manifestations of evangelicalism: fundamentalism, neo-evangelicalism, the holiness movement, Pentecostalism, the charismatic movement, and various forms of African-American and Hispanic evangelicalism.

== Influence on science ==
The Merton Thesis is an argument about the nature of early experimental science proposed by Robert K. Merton. Similar to Max Weber&#x27;s famous claim on the link between Protestant ethic and the capitalist economy, Merton argued for a similar positive correlation between the rise of Protestant Pietism and early experimental science. The Merton Thesis has resulted in continuous debates.

==Impact on party voting in United States and Great Britain==

In the United States, Richard L. McCormick says, &quot;In the nineteenth century voters whose religious heritage was pietistic or evangelical were prone to support the Whigs and, later, the Republicans.&quot; Paul Kleppner generalizes, &quot;the more pietistic the group&#x27;s outlook the more intensely Republican its partisan affiliation.&quot; McCormick notes that the key link between religious values and politics resulted from the &quot;urge of evangelicals and Pietists to &#x27;reach out and purge the world of sin&#x27;&quot;. Pietism became influential among Scandinavian Lutherans; additionally it affected other denominations in the United States, such as the Northern Methodists, Northern Baptists, Congregationalists, Presbyterians, Disciples of Christ, and some smaller groups. The great majority were based in the northern states; some of these groups in the South would rather support the Democrats.

In England in the late 19th and early 20th century, the Nonconformist Protestant denominations, such as the Methodists, Baptists and Congregationalists, formed the base of the Liberal Party. David Hempton states, &quot;The Liberal Party was the main beneficiary of Methodist political loyalties.&quot;

==See also==
* Amana Colonies
* Adolf Köberle
* Catholic Charismatic Renewal
* Church of the Brethren
* Erik Pontoppidan
* Evangelical Covenant Church
* Evangelical Free Church of America
* Friedrich Christoph Oetinger
* Friedrich Hölderlin
* Johann Georg Rapp
* Hans Adolph Brorson
* Harmony Society
* Henric Schartau
* Immanuel Kant
* Knightly Piety
* Johann Albrecht Bengel
* Johann Konrad Dippel
* Johannes Kelpius
* Mission Covenant Church of Sweden
* Templers (religious believers)
* &quot;Theologia Germanica&quot;
* Wesleyanism
==References==

* See: &quot;Six Principles of Pietism&quot;, based on Philip Jacob Spener&#x27;s six proposals http://www.miamifirstbrethren.org/about-us
* 

==Further reading==
* Brown, Dale: &quot;Understanding Pietism&quot;, rev. ed. Nappanee, IN: Evangel Publishing House, 1996.
* Brunner, Daniel L. &quot;Halle Pietists in England: Anthony William Boehm and the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge&quot;. Arbeiten zur Geschichte des Pietismus 29. Göttingen, Germany: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1993.
* Gehrz, Christopher and Mark Pattie III. &quot;The Pietist Option: Hope for the Renewal of Christianity&quot;. Downers Grove, Illinois: InterVarsity Press, 2017. 
* Olson, Roger E., Christian T. Collins Winn. &quot;Reclaiming Pietism: Retrieving an Evangelical Tradition&quot; (Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2015). xiii + 190 pp. online review
* Shantz, Douglas H. &quot;An Introduction to German Pietism: Protestant Renewal at the Dawn of Modern Europe&quot;. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013.
* Stoeffler, F. Ernest. &quot;The Rise of Evangelical Pietism&quot;. Studies in the History of Religion 9. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1965.
* Stoeffler, F. Ernest. &quot;German Pietism During the Eighteenth Century&quot;. Studies in the History of Religion 24. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1973.
* Stoeffler, F. Ernest. ed.: &quot;Continental Pietism and Early American Christianity&quot;. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1976.
* Winn, Christian T. et al. eds. &quot;The Pietist Impulse in Christianity&quot;. Pickwick, 2012.
* Yoder, Peter James. &quot;Pietism and the Sacraments: The Life and Theology of August Hermann Francke.&quot; University Park: PSU Press, 2021.

=== Older works ===
* Joachim Feller, Sonnet. In: &quot;Luctuosa desideria Quibus&quot; […] &quot;Martinum Bornium prosequebantur Quidam Patroni, Praeceptores atque Amici&quot;. Lipsiae [1689], pp. [2]–[3]. (Facsimile in: Reinhard Breymayer (Ed.): &quot;Luctuosa desideria&quot;. Tübingen 2008, pp. 24–25.) Here for the first time the newly detected source. – Less exactly cf. Martin Brecht: &quot;Geschichte des Pietismus&quot;, vol. I, p. 4.
* Johann Georg Walch, &quot;Historische und theologische Einleitung in die Religionsstreitigkeiten der evangelisch-lutherischen Kirche&quot; (1730);
* Friedrich August Tholuck, &quot;Geschichte des Pietismus und des ersten Stadiums der Aufklärung&quot; (1865);
* Heinrich Schmid, &quot;Die Geschichte des Pietismus&quot; (1863);
* Max Goebel, &quot;Geschichte des christlichen Lebens in der Rheinisch-Westfälischen Kirche&quot; (3 vols., 1849–1860).

The subject is dealt with at length in
* Isaak August Dorner&#x27;s and W Gass&#x27;s &quot;Histories of Protestant theology&quot;.

Other works are:
* Heinrich Heppe, &quot;Geschichte des Pietismus und der Mystik in der reformierten Kirche&quot; (1879), which is sympathetic;
* Albrecht Ritschl, &quot;Geschichte des Pietismus&quot; (5 vols., 1880–1886), which is hostile; and
* Eugen Sachsse, &quot;Ursprung und Wesen des Pietismus&quot; (1884).

See also
* Friedrich Wilhelm Franz Nippold&#x27;s article in &quot;Theol. Stud. und Kritiken&quot; (1882), pp. 347?392;
* Hans von Schubert, &quot;Outlines of Church History&quot;, ch. xv. (Eng. trans., 1907); and
* Carl Mirbt&#x27;s article, &quot;Pietismus,&quot; in Herzog-Hauck&#x27;s &quot;Realencyklopädie für prot. Theologie u. Kirche&quot;, end of vol. xv.

The most extensive and current edition on Pietism is the four-volume edition in German, covering the entire movement in Europe and North America
* Geschichte des Pietismus (GdP)Im Auftrag der Historischen Kommission zur Erforschung des Pietismus herausgegeben von Martin Brecht, Klaus Deppermann, Ulrich Gäbler und Hartmut Lehmann(English: )
** &quot;Band 1:&quot; Der Pietismus vom siebzehnten bis zum frühen achtzehnten Jahrhundert. In Zusammenarbeit mit Johannes van den Berg, Klaus Deppermann, Johannes Friedrich Gerhard Goeters und Hans Schneider hg. von Martin Brecht. Goettingen 1993. / 584 p.
** &quot;Band 2:&quot; Der Pietismus im achtzehnten Jahrhundert. In Zusammenarbeit mit Friedhelm Ackva, Johannes van den Berg, Rudolf Dellsperger, Johann Friedrich Gerhard Goeters, Manfred Jakubowski-Tiessen, Pentii Laasonen, Dietrich Meyer, Ingun Montgomery, Christian Peters, A. Gregg Roeber, Hans Schneider, Patrick Streiff und Horst Weigelt hg. von Martin Brecht und Klaus Deppermann. Goettingen 1995. / 826 p.
** &quot;Band 3:&quot; Der Pietismus im neunzehnten und zwanzigsten Jahrhundert. In Zusammenarbeit mit Gustav Adolf Benrath, Eberhard Busch, Pavel Filipi, Arnd Götzelmann, Pentii Laasonen, Hartmut Lehmann, Mark A. Noll, Jörg Ohlemacher, Karl Rennstich und Horst Weigelt unter Mitwirkung von Martin Sallmann hg. von Ulrich Gäbler. Goettingen 2000. / 607 p.
** &quot;Band 4:&quot; Glaubenswelt und Lebenswelten des Pietismus. In Zusammenarbeit mit Ruth Albrecht, Martin Brecht, Christian Bunners, Ulrich Gäbler, Andreas Gestrich, Horst Gundlach, Jan Harasimovicz, Manfred Jakubowski-Tiessen, Peter Kriedtke, Martin Kruse, Werner Koch, Markus Matthias, Thomas Müller Bahlke, Gerhard Schäfer (†), Hans-Jürgen Schrader, Walter Sparn, Udo Sträter, Rudolf von Thadden, Richard Trellner, Johannes Wallmann und Hermann Wellenreuther hg. von Hartmut Lehmann. Goettingen 2004. / 709 p.

==External links==
* New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge, Vol. IX: Pietism
* After Three Centuries – The Legacy of Pietism by E.C. Fredrich
* Literary Landmarks of Pietism by Martin O. Westerhaus
* Pietism&#x27;s World Mission Enterprise by Ernst H. Wendland
* Old Apostolic Lutheran Church of America 
* The Evangelical Pietist Church of Chatfield</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="0" end="7" title="Pietism" label="Pietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="26" end="47" title="Pietism" label="Pietistic Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="70" end="81" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411871" start="161" end="166" title="piety" label="piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="185" end="194" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="288" end="301" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="384" end="391" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q311231" start="434" end="448" title="Philipp Spener" label="Philipp Spener"/>
<link wikidata="Q919060" start="669" end="679" title="Quietism (Christian contemplation)" label="quietistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q525984" start="1070" end="1088" title="Hans Nielsen Hauge" label="Hans Nielsen Hauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="1092" end="1098" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q29042580" start="1100" end="1111" title="Peter Spaak" label="Peter Spaak"/>
<link wikidata="Q636426" start="1116" end="1134" title="Carl Olof Rosenius" label="Carl Olof Rosenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="1138" end="1144" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630543" start="1146" end="1162" title="Katarina Asplund" label="Katarina Asplund"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="1166" end="1173" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q63784" start="1179" end="1199" title="Barbara von Krüdener" label="Barbara von Krüdener"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="1405" end="1419" title="Christian denomination" label="denominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="1480" end="1494" title="evangelicalism" label="evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="1499" end="1518" title="Interdenominationalism" label="interdenominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q434939" start="1628" end="1648" title="Lars Levi Laestadius" label="Lars Levi Laestadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q730475" start="1731" end="1759" title="Laestadian Lutheranism" label="Laestadian Lutheran theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736120" start="1794" end="1822" title="Conservative Laestadianism" label="Laestadian Lutheran Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379849" start="1914" end="1952" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348854" start="1958" end="1971" title="Eielsen Synod" label="Eielsen Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809804" start="1976" end="2018" title="Association of Free Lutheran Congregations" label="Association of Free Lutheran Congregations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589282" start="2067" end="2102" title="Haugean movement" label="Pietist Lutheran movement in Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q525984" start="2129" end="2147" title="Hans Nielsen Hauge" label="Hans Nielsen Hauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117980" start="2162" end="2193" title="Church of the Lutheran Brethren" label="Church of the Lutheran Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="2265" end="2295" title="Born again" label="personal conversion experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q940272" start="2301" end="2342" title="Ethiopian Evangelical Church Mekane Yesus" label="Ethiopian Evangelical Church Mekane Yesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="2413" end="2425" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="2430" end="2441" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="2475" end="2483" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918061" start="2498" end="2516" title="Ethiopians" label="Ethiopian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="2560" end="2572" title="Christian denomination" label="denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q942284" start="2584" end="2609" title="Lutheran World Federation" label="Lutheran World Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125785" start="2719" end="2734" title="Radical Pietism" label="Radical Pietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25035950" start="2747" end="2757" title="Nonconformity to the world" label="separating"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2876" end="2889" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="2905" end="2913" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="2921" end="2932" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="2946" end="2955" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q95214" start="2969" end="2983" title="Alexander Mack" label="Alexander Mack"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="2997" end="3007" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q833158" start="3008" end="3028" title="Schwarzenau Brethren" label="Schwarzenau Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466789" start="3419" end="3430" title="conventicle" label="conventicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958102" start="3450" end="3464" title="Divine Service (Lutheran)" label="Divine Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="3854" end="3868" title="sanctification" label="sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544002" start="4053" end="4070" title="Gravois Township, St. Louis County, Missouri" label="Gravois, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379743" start="4078" end="4119" title="German Evangelical Synod of North America" label="German Evangelical Synod of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415769" start="4140" end="4171" title="Evangelical and Reformed Church" label="Evangelical and Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="4192" end="4215" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q170111" start="4468" end="4497" title="Evangelical Church in Germany" label="Evangelical Church in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q895977" start="4673" end="4694" title="Neo-Lutheranism" label="neo-Lutheran movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="4816" end="4826" title="Christianity" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297994" start="4856" end="4876" title="Book of Concord" label="Lutheran Confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q541235" start="5033" end="5050" title="Anglo-Catholicism" label="Anglo-Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="5085" end="5092" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466789" start="5180" end="5192" title="conventicles" label="conventicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="5275" end="5281" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340404" start="5441" end="5466" title="Erik Benzelius the younger" label="Archbishop Erik Benzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q730475" start="5518" end="5540" title="Laestadian Lutheranism" label="Laestadian Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q749243" start="5619" end="5635" title="Church of Sweden" label="Church of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q434939" start="5643" end="5663" title="Lars Levi Laestadius" label="Lars Levi Laestadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="5952" end="5968" title="Christian mysticism" label="Christian mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q77017" start="5969" end="5980" title="Jakob Böhme" label="Jakob Böhme"/>
<link wikidata="Q61359" start="5991" end="6003" title="Johann Arndt" label="Johann Arndt"/>
<link wikidata="Q69725" start="6085" end="6100" title="Heinrich Müller (theologian)" label="Heinrich Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q208820" start="6120" end="6124" title="baptismal font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="6130" end="6136" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q183959" start="6142" end="6154" title="Confession (religion)" label="confessional"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="6164" end="6169" title="altar" label="altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q60854" start="6244" end="6266" title="Johann Valentin Andrea" label="Johann Valentin Andrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q108578" start="6385" end="6408" title="Theophil Großgebauer" label="Theophilus Grossgebauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861" start="6422" end="6429" title="Rostock" label="Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q205318" start="6530" end="6534" title="Zion" label="Sion"/>
<link wikidata="Q311231" start="6601" end="6615" title="Philipp Spener" label="Philipp Spener"/>
<link wikidata="Q148483" start="6625" end="6639" title="Rappoltsweiler" label="Rappoltsweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="6917" end="6927" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="7117" end="7123" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="7280" end="7290" title="Waldensian" label="Waldensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="7333" end="7339" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q630413" start="7349" end="7364" title="Jean de Labadie" label="Jean de Labadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806" start="7384" end="7392" title="Tübingen" label="Tübingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="7506" end="7515" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877946" start="7634" end="7652" title="Lutheran orthodoxy" label="Lutheran orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="7850" end="7863" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877946" start="9312" end="9329" title="Lutheran Orthodoxy" label="orthodox Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="9550" end="9557" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="9629" end="9636" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q58753" start="9820" end="9842" title="August Hermann Francke" label="August Hermann Francke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="9896" end="9901" title="Halle, Saxony-Anhalt" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="10021" end="10036" title="German language" label="German language"/>
<link wikidata="Q57501" start="10247" end="10266" title="Christian Thomasius" label="Christian Thomasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q32120" start="10294" end="10313" title="University of Halle" label="University of Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="11048" end="11063" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q76336" start="11075" end="11095" title="Nicolaus Ludwig Zinzendorf" label="Count von Zinzendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q76682" start="11229" end="11252" title="Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg" label="Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="11428" end="11438" title="Asceticism" label="Asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q75717" start="11970" end="11992" title="Valentin Ernst Löscher" label="Valentin Ernst Löscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296367" start="11994" end="12008" title="superintendent (ecclesiastical)" label="superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381335" start="12987" end="12997" title="Consistory (Protestantism)" label="consistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q68160" start="13080" end="13085" title="Vevey" label="Vevey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123131" start="13277" end="13288" title="disputation" label="disputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="13598" end="13611" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="14082" end="14093" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76326" start="14277" end="14296" title="Dietrich Bonhoeffer" label="Dietrich Bonhoeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161362" start="14311" end="14328" title="Confessing Church" label="Confessing Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="14538" end="14548" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q163202" start="14790" end="14821" title="Prussian Union (Evangelical Christian Church)" label="Evangelical Church of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="14831" end="14838" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15287" end="15314" title="Prussian Union (Evangelical Christian Church)#Quarrels over the union" label="Schism of the Old Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416716" start="15339" end="15352" title="Old Lutherans" label="Old Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q426043" start="15360" end="15371" title="free church" label="free church"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="15412" end="15421" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q693844" start="15476" end="15508" title="Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod" label="Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128669" start="15517" end="15545" title="Lutheran Church of Australia" label="Lutheran Church of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379743" start="15713" end="15747" title="Evangelical Synod of North America" label="Evangelical Synod of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="15776" end="15799" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q434939" start="15837" end="15857" title="Lars Levi Laestadius" label="Lars Levi Laestadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q730475" start="15940" end="15968" title="Laestadian Lutheranism" label="Laestadian Lutheran theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471023" start="16001" end="16027" title="Laestadian Lutheran Church" label="Laestadian Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379849" start="16113" end="16151" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q749243" start="16160" end="16176" title="Church of Sweden" label="Church of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="16199" end="16203" title="Sami people" label="Sami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379849" start="16672" end="16710" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649443" start="16716" end="16731" title="national Church" label="national Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="16801" end="16807" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471025" start="16832" end="16860" title="Laestadianism in the United States" label="Laestadian Lutheran Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705760" start="16931" end="16950" title="Lutheran sacraments" label="Lutheran sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741926" start="16991" end="17005" title="infant baptism" label="infant baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134873" start="17014" end="17054" title="real presence of Christ in the Eucharist" label="real presence of Christ in the Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159985" start="17083" end="17093" title="Confession (Lutheran Church)" label="Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629762" start="17444" end="17467" title="Summer services" label="summer revival services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273715" start="17523" end="17540" title="R. J. Hollingdale" label="R. J. Hollingdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="17557" end="17576" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q199774" start="17590" end="17612" title="Thus Spake Zarathustra" label="Thus Spake Zarathustra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002653" start="17698" end="17707" title="amor fati" label="amor fati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039547" start="17807" end="17828" title="Carl Ludwig Nietzsche" label="Carl Ludwig Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117980" start="17902" end="17933" title="Church of the Lutheran Brethren" label="Church of the Lutheran Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="18005" end="18035" title="Born again" label="personal conversion experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q666860" start="18152" end="18168" title="Church of Norway" label="Church of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q434939" start="18328" end="18348" title="Lars Levi Laestadius" label="Lars Levi Laestadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q730475" start="18431" end="18459" title="Laestadian Lutheranism" label="Laestadian Lutheran theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736120" start="18494" end="18522" title="Conservative Laestadianism" label="Laestadian Lutheran Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379849" start="18614" end="18652" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348854" start="18658" end="18671" title="Eielsen Synod" label="Eielsen Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809804" start="18676" end="18718" title="Association of Free Lutheran Congregations" label="Association of Free Lutheran Congregations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589282" start="18767" end="18802" title="Haugean movement" label="Pietist Lutheran movement in Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q525984" start="18829" end="18847" title="Hans Nielsen Hauge" label="Hans Nielsen Hauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117980" start="18862" end="18893" title="Church of the Lutheran Brethren" label="Church of the Lutheran Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="18965" end="18995" title="Born again" label="personal conversion experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q24942470" start="19084" end="19102" title="Ecclesiastical separatism" label="Christian Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="19144" end="19155" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q907453" start="19272" end="19297" title="Mennonite Brethren Church" label="Mennonite Brethren Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q450314" start="19299" end="19328" title="Community of True Inspiration" label="Community of True Inspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857637" start="19354" end="19380" title="Baptist General Conference" label="Baptist General Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667544" start="19397" end="19450" title="International Federation of Free Evangelical Churches" label="International Federation of Free Evangelical Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415672" start="19464" end="19491" title="Evangelical Covenant Church" label="Evangelical Covenant Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415680" start="19500" end="19523" title="Evangelical Free Church" label="Evangelical Free Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q527100" start="19530" end="19538" title="Templers (religious believers)" label="Templers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394042" start="19544" end="19558" title="River Brethren" label="River Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q910556" start="19577" end="19602" title="Brethren in Christ Church" label="Brethren in Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024187" start="19608" end="19631" title="Calvary Holiness Church (Philadelphia)" label="Calvary Holiness Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084673" start="19637" end="19661" title="Old Order River Brethren" label="Old Order River Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893663" start="19670" end="19688" title="United Zion Church" label="United Zion Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q833158" start="19706" end="19726" title="Schwarzenau Brethren" label="Schwarzenau Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012877" start="19770" end="19797" title="Old Brethren German Baptist" label="Old Brethren German Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315343" start="19831" end="19854" title="Dunkard Brethren Church" label="Dunkard Brethren Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089826" start="19888" end="19910" title="Church of the Brethren" label="Church of the Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="19958" end="19969" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="20004" end="20015" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="20041" end="20059" title="Methodism" label="Methodist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="20076" end="20089" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="20135" end="20144" title="Moravian church" label="Moravians"/>
<link wikidata="Q76336" start="20152" end="20162" title="Zinzendorf" label="Zinzendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173116" start="20164" end="20177" title="Peter Boehler" label="Peter Boehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050725" start="20359" end="20376" title="Holiness movement" label="Holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="20597" end="20611" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="20766" end="20781" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="20803" end="20813" title="Puritanism" label="Puritanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q324640" start="21237" end="21257" title="charismatic movement" label="charismatic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365905" start="21358" end="21371" title="Merton Thesis" label="Merton Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="21413" end="21433" title="experimental science" label="experimental science"/>
<link wikidata="Q312843" start="21446" end="21462" title="Robert K. Merton" label="Robert K. Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="21475" end="21484" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q392937" start="21492" end="21504" title="The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism" label="famous claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16024056" start="21525" end="21541" title="Protestant ethic" label="Protestant ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="21550" end="21568" title="capitalist economy" label="capitalist economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="21607" end="21618" title="correlation" label="correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="21639" end="21649" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="22481" end="22500" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Northern Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q463455" start="22502" end="22519" title="American Baptist Churches USA" label="Northern Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q18245005" start="22521" end="22539" title="Congregationalism in the United States" label="Congregationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267684" start="22541" end="22554" title="Presbyterian Church in the United States of America" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="22556" end="22575" title="Disciples of Christ" label="Disciples of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="22783" end="22796" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="22903" end="22916" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q453554" start="23045" end="23059" title="Amana Colonies" label="Amana Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q107353" start="23062" end="23075" title="Adolf Köberle" label="Adolf Köberle"/>
<link wikidata="Q947528" start="23078" end="23106" title="Catholic Charismatic Renewal" label="Catholic Charismatic Renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089826" start="23109" end="23131" title="Church of the Brethren" label="Church of the Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q55071024" start="23134" end="23150" title="Erik Pontoppidan" label="Erik Pontoppidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415672" start="23153" end="23180" title="Evangelical Covenant Church" label="Evangelical Covenant Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415680" start="23183" end="23217" title="Evangelical Free Church of America" label="Evangelical Free Church of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q289546" start="23220" end="23248" title="Friedrich Christoph Oetinger" label="Friedrich Christoph Oetinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q75889" start="23251" end="23270" title="Friedrich Hölderlin" label="Friedrich Hölderlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108876" start="23273" end="23290" title="George Rapp" label="Johann Georg Rapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q348003" start="23293" end="23312" title="Hans Adolph Brorson" label="Hans Adolph Brorson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659615" start="23315" end="23330" title="Harmony Society" label="Harmony Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606090" start="23333" end="23348" title="Henric Schartau" label="Henric Schartau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="23351" end="23364" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902571" start="23367" end="23381" title="Knightly Piety" label="Knightly Piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q77562" start="23384" end="23406" title="Johann Albrecht Bengel" label="Johann Albrecht Bengel"/>
<link wikidata="Q61485" start="23409" end="23429" title="Johann Konrad Dippel" label="Johann Konrad Dippel"/>
<link wikidata="Q254071" start="23432" end="23448" title="Johannes Kelpius" label="Johannes Kelpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q677704" start="23451" end="23484" title="Mission Covenant Church of Sweden" label="Mission Covenant Church of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q527100" start="23487" end="23517" title="Templers (religious believers)" label="Templers (religious believers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q675767" start="23526" end="23545" title="Theologia Germanica" label="Theologia Germanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633792" start="23554" end="23565" title="Wesleyanism" label="Wesleyanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q90935" start="25261" end="25275" title="Joachim Feller" label="Joachim Feller"/>
<link wikidata="Q70352" start="25685" end="25703" title="Johann Georg Walch" label="Johann Georg Walch"/>
<link wikidata="Q646201" start="25834" end="25858" title="Friedrich August Tholuck" label="Friedrich August Tholuck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25946" end="25961" title="Heinrich Schmid (theologian)" label="Heinrich Schmid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26014" end="26024" title="Max Goebel" label="Max Goebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q97212" start="26175" end="26194" title="Isaak August Dorner" label="Isaak August Dorner"/>
<link wikidata="Q88404" start="26286" end="26300" title="Heinrich Heppe" label="Heinrich Heppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q63173" start="26413" end="26429" title="Albrecht Ritschl" label="Albrecht Ritschl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406974" start="26514" end="26527" title="Eugen Sachsse" label="Eugen Sachsse"/>
<link wikidata="Q95286" start="26594" end="26625" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Franz Nippold" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Franz Nippold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26705" end="26722" title="Hans von Schubert" label="Hans von Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039783" start="26799" end="26809" title="Carl Mirbt" label="Carl Mirbt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587488" start="27264" end="27279" title="Hartmut Lehmann" label="Hartmut Lehmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105265" start="27792" end="27808" title="Ingun Montgomery" label="Ingun Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q23061471" start="27881" end="27894" title="Horst Weigelt" label="Horst Weigelt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180782" wikidata="Q1643892" url="?curid=180782" title="Oligopsony">
<text>An oligopsony (from Greek ὀλίγοι (&quot;oligoi&quot;) &quot;few&quot; and ὀψωνία (&quot;opsōnia&quot;) &quot;purchase&quot;) is a market form in which the number of buyers is small while the number of sellers in theory could be large. This typically happens in a market for inputs where numerous suppliers are competing to sell their product to a small number of (often large and powerful) buyers. It contrasts with an oligopoly, where there are many buyers but few sellers. An oligopsony is a form of imperfect competition.

The terms monopoly (one seller), monopsony (one buyer), and bilateral monopoly have a similar relationship.

==Industry examples==
In each of these cases, the buyers have a major advantage over the sellers. They can play off one supplier against another, thus lowering their costs. They can also dictate exact specifications to suppliers, for delivery schedules, quality, and (in the case of agricultural products) crop varieties. They also pass off much of the risks of overproduction, natural losses, and variations in cyclical demand to the suppliers.

===Agriculture===
One example of an oligopsony in the world economy is cocoa, where three firms (Cargill, Archer Daniels Midland, and Barry Callebaut) buy the vast majority of world cocoa bean production, mostly from small farmers in third-world countries. Likewise, American tobacco growers face an oligopsony of cigarette makers, where three companies (Altria, Brown &amp; Williamson, and Lorillard Tobacco Company) buy almost 90% of all tobacco grown in the US and other countries.

===Publishing===
In U.S. publishing, five publishers known as the Big Five account for about two thirds of books published. Each of the companies runs a series of specialized imprints, which cater to different market segments and often carry the name of formerly independent publishers. Imprints create the illusion that there are many publishers, but imprints within each publisher co-ordinate to avoid competing with one another when they seek to acquire new books from authors.

Thus, authors have fewer truly-independent outlets for their work. That depresses advances paid to authors and creates pressure for authors to cater to the tastes of the publishers in order to ensure publication, reducing viewpoint diversity. 

===Retail===
Over at least 30 years, supermarkets in developed economies around the world have acquired an increasing share of grocery markets. In doing so, they have increased their influence over suppliers—what food is grown and how it is processed and packaged—with impacts reaching deep into the lives and livelihoods of farmers and workers worldwide.
In addition to increasing their market share with consumers, consolidation of suppliers means that retailers can exercise significant market power. In some countries, this has led to allegations of abuse, unethical and illegal conduct.

The situation in Australia is a good example since two retailers, Coles and Woolworths control 70% of the national food market.

==References==
==Sources==
* Bhaskar, V., A. Manning and T. To (2002) &#x27;Oligopsony and Monopsonistic Competition in Labor Markets,&#x27; &quot;Journal of Economic Perspectives,&quot; 16, 155–174.
* Bhaskar, V. and T. To (2003) &#x27;Oligopsony and the Distribution of Wages,&#x27; &quot;European Economic Review,&quot; 47, 371–399.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1643892" start="3" end="13" title="Oligopsony" label="oligopsony"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="20" end="25" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q877707" start="130" end="141" title="market structure" label="market form"/>
<link wikidata="Q103639" start="419" end="428" title="oligopoly" label="oligopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q281682" start="502" end="523" title="imperfect competition" label="imperfect competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="536" end="544" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q319808" start="559" end="568" title="monopsony" label="monopsony"/>
<link wikidata="Q860427" start="586" end="604" title="bilateral monopoly" label="bilateral monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="1153" end="1158" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036056" start="1179" end="1186" title="Cargill" label="Cargill"/>
<link wikidata="Q632694" start="1188" end="1210" title="Archer Daniels Midland" label="Archer Daniels Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q809018" start="1216" end="1231" title="Barry Callebaut" label="Barry Callebaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="1358" end="1365" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="1396" end="1405" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q445007" start="1437" end="1443" title="Altria Group" label="Altria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926338" start="1445" end="1467" title="Brown &amp;amp; Williamson" label="Brown &amp;amp; Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259566" start="1473" end="1498" title="Lorillard Tobacco Company" label="Lorillard Tobacco Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="1634" end="1642" title="Big Five (publishers)" label="Big Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608849" start="1743" end="1751" title="imprint (trade name)" label="imprints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108172" start="2954" end="2959" title="Coles Supermarkets" label="Coles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249145" start="2964" end="2974" title="Woolworths Supermarkets" label="Woolworths"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="180783" wikidata="Q58753" url="?curid=180783" title="August Hermann Francke">
<text>August Hermann Francke (; 22 March 1663 – 8 June 1727) was a German Lutheran clergyman, theologian, philanthropist, and Biblical scholar. His evangelistic fervour and pietism got him expelled as lecturer from the universities of Dresden and Leipzig and as deacon from Erfurt. In 1691 he found his calling at the University of Halle, where he turned towards the education of underprivileged children; he founded an orphan asylum, a Latin school, a German school (or burgher school), a &quot;Gynaeceum&quot;, the first Protestant higher girls school, and a seminary for training teachers. Francke&#x27;s schools provided a prototype, which greatly influenced later German education.

==Early life and education==
Born in Lübeck in 1663, Francke was educated at the Illustrious Gymnasium in Gotha before he studied at the universities of Erfurt and Kiel — where he came under the influence of the Pietist — and finally University of Leipzig. During his student career he made a special study of Hebrew and Greek; and in order to learn Hebrew more thoroughly, he for some time put himself under the instructions of Ezra Edzardi at Hamburg. He graduated at Leipzig, where in 1685 he became a &quot;Privatdozent&quot;.

==Career==
A year later, with the help of his friend P. Anton, and with the approval and encouragement of Philipp Jakob Spener, he founded the &quot;Collegium Philobiblicum&quot;, at which a number of graduates met regularly for the systematic study of the Bible, philologically and practically. He next spent some months at Lüneburg as assistant or curate to the learned superintendent, Kaspar Hermann &quot;K.C.&quot; Sandhagen, where his religious beliefs deepened. On leaving Lüneburg he spent some time in Hamburg, where he became a teacher in a private school, and made the acquaintance of Nikolaus Lange.

After a long visit to Spener, at that time a court preacher in Dresden, Francke returned to Leipzig in the spring of 1689, and began to give Bible lectures of an exegetical and practical kind, at the same time resuming the Collegium Philobiblicum of earlier days. He soon became popular as a lecturer; but the peculiarities of his teaching almost immediately aroused violent opposition on the part of the university authorities, and before the end of the year he was interdicted from lecturing on the grounds of his alleged Pietism. That was how Francke&#x27;s name first came to be publicly associated with that of Spener, and with Pietism. Prohibited from lecturing in Leipzig, Francke in 1690 found work at Erfurt as &quot;deacon&quot; of one of the city churches. Here his evangelistic fervour attracted multitudes to his preaching, including Roman Catholics, but at the same time excited the anger of his opponents; and the result of their opposition was that after a ministry of fifteen months he was commanded by the civil authorities (27 September 1691) to leave Erfurt within forty-eight hours. That same year Spener was expelled from Dresden.

In December 1691 , through Spener&#x27;s influence, Francke accepted an invitation to fill the chair of Greek and oriental languages in the new University of Halle, which was at that time being organized by the elector Frederick III of Brandenburg; and at the same time, the chair having no salary attached to it, he was appointed pastor of Halle-Glaucha, in the immediate neighbourhood of Halle. He afterwards became professor of theology. Here, for the remaining thirty-six years of his life, he discharged the twofold office of pastor and professor with energy and success.

===Schooling, 1695-1727===
At the very outset of his labours, he had been profoundly impressed with a sense of his responsibility towards the numerous underprivileged children who were growing up around him in ignorance and crime. After a number of tentative plans, he resolved in 1695 to institute what is often called a &quot;ragged school&quot;, supported by public charity. A one-room school was at first sufficient, but within a year it was found necessary to purchase a house, to which another was added in 1697.

In 1698, there were 100 orphans under his charge to be clothed and fed, besides 500 children who were taught as day scholars. The schools grew in importance and were later known as the &quot;Franckesche Stiftungen&quot;. The education given was strictly religious. Hebrew was included, while the Greek and Latin classics were neglected; the &quot;Homilies of Macarius&quot; took the place of Thucydides. 

A chemist, whom Francke had visited on his deathbed, bequeathed to him the recipe for compounding certain medicines, which afterwards yielded an annual income of more than $20,000, and made the institution independent. Shortly after its founding, the institution comprised an orphan asylum, a Latin school, a German school (or burgher school), and a seminary for training teachers for these establishments. Although Francke&#x27;s principal aim was religious instruction, he also taught natural science and physical exercises and manual trades. He ran an apothecary&#x27;s shop and, having assisted his friend Carl Hildebrand von Canstein in founding the first modern Bible society, a printing press for publishing cheap copies of the Bible for mass distribution. At the time of Francke&#x27;s death, the schools were frequented by more than 2,300 pupils.
In 1698, he also founded the &quot;Gynaeceum&quot;, the first Protestant higher girls school, influenced by François Fénelon, whose work he had translated from French. Its curriculum was different from the orphanage school and the school lasted only until 1730.

In his university teaching as well, he gave great emphasis to religion. Even as professor of Greek, he had given great prominence in his lectures to the study of the Scriptures; but he found a much more congenial sphere when, in 1698, he was appointed to the chair of theology. Yet his first courses of lectures in that department were readings and expositions of the Old and New Testament; and to this, as also to hermeneutics, he always attached special importance, believing that for theology a sound exegesis was indispensable. &quot;Theologus nascitur in scripturis&quot;, he used to say; but during his occupancy of the theological chair he lectured at various times upon other branches of theology also. Among his colleagues were Paul Anton, Joachim Lange and Johann Juncker — men who shared his beliefs.

==Personal life and death==

Franke died on 8 June 1727.

==Legacy==
Francke&#x27;s schools provided a prototype, which greatly influenced later German education, particularly women&#x27;s education.
The Gynaeceum was followed by many Pietist girls schools in Germany, notably the Magdalenenstift in Altenburg and Johann Julius Hecker&#x27;s Royal Elisabeth School in Berlin in 1747. In the 18th century, it became common with so called Töchterschule (&#x27;daughters&#x27; schools&#x27;) in German cities, supported by the merchant class who wished for their daughters to be given elementary schooling, as well as girls&#x27; schools known as Mädchenpensionate. 

Through his and his colleagues influence upon the students, Halle became a centre from which Pietism became very widely diffused over Germany. Under Francke&#x27;s influence, Christian missionary efforts were greatly enhanced, zeal was aroused and recruits for Christian missions were gained, and Halle also became the centre for the Danish-Halle Mission to India.

==Works==
Francke&#x27;s principal contributions to theological literature were: &#x27; (1693); &#x27; (1717); &#x27; (1724); and &#x27; (1726-1736). The &quot;Manuductio&quot; was translated into English in 1813, under the title &quot;A Guide to the Reading and Study of the Holy Scriptures&quot;.

An account of his orphanage, entitled &quot;&quot;, (1709), which subsequently passed through several editions, has also been partially translated, under the title &quot;The Footsteps of Divine Providence, or, The Bountiful Hand of Heaven Defraying the Expenses of Faith&quot;.

*Francke, August Hermann (1704): &quot;August Hermann Franckes Schrift über eine Reform des Erziehungs- und Bildungswesens als Ausgangspunkt einer geistlichen und sozialen Neuordnung der Evangelischen Kirche des 18. Jahrhunderts: der Grosse Aufsatz. Mit einer quellenkundlichen Einführung.&quot; Hrsg. v. Otto Podczeck. Berlin. Akademie 1962.

==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*
*Brigitte Klosterberg: &quot;The “Mission Archives” in the Archives of the Francke Foundations in Halle.&quot; in: &quot;MIDA Archival Reflexicon&quot; (2020), ISSN 2628-5029, 9 pp.

Attribution

==Further reading==
*Sattler, Gary R. (1982). &quot;God&#x27;s Glory, Neighbor&#x27;s Good: A brief introduction to the life and writings of August Hermann Francke.&quot; Chicago: Covenant Press. .
*Yoder, Peter James (2021). Pietism and the Sacraments: The Life and Theology of August Hermann Francke. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. .

==External links==

* Augustus Hermann Francke Christ the sum and substance of all the Holy Scriptures, in the Old and New Testament Published 1732
* Augustus Hermann Francke Nicodemus, or, A treatise against the fear of man Published 1831
*Augustus Hermann Francke A guide to the reading and study of the Holy Scriptures Published 1823
*Heinrich Ernst Ferdinand Guericke, 1803-1878 Life of Augustus Herman Franke Published 1847
*Memoirs of Augustus Hermann Francke by American Sunday-School Union 1831</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58753" start="0" end="22" title="August Hermann Francke" label="August Hermann Francke"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="68" end="76" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="77" end="86" title="clergyman" label="clergyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="88" end="98" title="Theology" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="100" end="114" title="philanthropist" label="philanthropist"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="120" end="136" title="Biblical scholar" label="Biblical scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q32120" start="312" end="331" title="University of Halle" label="University of Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246302" start="374" end="398" title="underprivileged children" label="underprivileged children"/>
<link wikidata="Q160645" start="414" end="427" title="orphan asylum" label="orphan asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q221175" start="431" end="443" title="Latin school" label="Latin school"/>
<link wikidata="Q167448" start="447" end="460" title="German school" label="German school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075597" start="535" end="547" title="girls school" label="girls school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="719" end="725" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356664" start="763" end="784" title="Ernestine Gymnasium, Gotha" label="Illustrious Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986" start="788" end="793" title="Gotha" label="Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q702524" start="835" end="841" title="University of Erfurt" label="Erfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q156737" start="846" end="850" title="University of Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="894" end="901" title="pietism" label="Pietist"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="916" end="937" title="University of Leipzig" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="992" end="998" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1003" end="1008" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1111" end="1123" title="Ezra Edzardi" label="Ezra Edzardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="1127" end="1134" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="1193" end="1205" title="Privatdozent" label="Privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q311231" start="1320" end="1340" title="Philipp Jakob Spener" label="Philipp Jakob Spener"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920" start="1539" end="1547" title="Lüneburg" label="Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="1725" end="1732" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="1890" end="1897" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="1919" end="1926" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="2351" end="2358" title="Pietism" label="Pietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729" start="2537" end="2543" title="Erfurt" label="Erfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2674" end="2688" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q32120" start="3125" end="3144" title="University of Halle" label="University of Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="3200" end="3228" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick III of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="3312" end="3318" title="pastor" label="pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="3412" end="3420" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246302" start="3710" end="3734" title="underprivileged children" label="underprivileged children"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282910" start="3887" end="3900" title="ragged school" label="ragged school"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="3921" end="3935" title="public charity" label="public charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308121" start="3939" end="3954" title="one-room school" label="one-room school"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="4191" end="4202" title="day scholar" label="day scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q276846" start="4270" end="4292" title="Franckesche Stiftungen" label="Franckesche Stiftungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163797" start="4438" end="4446" title="Macarius" label="Macarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="4471" end="4481" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q160645" start="4761" end="4774" title="orphan asylum" label="orphan asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q221175" start="4778" end="4790" title="Latin school" label="Latin school"/>
<link wikidata="Q167448" start="4794" end="4807" title="German school" label="German school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="4972" end="4987" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q243253" start="4992" end="5010" title="physical education" label="physical exercises"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="5015" end="5028" title="vocational training" label="manual trades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131236" start="5040" end="5050" title="apothecary" label="apothecary"/>
<link wikidata="Q103322" start="5095" end="5123" title="Carl Hildebrand von Canstein" label="Carl Hildebrand von Canstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280834" start="5153" end="5166" title="Bible society" label="Bible society"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="5170" end="5184" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075597" start="5421" end="5433" title="girls school" label="girls school"/>
<link wikidata="Q310002" start="5449" end="5465" title="François Fénelon" label="François Fénelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="5770" end="5780" title="Scriptures" label="Scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="6019" end="6031" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="6108" end="6116" title="exegesis" label="exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149085" start="6341" end="6351" title="Paul Anton" label="Paul Anton"/>
<link wikidata="Q77495" start="6353" end="6366" title="Joachim Lange" label="Joachim Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229061" start="6371" end="6385" title="Johann Juncker" label="Johann Juncker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15675634" start="6593" end="6615" title="women&amp;#x27;s education" label="women&amp;#x27;s education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075597" start="6660" end="6672" title="girls school" label="girls school"/>
<link wikidata="Q15976" start="6717" end="6726" title="Altenburg" label="Altenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q629451" start="6731" end="6751" title="Johann Julius Hecker" label="Johann Julius Hecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="6941" end="6955" title="merchant class" label="merchant class"/>
<link wikidata="Q122903379" start="7061" end="7077" title="Mädchenpensionat" label="Mädchenpensionat"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="7257" end="7277" title="Christian missionary" label="Christian missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269771" start="7416" end="7436" title="Danish-Halle Mission" label="Danish-Halle Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q76157" start="9296" end="9329" title="Heinrich Ernst Ferdinand Guericke" label="Heinrich Ernst Ferdinand Guericke"/>
</links>
</doc>
