<doc id="182694" wikidata="Q1370292" url="?curid=182694" title="Washington Heights, Manhattan">
<text>Washington Heights is a neighborhood in the northern part of the borough of Manhattan in New York City. It is named for Fort Washington, a fortification constructed at the highest natural point on Manhattan by Continental Army troops to defend the area from the British forces during the American Revolutionary War. Washington Heights is bordered by Inwood to the north along Dyckman Street, by Harlem to the south along 155th Street, by the Harlem River and Coogan&#x27;s Bluff to the east, and by the Hudson River to the west.

Washington Heights, which before the 20th century was sparsely populated by luxurious mansions and single-family homes, rapidly developed during the early 1900s as it became connected to the rest of Manhattan via the Broadway–Seventh Avenue and Eighth Avenue lines of the New York City Subway. Beginning as a middle-class neighborhood with many Irish and Eastern European immigrants, the neighborhood has at various points been home to communities of German Jews, Greek Americans, Puerto Ricans, Cuban Americans, and Russian Americans.

Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, many White residents left the neighborhood for nearby suburbs as the Latino populations increased. Dominican Americans became the dominant group by the 1980s despite facing economic difficulties, leading the neighborhood to its status in the 21st century as the most prominent Dominican community in the United States. While crime became a serious issue during the crack cocaine crisis of the 1980s and 1990s, in the 2000s Washington Heights became a much safer community and began to experience some upward mobility as well as gentrification.

Washington Heights is set apart among Manhattan neighborhoods for its high residential density despite the lack of modern construction, with the majority of its few high-rise buildings belonging to the NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Medical Center. Other higher education institutions include Yeshiva University and Boricua College. The neighborhood has generous access to green space in Fort Washington Park, Highbridge Park, and Fort Tryon Park, home to the historical landmarks the Little Red Lighthouse, the High Bridge Water Tower, and the Cloisters respectively. Other points of interest include Audubon Terrace, the Morris–Jumel Mansion, the United Palace, the Audubon Ballroom, and the Fort Washington Avenue Armory.

Washington Heights is part of Manhattan Community District 12, and its primary ZIP Codes are 10032, 10033, and 10040. It is served by the 33rd and 34th Precincts of the New York City Police Department and Engine Companies 67, 84, and 93 of the New York City Fire Department. Politically, it is part of the New York City Council&#x27;s 7th and 10th districts.

==History==
===Early history===

Prior to the arrival of Europeans, the area was traversed by American Indians from the Early Woodland Period, who left remains of shellfish and pottery at the site of the present-day Little Red Lighthouse. Washington Heights is part of the section of northern Manhattan that is the homelands of the Wecquaesgeeks (originally a name for the area meaning &quot;birch-bark country&quot;), a band of the Wappinger and a Lenape Native American people. The winding path of Broadway north of 168th Street and St. Nicholas Avenue to its south is living evidence of the old Wecquaesgeek trail which travelled along the Hudson Valley from Lower Manhattan all the way through Albany. On the plateau west of Broadway between 175th and 181st streets, the residents had been cultivating crops in a field known to Dutch colonists as the &quot;Great Maize Field&quot;.

===17th century===
Arriving in 1623, the Dutch initially worked as trade partners with the American Indians but became more and more hostile as time went on, with the natives frequently reciprocating. The Dutch referred to the elevated area of northwestern Washington Heights as &quot;Long Hill&quot; while the Fort Tryon Park area specifically carried the name &quot;Forest Hill&quot;.

===18th and 19th centuries===
None of the land in present-day Washington Heights was under private ownership until 1712, when it was parcelled out in lots to various landowners from the village of Harlem to the south. Even after repeated attempts by the Dutch to drive them out, including the bloody Kieft&#x27;s War (1643–1645), some Wecquaesgeeks managed to maintain residence in Washington Heights up until the Dutch paid them a settlement for their last land claims in 1715. For the greater part of the next two centuries, Washington Heights would remain a home to wealthy landowners seeking a quiet location for their suburban estates.

During the New York Campaign of the Revolutionary War, General George Washington&#x27;s Continental Army secured a small but much-needed victory over the pursuing British Army at the Battle of Harlem Heights, after a series of defeats in Manhattan. Not long after their victory, the Continental Army suffered one of its worst defeats at the Battle of Fort Washington, in which nearly 2,900 troops were captured. Fort Washington was a group of fortifications on the high points of Washington Heights, with its central site at present-day Bennett Park (known then as Mount Washington) built a few months prior opposite Fort Lee, New Jersey to protect the Hudson River from enemy ships.

Under British control, the position was renamed Fort Knyphausen for the Hessian general Wilhelm von Knyphausen, who played a major part in the victory; its lesser fortification at present-day Fort Tryon Park was renamed for Sir William Tryon, the last governor of New York before it was taken back by the Continental Army. The park holds a plaque dedicated in 1909 to Margaret Corbin, an American who took over at her husband&#x27;s cannon after his death in the Battle of Fort Washington; she was also honored with the naming of Margaret Corbin Drive in 1977.

At the northwest corner of 181st Street and Broadway (then Kingsbridge Road) was the Blue Bell Tavern, built in the early-mid 18th century as an inn and site of social gatherings. When New York&#x27;s Provincial Congress assented to the Declaration of Independence on July 9, 1776, the head of the statue of George III ended up on a spike at the Blue Bell Tavern, broken off by a &quot;rowdy&quot; group of civilians and soldiers at Bowling Green.

During the British evacuation of New York in 1783, George Washington and his staff stood in front of the tavern as they watched the American troops march southward to retake the city. After changing ownership several times, the tavern moved to a new building in 1885, following the original structure&#x27;s destruction for the widening of Broadway.

===20th century===

In 1915, the tavern was demolished again to build the 3,500-seat Coliseum Theatre, which was demolished in 2021 after denial of its landmark status.

Before the apartment development of the 20th century, many wealthy citizens built grand mansions in Washington Heights. The most famous landowner in the southwest part of the neighborhood was ornithologist John James Audubon, whose estate encompassed the from 155th to 158th Street west of Broadway. A mystery surrounds his family home by Riverside Drive, which was deconstructed and moved to a city lot to make room for new development in 1931, only for its remnants to vanish without a trace.

On the eastern side, by Edgecombe Avenue between 160th and 162nd streets, the Morris–Jumel Mansion has been successfully preserved to this day. The land of the estate had been owned by Jan Kiersen and her son-in-law Jacob Dyckman before it was bought by British colonel Roger Morris in 1765 and completed the same year. In 1776, the house was commandeered as a headquarters by George Washington, and after changing hands a few times was purchased by Stephen and Eliza Jumel in 1810. In 1903, the City bought the mansion and it became a museum, the oldest surviving house in Manhattan.

With a picturesque view of the Palisades, the elevated ridge of northwest Washington Heights became the site of a few modern castles. The first of these was Libbey Castle, built by Augustus Richards after he purchased the land from Lucius Chittenden in 1855. Located near Margaret Corbin Circle, this estate was once owned by William &quot;Boss&quot; Tweed but got its current name from William Libbey, who purchased it in 1880. Even more extravagant, Paterno Castle was situated on the estate of real estate developer Charles Paterno by the Hudson River at 181st Street. Built in 1907, the mansion was demolished thirty years later for Paterno&#x27;s Castle Village complex, where pieces of the original structure still remain.

The neighborhood&#x27;s largest estate was the property of industrial tycoon C. K. G. Billings, taking up in the southern part of Fort Tryon Park. Although the Louis XIV-style mansion at present-day Linden Terrace burned to the ground in 1925, Billings Terrace remains, supported by the elegant stone archway that originally led to the Billings mansion.

Initial residential development in Washington Heights began in the late 19th century with the construction of row and wood-frame houses in the southern portion of the neighborhood, particularly near Amsterdam Avenue. In 1886, the Third Avenue Railway was extended from 125th Street to 155th Street along Amsterdam Avenue. However, higher residential density would not be supported until the extension of the Interborough Rapid Transit Company (IRT)&#x27;s first subway line (now part of the Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line). The IRT built the 157th Street, 168th Street, 181st Street, and Dyckman Street stations between 1904 and 1906 (the 191st Street station opened as an infill station in 1911).

Although skyrocketing land values sparked early predictions that upper-class apartment buildings would dominate the neighborhood, such development was limited in the pre-World War I period to the Audubon Park area west of Broadway and south of 158th Street. Buildings such as the 13-story Riviera included elaborate decor and generous amenities to attract higher-paying tenants.

The southern and eastern parts of Washington Heights experienced a construction boom in the years leading up to World War I. The downtown access provided by the IRT prompted a rapid increase in density through the proliferation of five- and six-story New Law Tenements, the vast majority of which remain. Many of the new residents came from crowded immigrant neighborhoods such as the Lower East Side, which saw its density halved between 1910 and 1930. As a result of the development of new housing, the total population of Manhattan north of 155th Street grew from just 8,000 in 1900 to 110,000 by 1920. The incoming residents of Washington Heights were a diverse group of people of European descent. In 1920, nearly half were Protestant, most of whom had parents born in the United States; the remainder was split between Jews and Catholics, typically immigrants or born to immigrant parents.

The next wave of urbanization for Washington Heights came in the 1920s, coinciding with the construction boom occurring across the city. The population increased significantly in the central area west of Broadway, and drastically in the area north of 181st Street, populating the last of the undeveloped areas just south and west of Fort Tryon Park. Transit for new residents was improved with the construction of the Independent Subway System (IND)&#x27;s Eighth Avenue Line in 1932, with stops at 175th Street, 181st Street, and 190th Street along Fort Washington Avenue.

The demographics of the neighborhood were undergoing significant change. While the Protestant population remained stagnant, first- and second-generation Irish and Eastern European Jews continued to move in. By 1930, nearly a quarter of Manhattan&#x27;s Jewish residents lived north of 155th Street. The neighborhood also saw an influx of German Jews escaping Nazism in the 1930s and 1940s, a history documented by Steven M. Lowenstein&#x27;s book &quot;Frankfurt-on-the-Hudson&quot; (a nickname referencing the origin city of many in the diaspora). One attractive aspect of Washington Heights for German Jews was likely its Eastern European Jewish presence, but an economic pull was its abundance of housing stock from the 1920s construction boom. Although rents were higher than average, many landlords offered some free rent to draw new tenants, and apartments were nonetheless spacious for their cost.

In the first half of the 20th century, tensions broke out between Catholics and Jews, who were not very segregated residentially but remained in separate social spheres. Around the start of World War II Irish groups such as the Christian Front arose, drawing large crowds to their antisemitic rallies, coupled with the vandalism of synagogues and beating of Jewish youth by Irish youth in gangs such as the Amsterdams. After continual charges of police negligence, a committee was created to combat the violence and many members of the Irish gangs were arrested. By 1944, the local Catholic Clergy were pressured to speak out against the prejudice, and Jews, Catholics, and Protestants began working together on solutions to ease the tensions.

Around this time, Washington Heights also gained its first substantial population of Black residents, by 1943 numbering around 3,000 and concentrated mainly in the southeastern part of the neighborhood. The Black population of Washington Heights was dwarfed, however, by that of Hamilton Heights, where White residents were 63% of the population in 1943. It was in this period that the popular boundary of Washington Heights shifted from 135th Street to 155th Street, as many residents of European descent refused to include African Americans in their conception of the neighborhood. This attitude was expressed in a phrase heard in the time period: &quot;Washington Heights begins where Harlem ends.&quot; In fact, many of the neighborhood&#x27;s new Jewish arrivals had left from Harlem as it became increasingly populated by Black people from the South during the Great Migration.

====Segregation and racism====
Despite the growth of the Black population, racial segregation remained very rigid. While in the vast majority of blocks less than 2% of housing units were occupied by non-White residents, nearly every block east of Amsterdam Avenue and south of 165th Street was over 90% non-White by 1950.

The process underlying this segregation is exemplified in the history of one of Washington Heights&#x27; most famous apartment buildings: 555 Edgecombe Avenue. Built in 1914, the fourteen-story building rented to various relatively affluent White people until 1939, when the owner cancelled all the tenants&#x27; leases and began renting exclusively to Black people. While organizations like the Neighborhood Protective Association of Washington Heights had kept the neighborhood virtually all-White throughout much of the 20th century, the overcrowded conditions of Harlem led to growth in demand for apartments outside the neighborhood.

Throughout the 1940s, the building had a number of notable Black residents, such as Paul Robeson, Kenneth Clark, and Count Basie. The presence of middle-class Black people in 555 Edgecombe and other higher-class buildings in southeast Washington Heights led many to associate it with Sugar Hill, the Harlem sub-neighborhood spanning between Edgecombe Avenue and Amsterdam Avenue to its south.

In addition to segregation, racism also manifested itself in gang culture, where youth often defined themselves by race or ethnicity and violently defended their respective territories. These tensions were brought to a climax in 1957, with the assault of two teenagers of European ancestry, Michael Farmer and Roger McShane, members of the majority-Irish &quot;Jesters&quot; gang. The incident took place in the Highbridge Pool, a Works Progress Administration-funded pool built in 1936 which had no racial restrictions but was nonetheless an environment of racial hostility in the changing landscape of the neighborhood.

The assault, which ended in Michael Farmer&#x27;s death, was perpetrated by an alliance of the African American Egyptian Kings and the Puerto Rican Dragons, both based in West Harlem just south of the Heights. The supposed motive for the attack was to counter the perception that Highbridge Pool was &quot;owned&quot; by the Jesters, and Black and Latino youths were often called racial slurs and chased away from the surrounding blocks. As Eric Schneider analyzes in &quot;Vampires, Dragons, and Egyptian Kings: Youth Gangs in Postwar New York,&quot; the incident illustrated the effects of the neighborhood&#x27;s demographic shift: the Jesters defined themselves as fighting against Black and Latino occupancy of the neighborhood even as they included newly arrived Black people in their ranks (similar diversity was seen in the membership of the Dragons and Egyptian Kings).

====White flight and Latino immigration====
While signs were slowly appearing for the first half of the 20th century that Washington Heights would not forever be a neighborhood of European Americans, the 1960s and 1970s featured full force demographic shifts. Washington Heights&#x27; upwardly mobile White residents began to leave in great numbers, and lower-income Latino population saw great increases. Apart from the allure of suburban homes and their economic capacity to buy them, White residents were spurred to leave by the demographic changes themselves, increasing negligence of residential buildings, and rising crime (having more than doubled between 1969 and 1982). Compared to the White flight occurring in other neighborhoods such as the West Bronx, the process was much slower and less destructive as few buildings were outright abandoned or burned.

While Puerto Ricans had been the dominant Latino group in the 1950s, by 1965 Cubans and Dominicans had overtaken them in number, and by 1970 native Spanish speakers were the majority group in central-eastern census tracts. Despite being a smaller group, Cuban immigrants in the Heights had an outsized role in business, according to a 1976 estimate owning the majority of Latino-owned stores. The neighborhood&#x27;s Black population also increased, by 1980 numbering over 25,000 and residing in all areas of the neighborhood while remaining a plurality in the southeastern section.

While the overall trend was of exodus among White residents, the rate of this trend varied among different groups. One of the most pronounced changes occurred with Greek immigrants, who had reached their peak in the 1950s with the establishment of St. Spyridon Greek Orthodox Church and an accompanying school, only to see that in two decades nearly all of the congregation had left for the suburbs. On the other hand, the German Jewish exodus was characterized by a decrease in overall population but an increasing presence in the neighborhood&#x27;s northwestern corner. By the 1970s, evidence of the exodus of the broader Jewish community was present in the changing landscape of the neighborhood, where kosher stores and Jewish bakeries were gradually replaced by new small businesses with signs in Spanish.

While some Dominican immigrants had been arriving in Washington Heights throughout the 1950s and 1960s, the pace increased drastically during the regime of Joaquín Balaguer, who took power in 1966 following the Dominican Civil War. The combination of the recent passing of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, Balaguer&#x27;s policy of freely granting passports, and the country&#x27;s high unemployment rate created the conditions for growing emigration from the Dominican Republic. Some of the initial migrants were left-wing revolutionaries exiled by the Balaguer regime, theorized to have been granted visas through an unwritten agreement with the United States, but the majority of arrivals came for better economic opportunities.

In &quot;Quisqueya on the Hudson: The Transnational Identity of Dominicans in Washington Heights,&quot; Jorge Duany describes how Washington Heights developed as a &quot;transnational community&quot;, continually defined by its connection to the Dominican Republic. The majority of Dominican immigrants viewed their stay in the United States as purely economically motivated while they remained culturally attached to the D.R.; many also sent remittances home, imagining an eventual retirement to the island.

====School conflicts====

During the 1970s, Washington Heights&#x27; School District 6 (including Inwood and Hamilton Heights) was the scene of numerous conflicts over de facto racial segregation and unequal resource distribution within the district&#x27;s schools. The School Decentralization Act, passed by the New York State Legislature in 1969, set up elected boards for New York City&#x27;s school districts with limited hiring power and control over Title I funds. At the time, District 6&#x27;s demographics were rapidly changing due to White students&#x27; withdrawal from the public school system and the broader trend of White flight, while the Black and Latino student population rapidly increased.

This resulted in a stark gap between the district&#x27;s few racially integrated schools, which enjoyed better academic reputations and access to resources, and the remainder of schools with very few White students and serious overcrowding problems. Fierce competition between different factions for educational funding and new schools was compounded by the disproportionate representation of the majority-White northwestern Heights on the board, creating an environment in which public meetings were plagued by incivility and at times even violence.

George Washington High School, located on 193rd Street and Audubon Avenue near Highbridge Park, faced numerous issues representative of the changes and conflicts of the neighborhood&#x27;s public schools, which intersected in 1970 to produce a situation of extreme chaos. Located in a grand building with a Works Progress Administration mural by Lucienne Bloch, the school was relatively prestigious in the decades after its 1925 founding, graduating people such as Alan Greenspan, Henry Kissinger, and Murray Jarvik. Although George Washington remained racially mixed through the early 1970s, the school had a tracking system that saw White students leave the school better prepared for college, and violence frequently broke out among gangs identifying by race.

Discontent with academics and school policy led to a wave of student demonstrations, supported by a group of parents who pushed to set up an information table in the school&#x27;s lobby in order to answer questions and hear complaints regarding the school. However, the United Federation of Teachers – which had also clashed with students and parents over the 1964 school boycott and the 1968 teachers&#x27; strike – perceived this as an attempt to subvert teachers&#x27; authority, leading them to start a local strike after the administration reached a compromise with parents over the table.

By the end of 1970, the high school had seen the resignation of three principals and multiple incidents of violence against students, teachers, and security guards; while many safety improvements were made throughout the 1970s, its academic performance continued to decline. In 1999, the school took its present form as the George Washington Educational Campus composed of four smaller schools.

===Late 20th and early 21st centuries===
====Immigration trends====
For the remainder of the 20th century the Dominican community of Washington Heights continued to increase considerably, most notably during the mid to late 1980s, when over 40,000 Dominicans settled in Washington Heights, Hamilton Heights, and Inwood. Around the year 2000, the Dominican community reached its peak and became a slim majority of Washington Heights and Inwood, propelling the neighborhoods&#x27; combined population to 208,000, the highest level since 1950.

Even as they arrived in great numbers, Dominicans who came to the neighborhood faced a difficult economic situation, with many of the manufacturing jobs they disproportionately occupied having disappeared throughout the 1970s and 1980s. This was clear by 1990, when the proportion of Dominican New Yorkers living in households below the poverty line was 36%, more than double the citywide rate. In addition to service work, many residents found local jobs in the small-scale garment sector and factory work in New Jersey.

During the late 20th century, other immigrant groups began to make their home in the neighborhood as well. In the late 1970s and early 1980s a moderate influx of Soviet Jews occurred following a loosening of the country&#x27;s emigration policy, predominantly professionals and artists pushed out by antisemitism and drawn by economic opportunity. The makeup of the neighborhood&#x27;s Latino population also began to diversify beyond an exclusively Caribbean background, most prominently through the arrival of Mexicans and Ecuadorians, who together numbered over 6,000 by 2000 and over 10,000 a decade later.

Smaller communities of Central Americans, Colombians, and Chinese immigrants had also developed. The neighborhood&#x27;s African American population began to decrease from its height in the 1970s, by 2000 making up less than one-tenth of the neighborhood. In the present day Washington Heights also has an Orthodox Jewish community served by numerous synagogues, many of which have noticed more young Jewish families move into the neighborhood during the 2000s.

====1980s crime and drug crisis====

In the 1980s and early 1990s, Washington Heights was severely affected by the crack cocaine epidemic, as was the rest of New York City. Washington Heights had become one of the largest drug distribution centers in the Northeastern United States, bringing a negative reputation to Dominican Americans as a group. Then-U.S. Attorney Rudy Giuliani and Senator Alphonse D&#x27;Amato chose the corner of 160th Street and Broadway for their widely publicized undercover crack purchase, and in 1989, &quot;The New York Times&quot; called the neighborhood &quot;the crack capital of America&quot;. By 1990, crack&#x27;s impact on crime was evident: 103 murders were committed in the 34th Precinct that year, along with 1,130 felony assaults, 1,919 robberies, and 2,647 burglaries.

The causes behind the severity of the crisis for Washington Heights, however, were more intricate. One was the neighborhood&#x27;s location: the George Washington Bridge and its numerous highway connections made for easy access from the New Jersey suburbs. Another contributing factor was that as Dominican dealers such as Santiago Luis Polanco Rodríguez brought the group higher status in cocaine operations, the heavily-Dominican Washington Heights became increasingly important as a strategic location. Washington Heights also had a high level of unemployment and poverty in the 1980s and 1990s, providing ample economic motivation for young people to enter the drug trade.

The effects of the crack trade extended beyond physical danger to a breakdown in trust and widespread fear provoked by violence in public places as well as murders of people uninvolved in the drug business. It was common for police and detectives to note unresponsiveness from residents during murder inquiries. Overall distrust of the police may have stemmed from the perception of corruption, which was alleged numerous times concerning the 34th Precinct overlooking drug crimes for bribes.

Tensions between residents and the NYPD came to a head on July 4, 1992, when José &quot;Kiko&quot; Garcia was shot by 34th Precinct Officer Michael O&#x27;Keefe on the corner of 162nd Street and Saint Nicholas Avenue. Although evidence later supported that the killing was a reaction to violence initiated by Garcia, many residents quickly suspected wanton police brutality. The suspicion was not unfounded, as O&#x27;Keefe already had several civilian complaints of unnecessary aggression in arrests. What began as a peaceful demonstration for Garcia&#x27;s death turned into a violent riot, causing multiple fires, fifteen injuries, and one death. Then-mayor David Dinkins, who had met with the Garcia family following the killing, pleaded for an end to the rioting: &quot;There is much anger in the community about the death of José Garcia and other incidents, [but] you do not build a better city by destroying it.&quot;

====Crime drop and community improvement====

During the mid to late 1990s, Washington Heights experienced a drastic decrease in crime that continued through the 21st century. From 1990 to 2023, reported motor vehicle thefts, murders, and burglaries have each fallen by over 85%, felony assaults, rapes, and robberies by over 65%, and grand larcenies by around 45%. The 30th and 32nd precincts to the south of Washington Heights, which cover most of Harlem north of 133rd Street, experienced just as drastic crime drops during the past decades.

The crime drop, which was felt across all major U.S. cities, owed itself largely to the decrease in new users and dealers of crack cocaine, and the move of existing dealers from dealing on the streets to dealing from inside apartments. In Washington Heights, this meant a move back to the established cocaine dealing culture that had existed before the introduction of crack. As Terry Williams observes in &quot;The Cocaine Kids: The Inside Story of a Teenage Drug Ring&quot;, many dealers from the pre-freebasing period put greater emphasis on knowing their customers and hid their operations more carefully from police, as opposed to dealers of the crack days who would deal openly and fight violently in the competition for the drug&#x27;s high profits.

Many also credit actions taken on the neighborhood level in increasing safety in Washington Heights. After years of advocacy from residents, in 1994 the NYPD split the 34th Precinct to create the 33rd Precinct for Washington Heights south of 179th Street in order to devote more resources to crime prevention. Another local policing strategy was the &quot;model block&quot; initiative, first attempted in 1997 on 163rd Street between Broadway and Amsterdam Avenue, a location notable for the dealers who set up a &quot;fortified complex&quot; complete with traps and electrified wires to prevent police raids on their apartment. In an attempt to disrupt drug activity on the block, police officers set up barricades at both ends of the block, demanded proof of residence from anyone coming through, patrolled building hallways, and pressured landlords to improve their buildings. The program was controversial, facing criticism from the New York Civil Liberties Union and resistance from residents for its invasion of privacy. The initiative was later expanded throughout the city.

As crime decreased, Washington Heights also saw a recovery of many of its community institutions, including parks. Fort Tryon Park had fallen into a period of decline after the 1975 New York City fiscal crisis, when evaporated Parks Department funds left its walkways and playgrounds in a state of disrepair, and several corpses were found in the park.

===21st century===
After work from the Fort Tryon Park Trust and the New York Restoration Project throughout the 1990s and 2000s, funded by the city with the help of generous private donations, the park and its reputation were restored.

Highbridge Park, however, had the same problems as Fort Tryon Park but went without any major restoration funding for a while, likely due to its location in a lower-income area and lack of a frequently touristed landmark like The Cloisters. In 1997, the New York Restoration Project began to work on maintaining the park, but without the necessary funding much of the park&#x27;s disrepair continued. In 2016, however, the park received $30 million in restoration funding through the city&#x27;s Anchor Parks initiative, with the full restoration set to be finished by 2021.

Throughout the 2010s Washington Heights residents have made modest economic gains. According to American Community Survey data the neighborhood&#x27;s poverty rate decreased from 27% to 18% in the approximate 2008–2018 period. In the same period, the unemployment rate decreased from 14% to 9% and the proportion of residents with bachelor&#x27;s degrees increased from 29% to 35%.

Washington Heights has faced gentrification throughout the 2000s, with data from the New York University Furman Center finding that Washington Heights and Inwood&#x27;s average residential rent had increased by 29.3% between 1990 and 2014. Furthermore, there have been several businesses faced with drastic rent increases, such as Coogan&#x27;s, a well-known restaurant and bar which managed to renegotiate with its landlord NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital following outcry by many locals, including Lin-Manuel Miranda.

Washington Heights residents face many difficulties with the rental housing market; over a quarter of households pay the majority of their income in rent. As of 2014, Washington Heights and Inwood have the highest rate of severe crowding in Manhattan. Washington Heights also has the city&#x27;s second-highest rate of serious housing code violations and its lowest rental vacancy rate.

Many have expressed opposition to the neighborhood&#x27;s gentrification on both commercial and residential fronts. Luis Miranda and Robert Ramirez of the &quot;Manhattan Times&quot; wrote in 2005, &quot;How sad and ironic that many of the same people who fought to save our neighborhoods in the face of thugs and drugs have ultimately been forced to surrender their communities to the almighty dollar.&quot; Echoing this sentiment, &quot;Crossing Broadway&quot; author Robert W. Snyder said, &quot;The people who saved Washington Heights in the days of crime and crack deserve more for their pains than a stiff rent increase.&quot; Fears about displacement in Upper Manhattan have most recently manifest themselves in the controversy surrounding the 2018 Inwood rezoning plan, which despite its offers of community benefits and affordable housing has been accused of accelerating real estate speculation.

In 2018, ground was broken in 2018 on Amsterdam Avenue and 180th Street by developer Youngwoo &amp; Associates for the MVRDV-designed Radio Tower &amp; Hotel. The tower, a 22-story multi-use tower with office space, retail and a 221-room hotel, and is the first major mixed-use development to be built in Washington Heights in nearly five decades. The hotel opened in July 2022.

==Geography==

Washington Heights is located on the high ridge of Upper Manhattan that extends west of Edgecombe Avenue from around 133rd Street to just below Dyckman Street. It contains the highest piece of land in Manhattan: an outcropping of schist above sea level in Bennett Park.

The neighborhood was in the early 1900s considered to run as far south as 135th Street west of Central Harlem, encompassing most of the elevated area of Upper Manhattan. In the modern day, Washington Heights is typically defined as the area between Hamilton Heights at 155th Street and Inwood at Dyckman Street, although some have also considered Washington Heights&#x27; southern boundary to be 158th Street.

===Sub-neighborhoods===
==== Hudson Heights ====

The Hudson Heights subneighborhood is generally considered to cover the area west of Broadway and north of 181st Street or 179th Street, although some extend its southern boundary as far as 173rd Street. The name was created by the Hudson Heights Owners&#x27; Coalition in 1992 to promote the sale of co-op apartments in the northwestern part of the neighborhood.

Hudson Heights&#x27; name has been adopted by numerous newspapers, typically setting it apart from the rest of Washington Heights for its Art Deco decor, residential character, and closeness to Fort Tryon Park and the Hudson River. However, some disparage the name; Manhattan Borough Historian Robert W. Snyder argued that the name&#x27;s intention was to &quot;conceptually separate the area from the rest of Washington Heights,&quot; diminishing the &quot;shared interest on both sides of Broadway.&quot;

While the name &quot;Hudson Heights&quot; may be relatively new, a divide between northwestern Washington Heights and the rest of the neighborhood has existed in some form in the neighborhood since the early 1900s. Census data from 1950 shows that rents in the western areas of the neighborhood tended to be slightly higher compared to the eastern areas, but the highest rents were almost entirely in the northwestern area, with its high concentration of more modern elevator buildings, and the Audubon Park Historic District, which has most of the neighborhood&#x27;s few buildings with more than six stories.

This economic divide became racial as well during the 1970s and 80s, as the majority of White residents who did not leave the neighborhood settled in the northwestern area. , market rents remain significantly higher north of 181st Street and west of Broadway, although the most noticeable difference is the racial divide; , Hudson Heights census blocks are 60% White while census blocks east of Broadway are 13% White.

====Fort George====

Named for the Revolutionary War&#x27;s Fort George, the lesser-recognized Fort George sub-neighborhood runs east of Broadway from 181st Street to Dyckman Street. Educational institutions include Yeshiva College, located east of Amsterdam Avenue near Highbridge Park, and George Washington High School, on the nearby site of the original Fort George. Fort George also holds one of Manhattan&#x27;s rare semi-private streets, Washington Terrace, which runs south from West 186th Street for a half-block between Audubon and Amsterdam avenues.

===Elevation changes===
Because of its abrupt, hilly topography, pedestrian navigation in Upper Manhattan is facilitated by many step streets. The longest of these is a set of 130 stairs connecting Fort Washington Avenue and Overlook Terrace at 187th Street.

To help with eastward-westward transit in upper Washington Heights, elevators are available at the 181st Street IND station, with entrances on Overlook Terrace and Fort Washington Avenue at 184th Street, and the 190th Street station, with entrances on Fort Washington Avenue and Bennett Avenue. The 191st Street IRT station also has a pedestrian tunnel, with an entrance on Broadway near 190th Street, and free elevator connection. Exemplifying the abrupt changes in the area&#x27;s terrain, the 191st Street and Dyckman Street IRT stations are at similar elevations compared to sea level, but the former is the city&#x27;s deepest subway station below ground level, while the latter, just north, is above ground.

==Demographics==
For census purposes, New York City government classifies Washington Heights as part of two neighborhood tabulation areas called Washington Heights North and Washington Heights South, split by 177th Street west of Broadway and 180th Street east of Broadway. Based on data from the 2020 United States Census, the population of Washington Heights was 143,879, a decrease of 23,249 (13.9%) from the 167,128 counted in 2000. Covering an area of , the neighborhood had a population density of .

The racial makeup of the neighborhood was 21.7% (31,155) White, 7.5% (10,823) African American, 3.5% (4,976) Asian, 0.9% (1,348) from other races, and 2.3% (3,298) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race(s) were 64.1% (92,279) of the population. Between 2000 and 2020, the White and Asian populations increased by 42% (9,157) and 39% (1,385) respectively, while the Black and Hispanic/Latino populations decreased by 26% (3,766) and 25% (31,439) respectively.

In-depth demographic statistics are collected by the American Community Survey. Based on 2016–2020 data, an estimated 18% of the population is under 20 (compared to 23% citywide), 30% are ages 20 to 35 (24% citywide), 37% are ages 35 to 65 (38% citywide), and 15% are 65 and over (15% citywide). 46% of residents are foreign-born (36% citywide), of whom 56% are U.S. citizens (58% citywide). Of the population 5 years and over, 70% speak a language other than English at home (48% citywide) and 35% speak English less than &quot;very well&quot; (22% citywide).

The unemployment rate is 11% (7% citywide); 67% of workers commute by public transportation (53% citywide) and 12% by automobile (27% citywide). Washington Heights has a median household income of $58,373 ($67,046 citywide) and a mean household income of $78,184 ($107,000 citywide). 18% of residents are considered below poverty (17% citywide); the rate among children and seniors is 25% (24% citywide) and 28% (18% citywide) respectively. With a median gross rent of $1,405 ($1,489 citywide), 28% of households paid over half of their income in rent (28% citywide).

==Culture==
===Little Dominican Republic===

Washington Heights was designated &quot;Little Dominican Republic&quot; along with Inwood and part of Hamilton Heights in 2018, an area where two-thirds of Hispanic/Latino residents identify as Dominican . Another name sometimes given to the area is &quot;Quisqueya Heights&quot;, in reference to a Taíno name for Hispaniola meaning &quot;cradle of life&quot;. As Roberto Suro describes in &quot;Strangers Among Us: Latino Lives in a Changing America&quot;, many Dominicans in Washington Heights lead double lives between the U.S. and the D.R., moving between countries and investing money back home. Jorge Duany supports this analysis in &quot;Quisqueya on the Hudson&quot;, documenting how first-generation immigrants feel a strong cultural connection with the D.R., reinforced by frequent flights back to the island. A travel agency owner interviewed in &quot;The New York Times&quot; claimed, &quot;For the Dominican to go to Santo Domingo during Christmas and summer is like the Muslims going to Mecca.&quot;

One of the most popular flights of the route between New York and Santo Domingo was American Airlines Flight 587, which in November 2001 suffered an accidental crash in Belle Harbor, Queens shortly after takeoff from John F. Kennedy Airport, killing all 260 people aboard the plane as well as five Belle Harbor residents. The flight had a long history among Dominican New Yorkers, even being referenced in Kinito Méndez and Johnny Ventura&#x27;s song &quot;El Avión.&quot; A memorial to the crash was built in 2006 near Rockaway Beach and Boardwalk, inscribed with the victims&#x27; names and the Pedro Mir quote &quot;Después no quiero más que paz&quot; (which translates to &quot;Afterwards I want nothing more than peace&quot;).

===Religion===
Washington Heights&#x27; religious institutions are primarily Jewish, Protestant, and Catholic. Some of Washington Heights and Inwood&#x27;s earliest churches were the St. Elizabeth Church, the United Presbyterian Church, and the Mount Washington Presbyterian Church, all built in the mid- to late-1800s before the neighborhood urbanized. Most of the neighborhood&#x27;s places of worship date back to the early 1900s, but many have changed or moved as the ethnic composition changed in the later 1900s.

The landmarked Fort Washington Presbyterian Church, built in 1914 in neo-Georgian style according to plans by Thomas Hastings, is an example of how Washington Heights&#x27; religious institutions reflected demographic changes in the neighborhood. The church was constructed after a merger between two Presbyterian churches further south in order to have a location uptown, where many members of the previous congregations were moving. In 1982, the original congregation turned the church over to &quot;La Primera Iglesia Española de Washington Heights&quot;, a congregation organized in 1942 by Puerto Rican Presbyterians on 172nd Street and Audubon Avenue. Other Protestant churches which changed from a European American to a mostly Caribbean American congregation in the later part of the 20th century include the landmarked Holyrood Episcopal Church and Iglesia Adventista del Séptimo Dia (a Seventh-day Adventist church).

With the exception of Our Lady of Esperanza Church, which was built in Audubon Terrace as New York&#x27;s second Spanish-language Catholic church, the neighborhood&#x27;s Catholic churches served its large Irish population during the early 1900s. Church of the Incarnation and St. Elizabeth Church both started Catholic schools which began to serve more and more Dominicans as the Irish moved to the suburbs.

Other Christian denominations have a smaller but significant presence in Washington Heights, such as Baptist churches and Greek Orthodox churches (most notably St. Spyridon). Also of note is the Holy Cross Armenian Apostolic Church, where in 1933 members of the Armenian Revolutionary Federation assassinated Eastern Diocese Archbishop Levon Tourian as he walked down its halls, after which the church needed to be reconsecrated.

Washington Heights&#x27; many Jewish institutions underwent significant change throughout the 20th century, with many of their locations in the southern part of the neighborhood being sold to Christian congregations as they closed or moved to more northern areas, where a significant population of Jewish people remained after the White flight of the 1960s and 1970s. Some Jewish congregations were founded by German Jewish immigrants during the flight from Nazi persecution in the 1930s and 1940s, such as the Conservative Fort Tryon Jewish Center, while others predate it, such as the Orthodox Mount Sinai Jewish Center. Khal Adath Jeshurun is an Orthodox congregation started by Rabbi Joseph Breuer in New York, a continuation of his father&#x27;s Jewish community in Frankfurt am Main which includes the Yeshiva Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch as a parochial school.

===Arts===
Washington Heights, along with other parts of the city such as the Bronx, had a significant role in the early history of graffiti in New York City. In 1971, TAKI 183 (born on 183rd street) was the first graffiti tagger to be exposed to the broader public through a profile in &quot;The New York Times&quot;; 188th Street and Audubon Avenue has also been cited as a location where graffiti writers exchanged names and ideas in the 1970s.

The Northern Manhattan Arts Alliance, founded in 2007 to support local artists, organizes the annual Uptown Arts Stroll, which features artists from Upper Manhattan in public locations for several weeks each summer. The United Palace, a landmarked theater built in 1930, continues as a space for film and live performance in the present day, having featured musicians such as John Legend, Bob Dylan, Lenny Kravitz, and Lauryn Hill. Also noteworthy is UP Theater Company, a Washington Heights and Inwood-based company established in 2010 which performs original plays in the neighborhood.

Washington Heights has also become the setting for creative works such as Lin-Manuel Miranda&#x27;s Broadway musical and film &quot;In the Heights&quot;, Angie Cruz&#x27;s novels &quot;Soledad&quot; and &quot;Dominicana&quot;, and the Amazon show &quot;The Horror of Dolores Roach&quot;.

==Sports==
=== Historic ===

Five clubs in American professional sports have played in the Washington Heights area: the New York Giants, New York Mets, and New York Yankees baseball teams, and the New York Giants and New York Jets football teams. Situated on Coogan&#x27;s Hollow where the present-day Polo Grounds Towers are located, the Polo Grounds have been the home field of three professional baseball teams, the baseball Giants (from 1911 to 1957), the Yankees (from 1912 to 1923), the Mets (from 1962 to 1963), and two professional football teams, the New York Giants (from 1925 to 1955) and the New York Jets (from 1960 to 1963). The Mets and Jets both began play at the Polo Grounds while their future home, Shea Stadium in Queens, was under construction. The Polo Grounds were the site of two baseball-related deaths: the first of Ray Chapman in 1920 after being hit in the head by a pitch from Carl Mays, and the second of spectator Bernard Doyle in 1950, accidentally killed by a 14-year-old boy who had fired his .45 caliber pistol into the air from his apartment on Edgecombe Avenue.

Before the Yankees played at the Polo Grounds, they played at Hilltop Park on Broadway between 165th Street and 168th Street from 1903 to 1912; at the time they were known as the New York Highlanders. On May 15, 1912, after being heckled for several innings, then-Detroit Tigers player Ty Cobb leaped the fence and attacked his tormentor. He was suspended indefinitely by league president Ban Johnson, but his suspension was eventually reduced to 10 days and $50. A historically outstanding pitching performance took place at Hilltop Park, when on September 4, 1908, 20-year-old Washington Senators-player Walter Johnson shut out the Highlanders for three consecutive games. In 1928 the park became the Columbia University Medical Center, a major hospital complex.

Washington Heights has been the childhood residence of many baseball stars, including former Yankee star Alex Rodriguez, who was born in the neighborhood to Dominican parents. Rod Carew and Manny Ramírez were two famous players who immigrated to the neighborhood as teenagers and attended George Washington High School (Carew during the 1960s and Ramírez during the 1980s). The New York Yankees&#x27; Lou Gehrig grew up in the neighborhood after moving out of Yorkville with his family, attending PS 132 during the 1910s. Legendary baseball broadcaster Vin Scully also grew up in the Washington Heights.

===Modern===

The New Balance Track and Field Center, located in the Fort Washington Avenue Armory, maintains an Olympic-caliber track that is one of the fastest in the world. Starting in January 2012, the Millrose Games have been held there, after having been held at the second, third, and current Madison Square Gardens from 1914 to 2011. To encourage physical activity and healthy eating, a partnership of local politicians, schools, and community organizers have organized the annual &quot;Uptown Games&quot; for children grades 1 to 8 at the Armory. Also at the Armory is the National Track and Field Hall of Fame, along with the Charles B. Rangel Technology &amp; Learning Center for middle and high school students; the facility is operated by the Armory Foundation, which was created in 1993. The Armory is the starting point for the annual Washington Heights Salsa, Blues, and Shamrocks 5K, founded in 1999 by Peter M. Walsh of Coogan&#x27;s Restaurant but is now run by the New York Road Runners.

==Parks and recreation==
Washington Heights and Inwood collectively have over of parkland, representing over a third of the neighborhoods&#x27; total area.

===Fort Washington Park===

Washington Heights&#x27; Fort Washington Park runs from 155th Street to Dyckman Street along the Hudson River, meeting the George Washington Bridge at Jeffrey&#x27;s Hook (around 178th Street). The 184-acre park was originally designed in 1873 by Fredrick Law Olmsted along with Riverside Park and Morningside Park, and most of the park was acquired via eminent domain between 1896 and 1927. Although it was initially connected with Fort Tryon Park to the east (a condition for John D. Rockefeller Jr.&#x27;s donation of the Fort Tryon parkland), the 1937 construction of the Henry Hudson Parkway separated the two parks.

Sitting just underneath the George Washington Bridge is the Little Red Lighthouse, which was originally built in 1917 in Sandy Hook, New Jersey before being moved to aid with navigation in the Hudson River during the 1920s. After the George Washington Bridge opened in 1931, the lighthouse became obsolete, and the United States Coast Guard began planning to dismantle and auction it. After a public outcry, contributed to by Hildegarde Swift&#x27;s popular children&#x27;s book &quot;The Little Red Lighthouse and the Great Gray Bridge,&quot; the lighthouse was instead given to the city government in 1951. Having undergone renovation in 1986 and again in 2000, the lighthouse is available for tours and is honored in the annual Little Red Lighthouse Festival.

===Fort Tryon Park===

Occupying a 67-acre area south of Inwood Hill Park between Broadway and the Henry Hudson Parkway, Fort Tryon Park&#x27;s history began with John D. Rockefeller Jr.&#x27;s purchase of the Hays, Shaefer, Libbey, and Billings estates in 1917 for $2 million (equivalent to $ million in ). Rockefeller hired Frederick Law Olmsted Jr. (the son of Fort Washington Park&#x27;s planner) to design the park in 1927, and in 1931 Mayor James Walker accepted his donation of the parkland, to be developed primarily at Rockefeller&#x27;s expense. Opening in 1935, the park&#x27;s picturesque views of the Palisades across the Hudson River were maintained by another Rockefeller purchase there with the aim of preventing construction, preserved as part of Palisades Interstate Park.

As part of his Fort Tryon donation, Rockefeller reserved in the center of the park for the Metropolitan Museum of Art to develop the Cloisters. The original Cloisters museum, a collection of medieval art owned by George Grey Barnard and located on upper Fort Washington Avenue, was purchased by the Metropolitan with Rockefeller funds in 1925. After Fort Tryon Park&#x27;s opening in 1935, construction began for the new Cloisters building using elements shipped from abbeys in southern France and Catalonia, based on designs by Charles Collens. Added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1978, the museum has a vast collection of Romanesque and Gothic art, including the &quot;Hunt of the Unicorn&quot; tapestries, purchased by Rockefeller for $1 million in 1922.

One of Fort Tryon Park&#x27;s biggest annual events is the Medieval Festival, a collaboration between the Parks Department and the Washington Heights and Inwood Development Corporation that has taken place at the park since 1983. The event is free, relying on a mix of private and public sponsors as well as donations, and draws an average of 60,000 people for an afternoon of medieval-themed arts, activities, and food.

===Highbridge Park===

Highbridge Park, a 160-acre park with heavily wooded areas and views of the Harlem River, lies on Washington Heights&#x27; western cliffside from 155th Street to Dyckman Street, cut off from the waterfront by the Harlem River Drive. Unlike Washington Heights&#x27; other major parks, Highbridge had no prior design but was assembled piecemeal by the city through condemnation, the majority being acquired from 1895 to 1901. In the park&#x27;s southern extreme lies Coogan&#x27;s Bluff, which in the time of the Polo Grounds offered a vantage point for watching baseball games without paying for tickets. The park&#x27;s northernmost Fort George Hill section was gained through the condemnation of Fort George Amusement Park, a trolley park built in 1895 that was burned twice by 1913. In 2007, the Parks Department collaborated with the New York City Mountain Bike Association to open a network of mountain bike trails in this section of the park.

Highbridge Park is home to three New York City landmarks: its namesake the High Bridge, the High Bridge Water Tower, and the Highbridge Play Center. The High Bridge, New York City&#x27;s oldest remaining bridge, was built in 1848 as part of the Croton Aqueduct system connecting the Bronx to Manhattan at 174th Street and, since 2015, has been active as a bridge for pedestrians and cyclists. The bridge&#x27;s accompanying water tower was also an integral part of New York City&#x27;s water system until 1949.
Built on a former reservoir in front of the High Bridge Water Tower, the Highbridge Play Center is best known for its pool, one of many Works Progress Administration-funded outdoor pools opened in the summer of 1936.

===Other parks===

Washington Heights is also home to the following smaller parks:
* Bennett Parklocation of the highest natural point in Manhattan
* J. Hood Wright Park
* Mitchel Square Parksite of the Washington Heights and Inwood World War I memorial by Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney
* Amelia Gorman Parkclosed for retaining wall repairs since 2017 and abandoned except upper plaza (as of January 2024)
* McKenna Square

==Landmarks and attractions==

The current NewYork–Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center occupies the former site of Hilltop Park, the home of the New York Highlanders – later the New York Yankees – from 1903 to 1912. Across the street is the Fort Washington Avenue Armory&#x27;s New Balance Track and Field Center, an indoor track home to the National Track &amp; Field Hall of Fame.

Audubon Terrace, a cluster of eight distinguished Beaux Arts and Renaissance Revival buildings constructed between 1904 and 1930, is located on Broadway between 155th and 156th streets. Named for John James Audubon due to his land holdings in the Audubon Park Historic District, the complex was envisioned as a cultural center by its founder Archer Milton Huntington and almost entirely designed by his cousin Charles Pratt Huntington. A National Historic Landmark, the Audubon Terrace is home to the Hispanic Society of America, the American Academy of Arts and Letters, the Our Lady of Esperanza Church, and Boricua College. Despite their unique decor and expansive collections, its museums have long struggled with attracting visitors due to their non-central location; the American Geographical Society, the Heye Collection of the National Museum of the American Indian, and the American Numismatic Society all previously occupied Audubon Terrace but have since moved their collections elsewhere.

Overlooking Coogan&#x27;s Bluff between 160th and 162nd streets in the Jumel Terrace Historic District, the Morris–Jumel Mansion has the distinction of being Manhattan&#x27;s oldest surviving house. Headquartered by George Washington in 1776 before being taken by the British and Hessians, the mansion was built in 1765 by British colonel Roger Morris and in 1810 became property of Eliza Jumel. Jumel became one of the wealthiest women in the city after the death of her husband Stephen in 1832, and was later wife of Aaron Burr until his death in 1836.

Designated a landmark by the National Register of Historic Places, the house is owned and maintained as a museum by the Department of Parks and Recreation. At the time of its purchase by the Jumels in 1810, there were rumors that the mansion was haunted by a Hessian ghost. After Eliza Jumel&#x27;s death she became the main focus of paranormal suspicions, partly due to rumors that she caused her first husband Stephen to die by falling from a carriage onto a pitchfork. In the modern day, it has been investigated as a haunted house on the Today Show, Haunted USA, and Ghost Adventures. &quot;Hamilton&quot; playwright Lin-Manuel Miranda sat in Aaron Burr&#x27;s room to write of many of the hit musical&#x27;s songs.

The Paul Robeson Home, located on the corner of Edgecombe Avenue and 160th Street, is a National Historic Landmark building. Part of Washington Heights&#x27; historically Black southeastern area, the building is known for its famous African American residents including actor Paul Robeson, musician Count Basie, and boxer Joe Louis.

The Audubon Ballroom was originally a vaudeville and movie theater, built by William Fox of the Fox Film Corporation on the corner of Broadway and 165th Street. Since the 1930s the theater had been used as a meeting space for unions and other organizations, and in the 1950s hosted the annual New York Mardi Gras festival. The building acquired its greatest historical significance on February 21, 1965, when Malcolm X was assassinated there during a rally of the Organization of Afro-American Unity. The theater was seized by the city for unpaid back taxes in 1967 and, in the late 1980s, was planned for demolition in order to build a medical research center for Columbia University. After pushback by community members and Columbia students, the university reached a compromise in 1990 to restore part of the original facade and ballroom. , the building houses Columbia&#x27;s Mary Woodard Lasker Biomedical Research Building in addition to the Malcolm X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center, which houses documents related to the life and work of the two civil rights activists.

The United Palace was built in 1930 as the Loew&#x27;s 175th Street Theater, designed primarily by Thomas W. Lamb (the same architect of the Audubon Ballroom) and featuring interior design work by Harold Rambusch. Originally a theater, it was bought in 1969 by televangelist Reverend Ike and became a church for the United Church Science of Living Institute. Made a New York City landmark in 2016, the United Palace also acts as a cultural center, hosting films and live performances .

In 2022, the City University of New York&#x27;s Dominican Studies Institute proposed adding the Washington Heights-Dominican Cultural Historic District to the National Register of Historic Places; if designated, the district would run between 155th and 200th streets. The New York State Board for Historic Preservation voted in September 2024 to recommend that the district be added to the NRHP, though many local residents opposed the designation because it excluded other ethnic groups.

==Local newspaper==

&quot;Manhattan Times&quot; is a free English/Spanish bilingual community newspaper serving Spanish-speaking areas of Upper Manhattan, including Washington Heights. It was founded in 1999 by Luís A. Miranda Jr., Roberto Ramírez Sr., and David Keisman. The newspaper features stories about news and events of interest to residents on the city and neighborhood level, and is funded in part by private advertisements in addition to public service announcements.

==Police and crime==

Washington Heights is served by two precincts of the NYPD. The area south of 179th Street is served by the 33rd Precinct, located at 2207 Amsterdam Avenue, while the 34th Precinct, located at 4295 Broadway, serves the north side of the neighborhood along with Inwood.

The precinct was split in 1994 to increase police presence in Washington Heights at a time of very high crime rates, but crime has fallen drastically since then. , the neighborhood has a non-fatal assault hospitalization rate of 43 per 100,000 people (compared to 59 per 100,000 citywide) and an incarceration rate of 482 per 100,000 adults (425 per 100,000 citywide).

In 2023, the 34th Precinct reported 4 murders, 14 rapes, 215 robberies, 349 felony assaults, 151 burglaries, 575 grand larcenies, and 231 grand larcenies auto. The number of crimes committed in these categories fell by 30.2% between 1998 and 2023. In the same year, the 33rd Precinct reported 8 murders, 8 rapes, 177 robberies, 243 felony assaults, 115 burglaries, 359 grand larcenies, and 142 grand larcenies auto. The number of crimes committed in these categories fell by 36.8% between 1998 and 2023.

==Fire safety==

Washington Heights is served by three New York City Fire Department (FDNY) fire stations:
* Engine Company 67518 West 170th Street (a New York City landmark)
* Engine Company 84/Ladder Company 34513 West 161st Street (a New York City landmark)
* Engine Company 93/Ladder Company 45/Battalion 13515 West 181st Street

In addition, FDNY EMS Station 13 is located at 501 West 172nd Street.

==Health==

Data on health indicators is compiled for each community district in the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene&#x27;s Community Health Profiles, the most recent of which was released in 2018. In Manhattan Community District 12 (Washington Heights and Inwood), there are 73 preterm births per 1,000 live births (compared to 87 per 1,000 citywide), and 23.3 births to teenage mothers per 1,000 live births (19.3 per 1,000 citywide). The population of uninsured residents is estimated to be 14% (12% citywide).

The concentration of fine particulate matter, the deadliest type of air pollutant, in Community District 12 is ( citywide). 13% of residents are smokers (14% citywide), 26% are obese (24% citywide), 13% are diabetic (11% citywide), and 28% have high blood pressure (28% citywide). Additionally, 24% of children are obese (20% citywide). 81% of residents eat some fruits and vegetables every day (87% citywide). In 2018, 68% of residents described their health as &quot;good&quot;, &quot;very good&quot;, or &quot;excellent&quot; (78% citywide). For every supermarket, there are an estimated 13 bodegas.

, the overall life expectancy of Community District 12 is 84, 2.8 years greater than the citywide average and 5.3 years greater than the nationwide average. Its rates of premature death from cancer (39.1 per 100,000) and heart disease (26.1 per 100,000) are significantly lower than the citywide rates, although its drug-related death rate (9.6 per 100,000) is similar and suicide death rate (7.2 per 100,000) is higher.

NewYork–Presbyterian/Columbia University Irving Medical Center opened in 1928 as Columbia–Presbyterian, one of the first academic medical centers in the United States. It was known as the Columbia–Presbyterian Medical Center until 1998. The complex, located between 165th and 168th streets west of Broadway, contains the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons the medical school of Columbia University. The campus also contains the Mailman School of Public Health, as well as Morgan Stanley Children&#x27;s Hospital, New York City&#x27;s only stand-alone children&#x27;s hospital. In addition, NewYork–Presbyterian&#x27;s Allen Hospital is located in Inwood. 

==Politics==
Politically, Washington Heights is in New York&#x27;s 13th congressional district, represented by Democrat Adriano Espaillat . It is also part of the 31st State Senate District, represented by Democrat Robert Jackson, and the 71st and 72nd State Assembly districts, represented respectively by Democrats Al Taylor and Manny De Los Santos. In the City Council, the neighborhood is part of the 7th and 10th districts, represented respectively by Democrats Shaun Abreu and Carmen De La Rosa.

==Post offices and ZIP Codes==

Washington Heights is located in three ZIP Codes. From south to north, they are 10032 (between 155th and 173rd streets), 10033 (between 173rd and 187th streets) and 10040 (between 187th and Dyckman streets).

The United States Postal Service operates four post offices in Washington Heights:
* Audubon Station – 511 West 165th Street
* Fort George Station – 4558 Broadway
* Fort Washington Station – 556 West 158th Street
* Washington Bridge Station – 518 West 181st Street

== Education ==
Community District 12 has fewer college graduates and more high school dropouts compared to the borough and city as a whole. 38% of residents age 25 and older have a college education or higher (compared to 43% citywide), and 29% did not finish high school (19% citywide). , 19% of elementary school students missed twenty or more days per school year (20% citywide).

Washington Heights is part of District 6, along with Inwood and Hamilton Heights. Of the district&#x27;s 19,939 students , 85% are Hispanic/Latino, 7% are Black, 5% are White, and 3% are any other race; in addition, 29% are English Language Learners, and 22% are Students with Disabilities. Of all students in the cohort set to graduate in 2019, 74% in District 6 did so by August 2019 (77% citywide). The district rate was significantly lower for males (69%), English Language Learners (52%), and Students with Disabilities (49%). , one-quarter of District 6 students are English Language Learners (defined as students who require support to learn English as a second language), of whom 96% are Hispanic or Latino.

===Schools===
====Public schools====

The New York City Department of Education operates public schools in Washington Heights as part of Community School District 6. As with most other school districts in New York City, District 6 has both zoned schools, which take students mainly from a small area in the neighborhood, and unzoned schools, which admit students from anywhere in the district. Zoned public elementary and elementary/middle schools include:

* PS 28 Wright Brothers (grades 3K–5)
* PS 189 (grades 3K–5)
* PS 48 PO Michael J Buczek (grades 3K–5)
* PS 128 Audubon (grades 3K–5)
* PS 173 (grades 3K–5)
* PS 4 Duke Ellington (grades 3K–5)
* PS 8 Luis Belliard (grades 3K–5)
* PS 115 Alexander Humboldt (grades PK–5)
* PS 152 Dyckman Valley (grades PK–5)
* Dos Puentes Elementary School (grades K–5)
* PS 132 Juan Pablo Duarte (grades K–5)
* PS/IS 187 Hudson Cliffs (grades PK–8)

Unzoned elementary and elementary/middle schools include:
* Castle Bridge School (grades PK–5)
* Professor Juan Bosch Public School (grades K–5)

Zoned middle schools include:
* JHS 143 Eleanor Roosevelt (grades 6–8)
* MS 319 Maria Teresa (grades 6–8)
* MS 322 (grades 6–8)
* MS 324 Patria Mirabal (grades 6–8)

Unzoned middle and middle/high schools include:

* Harbor Heights (grades 6–8)
* Community Math and Science Prep (grades 6–8)
* IS 528 Bea Fuller Rodgers (grades 6–8)
* City College Academy of the Arts (grades 6–12)
* Community Health Academy of the Heights (grades 6–12)

The former George Washington High School, built in 1923, is located between 192nd and 193rd streets directly west of Highbridge Park. It became the George Washington Educational Campus in 1999 when it was split into four smaller schools:
* The College Academy (grades 9–12)
* High School for Media and Communications (grades 9–12)
* High School for Law and Public Service (grades 9–12)
* High School for Health Careers and Sciences (grades 9–12)

The Gregorio Luperón High School for Science and Mathematics was founded in 1994 and serves a student body of newly arrived Spanish-speakers. Washington Heights also has the unzoned Washington Heights Expeditionary Learning School, serving grades PK to 12.

====Charter and parochial schools====
Charter schools include:
* WHIN Community Charter School (grades K–3)
* Success Academy Washington Heights (grades K–4)
* KIPP Washington Heights (grades K–8)
* School in the Square (grade 6–8)

Catholic schools under the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York include:
* Incarnation School (grades 3K–8)
* St. Elizabeth School (grades 3K–8)

Jewish schools include:
* Yeshiva Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch (grades 3K, PK, and 1–12)
* Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy (grades 9–12)

===Higher education===
University education in Washington Heights includes Yeshiva University and Boricua College. Located between 184th and 186th streets east of Broadway, Yeshiva University&#x27;s Wilf Campus was founded in 1928 and is the Jewish institution&#x27;s main campus; it was originally envisioned with Moorish Revival aesthetic, although most of its buildings ended up with a modern design. Schools within the campus include Yeshiva College, the Syms School of Business, and the Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy high school. Boricua College, whose Manhattan campus is located on 156th and Broadway in the Audubon Terrace complex, is a small private college founded in 1975 to serve the city&#x27;s Puerto Rican population.

The medical campus of Columbia University hosts the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the College of Dental Medicine, the Mailman School of Public Health, the School of Nursing, and the biomedical programs of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, which offer Masters and Doctorate degrees in several fields. These schools are among the departments that compose the Columbia University Irving Medical Center.

CUNY in the Heights, a higher education program of the Borough of Manhattan Community College of the City University of New York, is actually located in Inwood on the corner of 213th Street and Broadway, despite its name. In the same building, the CUNY XPress Immigration Center is a branch of their Citizenship Now! program, which offers immigrants free legal services to help in attaining citizenship.

===Libraries===
The New York Public Library (NYPL) operates two branches in Washington Heights:
* The Fort Washington branch is located at 535 West 179th Street. The three-story Carnegie library opened in 1979.
* The Washington Heights branch is located at 1000 St. Nicholas Avenue. It was founded in 1868 as a subscription-based library and moved twice before it relocated to its current four-story structure in 1914, owing to generous donations from James Hood Wright.

==Transportation==
=== Bridges and highways ===

Washington Heights is connected to Fort Lee, New Jersey across the Hudson River via the Othmar Ammann-designed George Washington Bridge, the world&#x27;s busiest motor vehicle bridge. Upon completion in 1931, it was also the world&#x27;s longest suspension bridge. The Pier Luigi Nervi-designed George Washington Bridge Bus Terminal is located at the Manhattan end between 178th and 179th streets, extending between Fort Washington and Wadsworth avenues. After its construction in 1963, Nervi won an award for the terminal&#x27;s unique use of concrete, including its huge butterfly-like ventilation ducts. The station provides service to North Jersey via NJ Transit Bus Operations; Paterson and Jersey City via Spanish Transportation; the Northeastern Corridor via Greyhound; and upstate New York via Rockland Coaches and OurBus.

The Trans-Manhattan Expressway, part of Interstate 95, runs for from the George Washington Bridge in a trench between 178th and 179th streets. The construction of the George Washington Bridge and the Trans-Manhattan Expressway required the demolition of all apartment buildings between 178th and 179th streets, in addition to many west of Cabrini Boulevard between 177th and 181st streets, evicting over 1,000 families. To the east, the highway leads to the Alexander Hamilton Bridge, completed in 1963, which crosses the Harlem River and connects to the Bronx via the Cross Bronx Expressway. The Washington Bridge, built in 1888, crosses the river just north of the Alexander Hamilton Bridge and connects to both the Trans-Manhattan and Cross Bronx expressways.

Crossing the river at 175th Street in Manhattan, the High Bridge is the oldest bridge in New York City still in existence. The bridge was completed in 1848 to carry the Croton Aqueduct as part of the city&#x27;s water system; a promenade was added in 1864 that stayed in use up until the 1970s, although the aqueduct function was discontinued in 1949. In the late 1920s, several of its stone piers were replaced with a steel arch that spanned the river to allow ships to more easily navigate under the bridge. In June 2015, the High Bridge reopened as a pedestrian and bicycle bridge after a three-year rehabilitation project.

For transport northward and southward across Manhattan, Washington Heights is connected with two other significant highways: the Harlem River Drive by the Harlem River and the Henry Hudson Parkway (part of New York State Route 9A) by the Hudson River. The Harlem River Drive began as a horse carriage roadway in 1898 and was converted into a highway exclusively for cars during the 1950s. The road has since blocked access to the waterfront from Highbridge Park, although the Harlem River Greenway (planned for renovation ) can still be accessed from 155th Street and Dyckman Street. The Henry Hudson Parkway, built in 1936, is also surrounded by parkland but leaves Fort Washington Park with a large amount of waterfront space on its western side, while the Hudson River Greenway lies on its eastern side. Running above-ground between the highway and the greenway is the Empire Service Amtrak line, whose closest stops are at Yonkers and Penn Station.

===Subway===
Washington Heights is well served by the New York City Subway. On the IND Eighth Avenue Line, service is available at the 155th Street and 163rd Street–Amsterdam Avenue stations (), the 168th Street station (), and the 175th Street, 181st Street, and 190th Street stations (). The IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line () has stops at 157th Street, 168th Street, 181st Street, and 191st Street.

Out of these stations, only 175th Street is fully accessible, although the tunnel to the George Washington Bridge Bus Station at its 177th Street exit is not. The 168th Street station is accessible only for the entrance to the A and C trains. To help residents navigate the steep hills of the neighborhood&#x27;s northwestern area, the 181st Street and 190th Street IND stations provide free elevator service between Fort Washington Avenue and the Broadway valley below. On the northeastern side, the 191st Street station also has an elevator to St. Nicholas Avenue and a tunnel running to Broadway.

The 181st Street and 190th Street IND stations have several unique entrances and exits, many featuring a stone brick design inspired by the Overlook Terrace cliffside. The 168th Street, 190th Street, and both 181st Street stations are listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The 191st Street and 190th Street stations have the distinction of being the deepest in the entire subway system by distance to ground level, at 180 and 140 feet respectively. In 1951, researchers from New York University found that the 190th Street station would provide shelter from nuclear fallout.

===Bus===
Several MTA Regional Bus Operations bus routes serve Washington Heights:

* : to 238th Street station () via 181st Street and University Avenue
* and Bx6 Select Bus Service: to Hunts Point Cooperative Market via Riverside Drive, 155th, 161st and 163rd Streets and Hunts Point Avenue
* : to College of Mount Saint Vincent via Broadway and Riverdale Avenue
* : to Parkchester station via 181st, 170th, and 174th Streets
* : to Bronx Terminal Market or George Washington Bridge Bus Terminal via 181st Street and Ogden Avenue
* : to Crotona Park East, Bronx via 181st Street, 167th, and 169th Streets
* : to Castle Hill, Bronx via 181st Street, Tremont Avenue, and White Plains Road
* : to Greenwich Village via Fifth/Madison Avenues, Edgecombe Avenue, and Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard
* : to Greenwich Village or Fort George via Fifth/Madison Avenues and St. Nicholas Avenue
* : to Midtown South or Fort Tryon Park/The Cloisters via Fifth/Madison Avenues, Fort Washington Avenue, and Broadway
* : to Midtown South via Broadway and Riverside Drive
* : to Columbus Circle via Frederick Douglass Boulevard
* : to Lenox Hill or Fort Tryon Park via Third/Lexington Avenues, Harlem River Drive, 178th/179th Streets, and Fort Washington Avenue
* : to Manhattanville or Inwood via Broadway, St. Nicholas Avenue, and Amsterdam Avenue
* : to East Village or Fort George via Third/Lexington Avenues and Amsterdam Avenue
==Notable people==

Notable residents of Washington Heights include:
* Pedro Alvarez (born 1987), baseball player who was drafted second overall by the Pittsburgh Pirates in the 2008 Major League Baseball Draft.
* Alex Arias (born 1967), Dominican-American former Major League Baseball player.
* George Grey Barnard (1863–1938), sculptor.
* Harry Belafonte (1927–2023), calypso singer and Grammy winner.
* Ward Bennett (1917–2003), designer, artist and sculptor.
* Dellin Betances (born 1988), MLB pitcher for the New York Mets.
* Jocelyn Bioh, Ghanaian-American writer, playwright and actor.
* Stanley Bosworth (1927–2011), founding headmaster of Saint Ann&#x27;s School in Brooklyn, which he headed from 1965 to 2004.
* Tally Brown (1934–1989), singer and actress in films by Andy Warhol and other underground filmmakers.
* Robert John Burke (born 1960), actor.
* Maria Callas (1923–1977), Greek-American opera singer.
* Cardi B (born 1992), rapper, songwriter, actress and television personality.
* Jerry Craft (born 1963), children&#x27;s book author and illustrator / syndicated cartoonist and creator of the Mama&#x27;s Boyz comic strip.
* Rod Carew (born 1945), former professional baseball player.
* Frances Conroy (born 1953), actress.
* Nelson Antonio Denis (born 1954), former member of the New York State Assembly.
* Morton Deutsch (1920–2017), social psychologist who was one of the founding fathers of the field of conflict resolution.
* David Dinkins (1927–2020), Mayor of New York City 1990–1994.
* Jim Dwyer (1957–2020), columnist and reporter at &quot;The New York Times&quot;.
* Laurence Fishburne (born 1961), Academy Award-nominated actor.
* Luis Flores (born 1981), former NBA point guard.
* Hillel Furstenberg (born 1935), mathematician known for his application of probability theory and ergodic theory methods to other areas of mathematics.
* Lou Gehrig (1903–1941), professional baseball player for the New York Yankees.
* Elias Goldberg (1886–1978), New York painter, most of his city paintings focus on the area of Washington Heights. Mr. Goldberg exhibited at the legendary Charles Egan Gallery.
* Leo Gorcey (1917–1969), member of the original cast of &quot;Dead End&quot;, and memorably outspoken member of the Dead End Kids / East Side Kids / The Bowery Boys.
* Alan Greenspan (born 1926), 13th Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.
* Hex Hector (born 1965), Grammy Award-winning remixer and producer.
* Jacob K. Javits (1904–1986), United States Senator from 1957 to 1981.
* Henry Kissinger (1923–2023), former National Security Advisor and United States Secretary of State.
* Paul Kolton (1923–2010), chairman of the American Stock Exchange.
* Joshua Lederberg (1925–2008), geneticist who received the 1958 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for work in bacterial genetics, was born in Montclair.
* Stan Lee (1922–2018), creator of Spider-Man, X-Men, The Incredible Hulk.
* Frankie Lymon (1942–1968), lead singer of The Teenagers, best known for their hit &quot;Why Do Fools Fall in Love?&quot;
* Lin-Manuel Miranda (born 1980), actor, and Tony Award-winning composer, and lyricist, best known for writing and acting in the Broadway musicals &quot;In the Heights&quot; and &quot;Hamilton&quot;.
* Theodore Edgar McCarrick (born 1930), Cardinal who served as Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Washington (2001–2006).
* Daniel D. McCracken (1930–2011), early computer pioneer and author.
* Knox Martin (born 1923), painter, sculptor and muralist.
* Mims (born 1981), Jamaican-American rapper.
* Andy Mineo (born 1988), rapper, singer, producer, director, and minister signed to Reach Records.
* Karina Pasian (born 1991), recording R&amp;B singer from Def Jam Records.
* Manny Pérez (born 1969), Dominican actor, appeared in &quot;Third Watch&quot;.
* Jim Powers (born 1958), retired professional wrestler best known for his appearances with the World Wrestling Federation from 1987 to 1994.
* Freddie Prinze (1954–1977), Hungarian-Puerto Rican stand-up comedian, best known for his 1970s TV series &quot;Chico and the Man&quot; co-starring Jack Albertson.
* Manny Ramírez (born 1972), Dominican baseball player for the Los Angeles Dodgers.
* Kenny Rankin (1940–2009), musician, singer and songwriter.
* Alex Rodriguez (born 1975), Dominican-American baseball player for the New York Yankees.
* James R. Russell (born 1953), scholar and Harvard University professor.
* Merlin Santana (1976–2002), Dominican-American actor.
* Vin Scully (1927—2022), sportscaster for the Los Angeles Dodgers.
* William &quot;Bill&quot; Shea (1907–1991), lawyer, instrumental in the founding of the New York Mets and New York Islanders, namesake of Shea Stadium
* Scott Stringer (born 1960), New York City Comptroller and Borough President of Manhattan.
* Allen Swift (1924–2010), actor, writer and magician, best known as a voiceover artist who voiced characters Simon Bar Sinister and Riff-Raff on the &quot;Underdog&quot; cartoon show
* TAKI 183, New York City graffitist.
* Tiny Tim (1932–1996), singer and ukulele player, a novelty act of the 1960s best known for his rendition of &quot;Tiptoe Through the Tulips&quot;.
* Leslie Uggams, actress and singer best known for her appearances in &quot;Roots&quot; and &quot;Hallelujah, Baby!&quot;
* George Weinberg (1929–2017), psychologist and author, who coined the term &quot;homophobia&quot; in 1965.
* Joel Westheimer, professor of citizenship education at the University of Ottawa
* Ruth Westheimer (1928–2024, born Karola Siegel; known as &quot;Dr. Ruth&quot;) German-American sex therapist, talk show host, author, professor, Holocaust survivor, and former Haganah sniper.
* Jerry Wexler (1917–2008), music producer who coined the term &quot;Rhythm and blues&quot;.
* Guy Williams (1924–1989), Italian American actor.
* Rafael Yglesias (born 1954), novelist and screenwriter.
==In popular culture==
* The musical &quot;In the Heights&quot;, which ran on Broadway from 2008 to 2011, is set in Washington Heights. Its 2021 film adaptation was shot in many Washington Heights locations, including the 191st Street station tunnel.
* The HBO series &quot;The Deuce&quot; chose Amsterdam Avenue between 164th and 166th streets to recreate Times Square.
* The 2002 film &quot;Washington Heights&quot; starring Manny Pérez is the story of a young man trying to escape the cultural barriers of Washington Heights to make it as an illustrator.
* The 2005 documentary &quot;Mad Hot Ballroom&quot; features students from PS 115 in Washington Heights.
* The MTV series &quot;Washington Heights&quot;, which did not continue beyond 2013, is set in the neighborhood.
* The soap opera &quot;Ryan&#x27;s Hope&quot; was set in Washington Heights and aired on ABC from 1975 to 1989.
* Parts of the 2010 film &quot;Salt&quot; were filmed in the neighborhood, in particular at the 13-story Riviera, a 1910 Beaux-Arts style co-op on 157th Street and Riverside Drive.
* The 2008 film &quot;Pride and Glory&quot; centers on police corruption in a fictional precinct of Washington Heights.
* The 1993 film &quot;The Saint of Fort Washington&quot; is not entirely geographically accurate, but is set in the neighborhood, with the Fort Washington Avenue Armory playing a large role in the plot.
* The 1968 film &quot;Coogan&#x27;s Bluff&quot; features a scene in which Clint Eastwood chases the criminal he is to bring back to Arizona through the Cloisters.
* The 2007 film &quot;The Brave One&quot; was filmed in some sections of Washington Heights; she and her boyfriend are attacked in a scene filmed in Fort Tryon Park, and the final scene with Terrence Howard was filmed on Elwood Street between Broadway and Nagle Avenue.
* The 2013 film &quot;Frances Ha&quot; ends with the main character moving to Washington Heights.
==References==
Citations
Further reading
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Washington Heights &amp; Inwood - The Official Guide to New York City
* Manhattan Community District 12 Profile
* Manhattan Times News</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1370292" start="0" end="18" title="Washington Heights, Manhattan" label="Washington Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="65" end="72" title="Borough (New York City)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="76" end="85" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="89" end="102" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438808" start="120" end="135" title="Fort Washington (Manhattan)" label="Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729185" start="172" end="193" title="Bennett Park (New York City)" label="highest natural point"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="210" end="226" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="288" end="314" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189533" start="350" end="356" title="Inwood, Manhattan" label="Inwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318531" start="376" end="390" title="Dyckman Street" label="Dyckman Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="395" end="401" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706137" start="421" end="433" title="155th Street (Manhattan)" label="155th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q597451" start="442" end="454" title="Harlem River" label="Harlem River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166847" start="459" end="478" title="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Bluff" label="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="503" end="515" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344719" start="747" end="770" title="IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line" label="Broadway–Seventh Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373436" start="775" end="788" title="IND Eighth Avenue Line" label="Eighth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="802" end="822" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="875" end="880" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16129257" start="885" end="901" title="Eastern European Jews" label="Eastern European"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="981" end="992" title="German Jews" label="German Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150312" start="994" end="1009" title="Greek Americans" label="Greek Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258666" start="1011" end="1024" title="Stateside Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="1026" end="1041" title="Cuban Americans" label="Cuban Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140588" start="1047" end="1064" title="Russian Americans" label="Russian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989605" start="1104" end="1124" title="white flight" label="White residents left"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290725" start="1198" end="1217" title="Dominican Americans" label="Dominican Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758527" start="1464" end="1484" title="crack epidemic in the United States" label="crack cocaine crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="1627" end="1641" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q975653" start="1846" end="1875" title="NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital" label="NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415975" start="1876" end="1910" title="Columbia University Medical Center" label="Columbia University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048851" start="1956" end="1974" title="Yeshiva University" label="Yeshiva University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910878" start="1979" end="1994" title="Boricua College" label="Boricua College"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148520" start="2051" end="2071" title="Fort Washington Park (Manhattan)" label="Fort Washington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757846" start="2073" end="2088" title="Highbridge Park" label="Highbridge Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190346" start="2094" end="2109" title="Fort Tryon Park" label="Fort Tryon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739789" start="2148" end="2169" title="Little Red Lighthouse" label="Little Red Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754953" start="2175" end="2198" title="High Bridge Water Tower" label="High Bridge Water Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138030" start="2204" end="2217" title="the Cloisters" label="the Cloisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820259" start="2265" end="2280" title="Audubon Terrace" label="Audubon Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948466" start="2286" end="2306" title="Morris–Jumel Mansion" label="Morris–Jumel Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889018" start="2312" end="2325" title="United Palace" label="United Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820234" start="2331" end="2347" title="Audubon Ballroom" label="Audubon Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564794" start="2357" end="2386" title="Fort Washington Avenue Armory" label="Fort Washington Avenue Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q262494" start="2419" end="2450" title="Manhattan Community Board 12" label="Manhattan Community District 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="2468" end="2476" title="ZIP Code" label="ZIP Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="2558" end="2589" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q283207" start="2633" end="2662" title="New York City Fire Department" label="New York City Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="2695" end="2716" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q107389527" start="2724" end="2727" title="New York City&amp;#x27;s 7th City Council district" label="7th"/>
<link wikidata="Q107404915" start="2732" end="2736" title="New York City&amp;#x27;s 10th City Council district" label="10th"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299963" start="2869" end="2890" title="Woodland Period" label="Early Woodland Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739789" start="2965" end="2986" title="Little Red Lighthouse" label="Little Red Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252" start="3033" end="3051" title="Upper Manhattan" label="northern Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645114" start="3081" end="3093" title="Wecquaesgeek" label="Wecquaesgeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811930" start="3182" end="3191" title="Wappinger" label="Wappinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="3198" end="3204" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="3205" end="3220" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="3249" end="3257" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593583" start="3284" end="3303" title="St. Nicholas Avenue" label="St. Nicholas Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="3392" end="3405" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="3411" end="3426" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="3447" end="3453" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="3581" end="3586" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="3616" end="3621" title="Maize" label="Maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556538" start="3677" end="3682" title="Dutch colonization of the Americas" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190346" start="3947" end="3962" title="Fort Tryon Park" label="Fort Tryon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="4221" end="4227" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377132" start="4324" end="4340" title="Kieft&amp;#x27;s War" label="Kieft&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630469" start="4677" end="4694" title="New York Campaign" label="New York Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="4702" end="4719" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="4721" end="4746" title="George Washington" label="General George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="4754" end="4770" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824430" start="4829" end="4841" title="British Army during the American Revolutionary War" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q668595" start="4849" end="4873" title="Battle of Harlem Heights" label="Battle of Harlem Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q706755" start="5007" end="5032" title="Battle of Fort Washington" label="Battle of Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438808" start="5078" end="5093" title="Fort Washington (Manhattan)" label="Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729185" start="5203" end="5215" title="Bennett Park (New York City)" label="Bennett Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013261" start="5283" end="5303" title="Fort Lee, New Jersey" label="Fort Lee, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="5319" end="5331" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q700853" start="5423" end="5430" title="Hessian (soldier)" label="Hessian"/>
<link wikidata="Q88824" start="5439" end="5461" title="Wilhelm von Knyphausen" label="Wilhelm von Knyphausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580817" start="5575" end="5592" title="William Tryon" label="Sir William Tryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396241" start="5719" end="5734" title="Margaret Corbin" label="Margaret Corbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11273818" start="6098" end="6133" title="New York Provincial Congress" label="New York&amp;#x27;s Provincial Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="6150" end="6177" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="6221" end="6231" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q895455" start="6346" end="6359" title="Bowling Green (New York City)" label="Bowling Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133590" start="6373" end="6403" title="Evacuation Day (New York)" label="British evacuation of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="6413" end="6430" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753293" start="6798" end="6814" title="Coliseum Theatre (Washington Heights)" label="Coliseum Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q182882" start="7089" end="7107" title="John James Audubon" label="John James Audubon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589766" start="7222" end="7237" title="Riverside Drive (Manhattan)" label="Riverside Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948466" start="7457" end="7477" title="Morris–Jumel Mansion" label="Morris–Jumel Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994331" start="7649" end="7661" title="Roger Morris (British Army officer)" label="Roger Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362157" start="7841" end="7852" title="Eliza Jumel" label="Eliza Jumel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338968" start="7992" end="8005" title="The Palisades (Hudson River)" label="the Palisades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353450" start="8291" end="8321" title="William &amp;quot;Boss&amp;quot; Tweed" label="William &amp;quot;Boss&amp;quot; Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q772500" start="8484" end="8499" title="Charles Paterno" label="Charles Paterno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050335" start="8617" end="8631" title="Castle Village" label="Castle Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006141" start="8772" end="8789" title="C. K. G. Billings" label="C. K. G. Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="8855" end="8864" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q130388" start="9249" end="9265" title="Tenth Avenue (Manhattan)" label="Amsterdam Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784768" start="9280" end="9300" title="Third Avenue Railway" label="Third Avenue Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523955" start="9458" end="9492" title="Interborough Rapid Transit Company" label="Interborough Rapid Transit Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326824" start="9506" end="9523" title="Early history of the IRT subway" label="first subway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344719" start="9541" end="9569" title="IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line" label="Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049816" start="9590" end="9602" title="157th Street station" label="157th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981131" start="9604" end="9616" title="168th Street station (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="168th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570712" start="9618" end="9630" title="181st Street station (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="181st Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051404" start="9636" end="9650" title="Dyckman Street station (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="Dyckman Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q572625" start="9687" end="9707" title="191st Street station" label="191st Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11504311" start="9721" end="9735" title="infill station" label="infill station"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9917" end="9928" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193977" start="9943" end="9955" title="Audubon Park Historic District, New York City" label="Audubon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10239" end="10250" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063654" start="10378" end="10394" title="New Law Tenement" label="New Law Tenement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="10512" end="10527" title="Lower East Side" label="Lower East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251675" start="10856" end="10866" title="Protestantism in the United States" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="10952" end="10956" title="Judaism" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10961" end="10970" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097594" start="11442" end="11467" title="Independent Subway System" label="Independent Subway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373436" start="11481" end="11499" title="IND Eighth Avenue Line" label="Eighth Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102181" start="11523" end="11535" title="175th Street station (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="175th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442219" start="11537" end="11549" title="181st Street station (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="181st Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959768" start="11555" end="11567" title="190th Street station (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="190th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472255" start="11574" end="11596" title="Fort Washington Avenue" label="Fort Washington Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="11682" end="11692" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="11752" end="11757" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16129257" start="11762" end="11783" title="Eastern European Jews" label="Eastern European Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="11937" end="11947" title="German Jew" label="German Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="11958" end="11964" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490833" start="12052" end="12075" title="Frankfurt-on-the-Hudson" label="Frankfurt-on-the-Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="12223" end="12237" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12695" end="12707" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109629" start="12733" end="12748" title="Christian Front (United States)" label="Christian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="12786" end="12797" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455265" start="13529" end="13545" title="Hamilton Heights" label="Hamilton Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="14117" end="14132" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640573" start="14596" end="14616" title="555 Edgecombe Avenue" label="555 Edgecombe Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="15182" end="15194" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19025522" start="15196" end="15209" title="Kenneth Clark (psychologist)" label="Kenneth Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="15215" end="15226" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857393" start="15382" end="15392" title="Sugar Hill, Manhattan" label="Sugar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757846" start="15904" end="15919" title="Highbridge Pool" label="Highbridge Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="15923" end="15952" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989605" start="17690" end="17702" title="White flight" label="White flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258666" start="17868" end="17881" title="Stateside Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="17939" end="17945" title="Cuban Americans" label="Cubans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290725" start="17950" end="17960" title="Dominican Americans" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="18010" end="18017" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150312" start="18610" end="18615" title="Greek Americans" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q43081874" start="18694" end="18728" title="St. Spyridon Greek Orthodox Church" label="St. Spyridon Greek Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="19153" end="19159" title="Kashrut" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q147989" start="19415" end="19431" title="Joaquín Balaguer" label="Joaquín Balaguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q955457" start="19470" end="19489" title="Dominican Civil War" label="Dominican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q505311" start="19536" end="19575" title="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965" label="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="20250" end="20268" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="20447" end="20457" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="20682" end="20690" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="20691" end="20709" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270268" start="20827" end="20853" title="New York State Legislature" label="New York State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358895" start="20970" end="20977" title="Title I" label="Title I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757846" start="21856" end="21871" title="Highbridge Park" label="Highbridge Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="22084" end="22113" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697152" start="22123" end="22137" title="Lucienne Bloch" label="Lucienne Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="22243" end="22257" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="22259" end="22274" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q967938" start="22280" end="22293" title="Murray Jarvik" label="Murray Jarvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887762" start="22812" end="22841" title="United Federation of Teachers" label="United Federation of Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q85788687" start="22902" end="22921" title="New York City school boycott" label="1964 school boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q991273" start="22930" end="22956" title="New York City teachers&amp;#x27; strike of 1968" label="1968 teachers&amp;#x27; strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545975" start="23462" end="23498" title="George Washington Educational Campus" label="George Washington Educational Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455265" start="23824" end="23840" title="Hamilton Heights" label="Hamilton Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189533" start="23846" end="23852" title="Inwood, Manhattan" label="Inwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="24586" end="24596" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137429" start="24761" end="24771" title="Soviet Jew" label="Soviet Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="24899" end="24911" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="25049" end="25058" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="25111" end="25118" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334370" start="25124" end="25134" title="Ecuadorian Americans" label="Ecuadorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="25234" end="25250" title="Central American" label="Central American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147921" start="25253" end="25262" title="Colombian Americans" label="Colombian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="25269" end="25276" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="25517" end="25532" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="25562" end="25571" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758527" start="25789" end="25811" title="Crack epidemic" label="crack cocaine epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="25929" end="25955" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="26042" end="26055" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064037" start="26068" end="26089" title="Al D&amp;#x27;Amato" label="Alphonse D&amp;#x27;Amato"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="26210" end="26228" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821" start="26630" end="26654" title="George Washington Bridge" label="George Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="26722" end="26732" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420307" start="26808" end="26839" title="Santiago Luis Polanco Rodríguez" label="Santiago Luis Polanco Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="27692" end="27696" title="New York Police Department" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593583" start="27852" end="27873" title="St. Nicholas Avenue" label="Saint Nicholas Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="28014" end="28030" title="police brutality" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q467133" start="28318" end="28331" title="David Dinkins" label="David Dinkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="29033" end="29039" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q280190" start="29632" end="29642" title="freebasing" label="freebasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="30040" end="30044" title="New York City Police Department" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="30321" end="30329" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q130388" start="30334" end="30350" title="Tenth Avenue (Manhattan)" label="Amsterdam Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013341" start="30824" end="30854" title="New York Civil Liberties Union" label="New York Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190346" start="31085" end="31100" title="Fort Tryon Park" label="Fort Tryon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865642" start="31147" end="31179" title="1975 New York City fiscal crisis" label="1975 New York City fiscal crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894232" start="31197" end="31213" title="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation" label="Parks Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190346" start="31363" end="31384" title="Fort Tryon Park Trust" label="Fort Tryon Park Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013931" start="31393" end="31421" title="New York Restoration Project" label="New York Restoration Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757846" start="31562" end="31577" title="Highbridge Park" label="Highbridge Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138030" start="31788" end="31801" title="The Cloisters" label="The Cloisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="32234" end="32259" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="32469" end="32491" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="32550" end="32564" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="32606" end="32625" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q594306" start="32626" end="32639" title="Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy" label="Furman Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q975653" start="32946" end="32975" title="NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital" label="NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646482" start="33019" end="33037" title="Lin-Manuel Miranda" label="Lin-Manuel Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q20617708" start="33589" end="33604" title="Manhattan Times" label="Manhattan Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252" start="34089" end="34104" title="Upper Manhattan" label="Upper Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q932801" start="34454" end="34459" title="MVRDV" label="MVRDV"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252" start="34781" end="34796" title="Upper Manhattan" label="Upper Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="34960" end="34966" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729185" start="34986" end="34998" title="Bennett Park (New York City)" label="Bennett Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="35096" end="35110" title="Central Harlem" label="Central Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455265" start="35250" end="35266" title="Hamilton Heights" label="Hamilton Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706137" start="35270" end="35282" title="155th Street (Manhattan)" label="155th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189533" start="35287" end="35293" title="Inwood, Manhattan" label="Inwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318531" start="35297" end="35311" title="Dyckman Street (Manhattan)" label="Dyckman Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="35547" end="35555" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q562166" start="35763" end="35768" title="Housing cooperative" label="co-op"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="35965" end="35973" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190346" start="36021" end="36036" title="Fort Tryon Park" label="Fort Tryon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="36045" end="36057" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193977" start="36830" end="36860" title="Audubon Park Historic District, New York City" label="Audubon Park Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="37402" end="37419" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438535" start="37427" end="37438" title="Fort George (New York)" label="Fort George"/>
<link wikidata="Q55393765" start="37583" end="37598" title="Yeshiva College (Yeshiva University)" label="Yeshiva College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757846" start="37638" end="37653" title="Highbridge Park" label="Highbridge Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545975" start="37659" end="37688" title="George Washington High School (New York City)" label="George Washington High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252" start="38019" end="38034" title="Upper Manhattan" label="Upper Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16634966" start="38058" end="38069" title="step street" label="step street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472255" start="38127" end="38149" title="Fort Washington Avenue" label="Fort Washington Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278230" start="38174" end="38186" title="187th Street" label="187th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442219" start="38288" end="38312" title="181st Street (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="181st Street IND station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959768" start="38401" end="38421" title="190th Street station" label="190th Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q572625" start="38488" end="38512" title="191st Street (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="191st Street IRT station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051404" start="38702" end="38716" title="Dyckman Street station (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="Dyckman Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="38942" end="38955" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="39134" end="39142" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="39201" end="39226" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="39335" end="39339" title="2000 United States census" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="39468" end="39473" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="39489" end="39505" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="39520" end="39525" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="39545" end="39556" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="39599" end="39607" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="39611" end="39617" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="39940" end="39965" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="41110" end="41128" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189533" start="41146" end="41152" title="Inwood, Manhattan" label="Inwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455265" start="41165" end="41181" title="Hamilton Heights, Manhattan" label="Hamilton Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="41362" end="41367" title="Taíno" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="41377" end="41387" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="41926" end="41944" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="41993" end="42006" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="42014" end="42023" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="42047" end="42054" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="42064" end="42069" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q384845" start="42162" end="42190" title="American Airlines Flight 587" label="American Airlines Flight 587"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894717" start="42247" end="42267" title="Belle Harbor, Queens" label="Belle Harbor, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q854248" start="42282" end="42289" title="takeoff" label="takeoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="42295" end="42318" title="John F. Kennedy Airport" label="John F. Kennedy Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q504487" start="42484" end="42497" title="Kinito Méndez" label="Kinito Méndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702424" start="42502" end="42516" title="Johnny Ventura" label="Johnny Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q34711903" start="42598" end="42626" title="Rockaway Beach and Boardwalk" label="Rockaway Beach and Boardwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740930" start="42675" end="42684" title="Pedro Mir" label="Pedro Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="42888" end="42894" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="42896" end="42906" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="42912" end="42920" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587835" start="42994" end="43014" title="St. Elizabeth Church (Manhattan)" label="St. Elizabeth Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706273" start="43346" end="43381" title="Fort Washington Presbyterian Church" label="Fort Washington Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="43400" end="43418" title="neo-Georgian architecture" label="neo-Georgian style"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790487" start="43441" end="43456" title="Thomas Hastings (architect)" label="Thomas Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="43632" end="43644" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46996526" start="44159" end="44184" title="Holyrood Episcopal Church" label="Holyrood Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="44227" end="44248" title="Seventh-day Adventist" label="Seventh-day Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116966" start="44281" end="44309" title="Our Lady of Esperanza Church" label="Our Lady of Esperanza Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820259" start="44330" end="44345" title="Audubon Terrace" label="Audubon Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117968" start="44506" end="44531" title="Church of the Incarnation, Roman Catholic (Manhattan)" label="Church of the Incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="44570" end="44585" title="Catholic school" label="Catholic school"/>
<link wikidata="Q43081874" start="44829" end="44841" title="St. Spyridon Greek Orthodox Church" label="St. Spyridon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706390" start="44864" end="44900" title="Holy Cross Armenian Apostolic Church (New York City)" label="Holy Cross Armenian Apostolic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q318657" start="44931" end="44964" title="Armenian Revolutionary Federation" label="Armenian Revolutionary Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20507031" start="45005" end="45018" title="Levon Tourian" label="Levon Tourian"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="45611" end="45623" title="Conservative Jewish" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837453" start="45624" end="45648" title="Fort Tryon Jewish Center" label="Fort Tryon Jewish Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="45687" end="45695" title="Orthodox Jewish" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923680" start="45696" end="45721" title="Mount Sinai Jewish Center" label="Mount Sinai Jewish Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399222" start="45723" end="45742" title="Khal Adath Jeshurun" label="Khal Adath Jeshurun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184666" start="45788" end="45801" title="Joseph Breuer" label="Joseph Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="45871" end="45888" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052840" start="45908" end="45943" title="Yeshiva Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch" label="Yeshiva Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="46042" end="46051" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592471" start="46100" end="46125" title="graffiti in New York City" label="graffiti in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034550" start="46136" end="46144" title="TAKI 183" label="TAKI 183"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889018" start="46637" end="46650" title="United Palace" label="United Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q44857" start="46793" end="46804" title="John Legend" label="John Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="46806" end="46815" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180224" start="46817" end="46830" title="Lenny Kravitz" label="Lenny Kravitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214226" start="46836" end="46847" title="Lauryn Hill" label="Lauryn Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646482" start="47080" end="47098" title="Lin-Manuel Miranda" label="Lin-Manuel Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810054" start="47138" end="47152" title="In the Heights" label="In the Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763193" start="47160" end="47170" title="Angie Cruz" label="Angie Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q78925288" start="47191" end="47198" title="Soledad (2001 novel)" label="Soledad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="47241" end="47247" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q120279508" start="47259" end="47286" title="The Horror of Dolores Roach" label="The Horror of Dolores Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="47415" end="47430" title="New York Giants (baseball)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="47432" end="47445" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="47451" end="47467" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="47492" end="47507" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="47512" end="47525" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166847" start="47554" end="47574" title="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Bluff" label="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="47634" end="47646" title="Polo Grounds" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="47723" end="47729" title="New York Giants (baseball)" label="Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="47755" end="47762" title="New York Yankees" label="Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="47788" end="47792" title="New York Mets" label="Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="47855" end="47870" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="47899" end="47912" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="48013" end="48025" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="48029" end="48035" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147525" start="48137" end="48148" title="Ray Chapman" label="Ray Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040536" start="48201" end="48210" title="Carl Mays" label="Carl Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q158803" start="48322" end="48333" title=".45 ACP" label=".45 caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907525" start="48334" end="48340" title="pistol" label="pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764114" start="48457" end="48469" title="Hilltop Park" label="Hilltop Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="48574" end="48594" title="New York Highlanders" label="New York Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="48659" end="48673" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q552828" start="48681" end="48688" title="Ty Cobb" label="Ty Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q766590" start="48784" end="48795" title="Ban Johnson" label="Ban Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030254" start="48974" end="48993" title="Washington Senators (1901–1960)" label="Washington Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q722059" start="49001" end="49015" title="Walter Johnson" label="Walter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415975" start="49098" end="49132" title="Columbia University Medical Center" label="Columbia University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q558664" start="49266" end="49280" title="Alex Rodriguez" label="Alex Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316950" start="49337" end="49346" title="Rod Carew" label="Rod Carew"/>
<link wikidata="Q375648" start="49351" end="49364" title="Manny Ramírez" label="Manny Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545975" start="49450" end="49479" title="George Washington High School (New York City)" label="George Washington High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q357444" start="49562" end="49572" title="Lou Gehrig" label="Lou Gehrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189975" start="49621" end="49630" title="Yorkville, Manhattan" label="Yorkville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422581" start="49714" end="49724" title="Vin Scully" label="Vin Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564794" start="49835" end="49864" title="Fort Washington Avenue Armory" label="Fort Washington Avenue Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060588" start="49972" end="49986" title="Millrose Games" label="Millrose Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q9026714" start="50039" end="50045" title="Madison Square Garden (1890)" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728098" start="50047" end="50052" title="Madison Square Garden (1925)" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="50058" end="50065" title="Madison Square Garden" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087567" start="50348" end="50385" title="National Track and Field Hall of Fame" label="National Track and Field Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021623" start="50751" end="50772" title="New York Road Runners" label="New York Road Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148520" start="50985" end="51005" title="Fort Washington Park (Manhattan)" label="Fort Washington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821" start="51083" end="51107" title="George Washington Bridge" label="George Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="51207" end="51227" title="Fredrick Law Olmsted" label="Fredrick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339602" start="51239" end="51253" title="Riverside Park (Manhattan)" label="Riverside Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913001" start="51258" end="51274" title="Morningside Park (Manhattan)" label="Morningside Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="51314" end="51328" title="eminent domain" label="eminent domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q363984" start="51438" end="51461" title="John D. Rockefeller Jr." label="John D. Rockefeller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2487838" start="51536" end="51556" title="Henry Hudson Parkway" label="Henry Hudson Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739789" start="51643" end="51664" title="Little Red Lighthouse" label="Little Red Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028611" start="51704" end="51726" title="Sandy Hook, New Jersey" label="Sandy Hook, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="51898" end="51923" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16159816" start="52009" end="52025" title="Hildegarde Swift" label="Hildegarde Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636278" start="52404" end="52420" title="Inwood Hill Park" label="Inwood Hill Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190346" start="52468" end="52483" title="Fort Tryon Park" label="Fort Tryon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q538025" start="52673" end="52698" title="Frederick Law Olmsted Jr." label="Frederick Law Olmsted Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q204135" start="52788" end="52806" title="Jimmy Walker" label="Mayor James Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338968" start="52957" end="52970" title="The Palisades (Hudson River)" label="the Palisades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127602" start="53111" end="53136" title="Palisades Interstate Park" label="Palisades Interstate Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="53230" end="53256" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138030" start="53268" end="53281" title="the Cloisters" label="the Cloisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624153" start="53330" end="53342" title="medieval art" label="medieval art"/>
<link wikidata="Q339164" start="53352" end="53371" title="George Grey Barnard" label="George Grey Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="53626" end="53632" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="53637" end="53646" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731486" start="53668" end="53683" title="Charles Collens" label="Charles Collens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="53698" end="53734" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q46805" start="53780" end="53790" title="Romanesque art" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="53795" end="53801" title="Gothic art" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626769" start="53827" end="53846" title="The Hunt of the Unicorn" label="Hunt of the Unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="53974" end="53982" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894232" start="54021" end="54037" title="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation" label="Parks Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757846" start="54360" end="54375" title="Highbridge Park" label="Highbridge Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q597451" start="54436" end="54448" title="Harlem River" label="Harlem River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487835" start="54573" end="54591" title="Harlem River Drive" label="Harlem River Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166847" start="54825" end="54844" title="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Bluff" label="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="54871" end="54883" title="Polo Grounds" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q85761702" start="55057" end="55083" title="Fort George Amusement Park" label="Fort George Amusement Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540243" start="55087" end="55099" title="trolley park" label="trolley park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894232" start="55158" end="55174" title="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation" label="Parks Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754953" start="55384" end="55395" title="High Bridge (New York City)" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141610" start="55554" end="55569" title="Croton Aqueduct" label="Croton Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="55956" end="55985" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729185" start="56123" end="56135" title="Bennett Park (New York City)" label="Bennett Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166715" start="56188" end="56207" title="J. Hood Wright Park" label="J. Hood Wright Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881404" start="56210" end="56229" title="Mitchel Square Park" label="Mitchel Square Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="56271" end="56282" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q271910" start="56295" end="56322" title="Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney" label="Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586633" start="56325" end="56343" title="Gorman Park" label="Amelia Gorman Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091931" start="56444" end="56458" title="McKenna Square" label="McKenna Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764114" start="56587" end="56599" title="Hilltop Park" label="Hilltop Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="56650" end="56666" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564794" start="56713" end="56742" title="Fort Washington Avenue Armory" label="Fort Washington Avenue Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087567" start="56814" end="56853" title="National Track &amp;amp; Field Hall of Fame" label="National Track &amp;amp; Field Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820259" start="56856" end="56871" title="Audubon Terrace" label="Audubon Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="56906" end="56916" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q502163" start="56921" end="56940" title="Renaissance Revival" label="Renaissance Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q182882" start="57052" end="57070" title="John James Audubon" label="John James Audubon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193977" start="57103" end="57133" title="Audubon Park Historic District, New York City" label="Audubon Park Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785964" start="57198" end="57222" title="Archer Milton Huntington" label="Archer Milton Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081742" start="57266" end="57290" title="Charles Pratt Huntington" label="Charles Pratt Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="57294" end="57320" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420849" start="57357" end="57384" title="Hispanic Society of America" label="Hispanic Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="57390" end="57426" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116966" start="57432" end="57460" title="Our Lady of Esperanza Church" label="Our Lady of Esperanza Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910878" start="57466" end="57481" title="Boricua College" label="Boricua College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156372" start="57633" end="57662" title="American Geographical Society" label="American Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539979" start="57668" end="57683" title="George Gustav Heye Center" label="Heye Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075141" start="57691" end="57729" title="National Museum of the American Indian" label="National Museum of the American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256518" start="57739" end="57766" title="American Numismatic Society" label="American Numismatic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166847" start="57870" end="57889" title="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Bluff" label="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310962" start="57929" end="57960" title="Jumel Terrace Historic District" label="Jumel Terrace Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948466" start="57966" end="57986" title="Morris–Jumel Mansion" label="Morris–Jumel Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="58074" end="58091" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q700853" start="58138" end="58145" title="Hessian (soldier)" label="Hessian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994331" start="58197" end="58209" title="Roger Morris (British Army officer)" label="Roger Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362157" start="58241" end="58252" title="Eliza Jumel" label="Eliza Jumel"/>
<link wikidata="Q179090" start="58377" end="58387" title="Aaron Burr" label="Aaron Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="58443" end="58479" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894232" start="58534" end="58568" title="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation" label="Department of Parks and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130838" start="58956" end="58966" title="Today (American TV program)" label="Today Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074617" start="58968" end="58979" title="Haunted USA" label="Haunted USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243445" start="58985" end="59001" title="Ghost Adventures" label="Ghost Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q19320959" start="59009" end="59017" title="Hamilton (musical)" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646482" start="59035" end="59053" title="Lin-Manuel Miranda" label="Lin-Manuel Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640573" start="59139" end="59156" title="555 Edgecombe Avenue" label="Paul Robeson Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="59411" end="59423" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="59434" end="59445" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q273206" start="59457" end="59466" title="Joe Louis" label="Joe Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820234" start="59473" end="59489" title="Audubon Ballroom" label="Audubon Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="59507" end="59517" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q134382" start="59546" end="59557" title="William Fox (producer)" label="William Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644123" start="59565" end="59585" title="Fox Film Corporation" label="Fox Film Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35105" start="59771" end="59781" title="Mardi Gras" label="Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q43303" start="59878" end="59887" title="Malcolm X" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493102" start="59933" end="59968" title="Organization of Afro-American Unity" label="Organization of Afro-American Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742732" start="60417" end="60480" title="Malcolm X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center" label="Malcolm X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889018" start="60574" end="60587" title="United Palace" label="United Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q738883" start="60613" end="60624" title="Loew&amp;#x27;s" label="Loew&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525639" start="60669" end="60683" title="Thomas W. Lamb" label="Thomas W. Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639637" start="60767" end="60782" title="Harold Rambusch" label="Harold Rambusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407240" start="60831" end="60844" title="televangelism" label="televangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318134" start="60845" end="60857" title="Reverend Ike" label="Reverend Ike"/>
<link wikidata="Q762266" start="61070" end="61097" title="City University of New York" label="City University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706660" start="61329" end="61375" title="New York State Board for Historic Preservation" label="New York State Board for Historic Preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252" start="61686" end="61701" title="Upper Manhattan" label="Upper Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108332224" start="61759" end="61778" title="Luis A. Miranda Jr." label="Luís A. Miranda Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="62103" end="62107" title="New York City Police Department" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q130388" start="62188" end="62204" title="Tenth Avenue (Manhattan)" label="Amsterdam Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="62247" end="62255" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485381" start="62802" end="62817" title="grand larceny" label="grand larcenies"/>
<link wikidata="Q548007" start="62827" end="62847" title="motor vehicle theft" label="grand larcenies auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q283207" start="63249" end="63278" title="New York City Fire Department" label="New York City Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013203" start="63541" end="63549" title="New York City Fire Department Bureau of EMS" label="FDNY EMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995038" start="63684" end="63737" title="New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene" label="New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q262494" start="63822" end="63853" title="Manhattan Community District 12" label="Manhattan Community District 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="64157" end="64180" title="particulates" label="fine particulate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="64204" end="64217" title="air pollution" label="air pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="64281" end="64288" title="Smoking" label="smokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="64313" end="64318" title="Obesity" label="obese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="64343" end="64351" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="diabetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="64381" end="64400" title="hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="64730" end="64737" title="convenience store" label="bodegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q975653" start="65162" end="65182" title="NewYork–Presbyterian" label="NewYork–Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415975" start="65183" end="65224" title="Columbia University Irving Medical Center" label="Columbia University Irving Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671274" start="65283" end="65306" title="academic medical center" label="academic medical center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154182" start="65483" end="65537" title="Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons" label="Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="65560" end="65579" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149896" start="65610" end="65641" title="Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health" label="Mailman School of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911843" start="65654" end="65693" title="Morgan Stanley Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Morgan Stanley Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65800" end="65814" title="NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital#Allen Hospital" label="Allen Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q175410" start="65890" end="65933" title="New York&amp;#x27;s 13th congressional district" label="New York&amp;#x27;s 13th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="65950" end="65958" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685569" start="65959" end="65976" title="Adriano Espaillat" label="Adriano Espaillat"/>
<link wikidata="Q85788592" start="66002" end="66006" title="New York&amp;#x27;s 31st State Senate district" label="31st"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722258" start="66007" end="66019" title="New York State Senate" label="State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730113" start="66054" end="66068" title="Robert Jackson (New York politician)" label="Robert Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="66092" end="66106" title="New York State Assembly" label="State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742886" start="66156" end="66165" title="Al Taylor (politician)" label="Al Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q110981567" start="66170" end="66189" title="Manny De Los Santos" label="Manny De Los Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q107528143" start="66306" end="66317" title="Shaun Abreu" label="Shaun Abreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28131635" start="66322" end="66339" title="Carmen De La Rosa" label="Carmen De La Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="66413" end="66421" title="ZIP Code" label="ZIP Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706137" start="66469" end="66474" title="155th Street (Manhattan)" label="155th"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318531" start="66564" end="66571" title="Dyckman Street" label="Dyckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="66587" end="66615" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="66737" end="66745" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189533" start="67287" end="67293" title="Inwood, Manhattan" label="Inwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455265" start="67298" end="67314" title="Hamilton Heights" label="Hamilton Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q408230" start="67993" end="68030" title="New York City Department of Education" label="New York City Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545975" start="69439" end="69468" title="George Washington Educational Campus" label="George Washington High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757846" start="69545" end="69560" title="Highbridge Park" label="Highbridge Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606726" start="69879" end="69935" title="Gregorio Luperón High School for Math &amp;amp; Science" label="Gregorio Luperón High School for Science and Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q28131857" start="70057" end="70105" title="Washington Heights Expeditionary Learning School" label="Washington Heights Expeditionary Learning School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086780" start="70171" end="70186" title="Charter schools in New York" label="Charter schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707388" start="70243" end="70258" title="Success Academy Charter Schools" label="Success Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423304" start="70293" end="70297" title="KIPP" label="KIPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365153" start="70393" end="70431" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014176" start="70443" end="70461" title="Incarnation School (Manhattan)" label="Incarnation School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052840" start="70540" end="70575" title="Yeshiva Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch" label="Yeshiva Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773401" start="70604" end="70635" title="Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy" label="Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048851" start="70726" end="70744" title="Yeshiva University" label="Yeshiva University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910878" start="70749" end="70764" title="Boricua College" label="Boricua College"/>
<link wikidata="Q74156" start="70966" end="70981" title="Moorish Revival" label="Moorish Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q55393765" start="71089" end="71104" title="Yeshiva College (Yeshiva University)" label="Yeshiva College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661915" start="71110" end="71133" title="Syms School of Business" label="Syms School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773401" start="71143" end="71174" title="Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy" label="Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820259" start="71268" end="71283" title="Audubon Terrace" label="Audubon Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="71409" end="71428" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154182" start="71439" end="71473" title="Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons" label="College of Physicians and Surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149893" start="71479" end="71505" title="Columbia University College of Dental Medicine" label="College of Dental Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149896" start="71511" end="71542" title="Mailman School of Public Health" label="Mailman School of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149902" start="71548" end="71565" title="Columbia University School of Nursing" label="School of Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149699" start="71602" end="71638" title="Columbia University Graduate School of Arts and Sciences" label="Graduate School of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415975" start="71758" end="71799" title="Columbia University Irving Medical Center" label="Columbia University Irving Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946345" start="71857" end="71895" title="Borough of Manhattan Community College" label="Borough of Manhattan Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q762266" start="71903" end="71930" title="City University of New York" label="City University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q762266" start="72102" end="72118" title="Citizenship Now!" label="Citizenship Now!"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="72227" end="72250" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043939" start="72385" end="72401" title="Carnegie library" label="Carnegie library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593583" start="72469" end="72488" title="St. Nicholas Avenue" label="St. Nicholas Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q46152138" start="72659" end="72676" title="James Hood Wright" label="James Hood Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013261" start="72763" end="72771" title="Fort Lee, New Jersey" label="Fort Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="72773" end="72783" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q115783" start="72816" end="72829" title="Othmar Ammann" label="Othmar Ammann"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821" start="72839" end="72863" title="George Washington Bridge" label="George Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="72974" end="72991" title="suspension bridge" label="suspension bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q313528" start="72997" end="73013" title="Pier Luigi Nervi" label="Pier Luigi Nervi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101988" start="73023" end="73060" title="George Washington Bridge Bus Terminal" label="George Washington Bridge Bus Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9050707" start="73367" end="73379" title="North Jersey" label="North Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009514" start="73384" end="73409" title="NJ Transit Bus Operations" label="NJ Transit Bus Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="73411" end="73419" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="73424" end="73435" title="Jersey City" label="Jersey City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573319" start="73440" end="73462" title="Spanish Transportation" label="Spanish Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422082" start="73468" end="73489" title="Northeast megalopolis" label="Northeastern Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="73494" end="73503" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="73509" end="73525" title="upstate New York" label="upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355436" start="73530" end="73546" title="Rockland Coaches" label="Rockland Coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740702" start="73551" end="73557" title="OurBus" label="OurBus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448870" start="73564" end="73590" title="Trans-Manhattan Expressway" label="Trans-Manhattan Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448870" start="73600" end="73613" title="Interstate 95 in New York" label="Interstate 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q621768" start="74018" end="74043" title="Alexander Hamilton Bridge" label="Alexander Hamilton Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q597451" start="74082" end="74094" title="Harlem River" label="Harlem River"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="74111" end="74120" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141143" start="74129" end="74151" title="Cross Bronx Expressway" label="Cross Bronx Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550421" start="74157" end="74174" title="Washington Bridge (Harlem River)" label="Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754953" start="74377" end="74388" title="High Bridge (New York City)" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141610" start="74493" end="74508" title="Croton Aqueduct" label="Croton Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487835" start="75081" end="75099" title="Harlem River Drive" label="Harlem River Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487838" start="75128" end="75148" title="Henry Hudson Parkway" label="Henry Hudson Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485904" start="75158" end="75181" title="New York State Route 9A" label="New York State Route 9A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749328" start="75428" end="75449" title="Harlem River Greenway" label="Harlem River Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472261" start="75619" end="75639" title="Fort Washington Park" label="Fort Washington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749328" start="75711" end="75732" title="Hudson River Greenway" label="Hudson River Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q989490" start="75824" end="75838" title="Empire Service" label="Empire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="75839" end="75845" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098103" start="75879" end="75886" title="Yonkers station" label="Yonkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q54451" start="75891" end="75903" title="Pennsylvania Station (New York City)" label="Penn Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="75960" end="75980" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373436" start="75989" end="76011" title="IND Eighth Avenue Line" label="IND Eighth Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612658" start="76041" end="76053" title="155th Street (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="155th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612725" start="76058" end="76087" title="163rd Street–Amsterdam Avenue (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="163rd Street–Amsterdam Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981131" start="76105" end="76117" title="168th Street (New York City Subway)" label="168th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102181" start="76138" end="76150" title="175th Street (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="175th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442219" start="76152" end="76164" title="181st Street (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="181st Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959768" start="76170" end="76182" title="190th Street (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="190th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344719" start="76200" end="76232" title="IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line" label="IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049816" start="76249" end="76261" title="157th Street (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="157th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570712" start="76277" end="76289" title="181st Street (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="181st Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q572625" start="76295" end="76307" title="191st Street (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="191st Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102181" start="76338" end="76350" title="175th Street (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="175th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101988" start="76399" end="76435" title="George Washington Bridge Bus Station" label="George Washington Bridge Bus Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981131" start="76473" end="76485" title="168th Street (New York City Subway)" label="168th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472255" start="76727" end="76749" title="Fort Washington Avenue" label="Fort Washington Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="76758" end="76766" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593583" start="76856" end="76875" title="St. Nicholas Avenue" label="St. Nicholas Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="77160" end="77196" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="77400" end="77419" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="77483" end="77498" title="nuclear fallout" label="nuclear fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="77519" end="77546" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="MTA Regional Bus Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513869" start="77592" end="77612" title="238th Street station" label="238th Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q120962523" start="77661" end="77683" title="Bx6 SBS (New York City bus)" label="Bx6 Select Bus Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706489" start="77688" end="77718" title="Hunts Point Cooperative Market" label="Hunts Point Cooperative Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982993" start="77801" end="77831" title="College of Mount Saint Vincent" label="College of Mount Saint Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q526848" start="77873" end="77892" title="Parkchester station" label="Parkchester station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974207" start="77936" end="77957" title="Bronx Terminal Market" label="Bronx Terminal Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101988" start="77961" end="77998" title="George Washington Bridge Bus Terminal" label="George Washington Bridge Bus Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188993" start="78040" end="78064" title="Crotona Park East, Bronx" label="Crotona Park East, Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663079" start="78115" end="78133" title="Castle Hill, Bronx" label="Castle Hill, Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="78197" end="78214" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657331" start="78395" end="78408" title="Midtown South" label="Midtown South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190346" start="78412" end="78427" title="Fort Tryon Park" label="Fort Tryon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138030" start="78428" end="78441" title="The Cloisters" label="The Cloisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657331" start="78513" end="78526" title="Midtown South" label="Midtown South"/>
<link wikidata="Q109968" start="78567" end="78582" title="Columbus Circle" label="Columbus Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190605" start="78623" end="78633" title="Lenox Hill" label="Lenox Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857997" start="78757" end="78771" title="Manhattanville" label="Manhattanville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189533" start="78775" end="78781" title="Inwood, Manhattan" label="Inwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="78845" end="78857" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q767616" start="78993" end="79006" title="Pedro Alvarez (baseball)" label="Pedro Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="79074" end="79092" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4611465" start="79100" end="79132" title="2008 Major League Baseball Draft" label="2008 Major League Baseball Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716641" start="79136" end="79146" title="Alex Arias" label="Alex Arias"/>
<link wikidata="Q339164" start="79218" end="79237" title="George Grey Barnard" label="George Grey Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q214959" start="79263" end="79278" title="Harry Belafonte" label="Harry Belafonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968974" start="79328" end="79340" title="Ward Bennett" label="Ward Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059443" start="79387" end="79402" title="Dellin Betances" label="Dellin Betances"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="79436" end="79449" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q43852827" start="79453" end="79465" title="Jocelyn Bioh" label="Jocelyn Bioh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599489" start="79517" end="79533" title="Stanley Bosworth" label="Stanley Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400951" start="79570" end="79593" title="Saint Ann&amp;#x27;s School (Brooklyn)" label="Saint Ann&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560250" start="79644" end="79655" title="Tally Brown" label="Tally Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="79700" end="79711" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q935081" start="79748" end="79765" title="Robert John Burke" label="Robert John Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q128297" start="79788" end="79800" title="Maria Callas" label="Maria Callas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29033668" start="79845" end="79852" title="Cardi B" label="Cardi B"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195018" start="79924" end="79935" title="Jerry Craft" label="Jerry Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316950" start="80068" end="80077" title="Rod Carew" label="Rod Carew"/>
<link wikidata="Q233882" start="80130" end="80144" title="Frances Conroy" label="Frances Conroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990361" start="80169" end="80189" title="Nelson Antonio Denis" label="Nelson Antonio Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="80224" end="80247" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q611121" start="80251" end="80265" title="Morton Deutsch" label="Morton Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="80279" end="80298" title="Social psychology" label="social psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194317" start="80351" end="80370" title="conflict resolution" label="conflict resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q467133" start="80374" end="80387" title="David Dinkins" label="David Dinkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178791" start="80437" end="80446" title="Jim Dwyer (journalist)" label="Jim Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="80492" end="80510" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q193048" start="80520" end="80538" title="Laurence Fishburne" label="Laurence Fishburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q977666" start="80585" end="80596" title="Luis Flores (basketball)" label="Luis Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q556862" start="80636" end="80654" title="Hillel Furstenberg" label="Hillel Furstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="80668" end="80681" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="80711" end="80729" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498822" start="80734" end="80748" title="ergodic theory" label="ergodic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q357444" start="80790" end="80800" title="Lou Gehrig" label="Lou Gehrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="80851" end="80867" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360512" start="80871" end="80885" title="Elias Goldberg" label="Elias Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077332" start="81025" end="81045" title="Charles Egan Gallery" label="Charles Egan Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560665" start="81049" end="81059" title="Leo Gorcey" label="Leo Gorcey"/>
<link wikidata="Q676341" start="81110" end="81118" title="Dead End (1937 film)" label="Dead End"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245169" start="81164" end="81177" title="Dead End Kids" label="Dead End Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329371" start="81180" end="81194" title="East Side Kids" label="East Side Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719544" start="81197" end="81212" title="The Bowery Boys" label="The Bowery Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="81216" end="81230" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336413" start="81310" end="81320" title="Hex Hector" label="Hex Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875906" start="81379" end="81394" title="Jacob K. Javits" label="Jacob K. Javits"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="81451" end="81466" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="81487" end="81512" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="81517" end="81549" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151831" start="81553" end="81564" title="Paul Kolton" label="Paul Kolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q846626" start="81594" end="81617" title="American Stock Exchange" label="American Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q218823" start="81621" end="81637" title="Joshua Lederberg" label="Joshua Lederberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="81684" end="81721" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="81779" end="81787" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="81812" end="81822" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="81824" end="81829" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q188760" start="81831" end="81850" title="The Incredible Hulk" label="The Incredible Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q683420" start="81854" end="81867" title="Frankie Lymon" label="Frankie Lymon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445090" start="81896" end="81909" title="The Teenagers" label="The Teenagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807009" start="81942" end="81968" title="Why Do Fools Fall in Love (song)" label="Why Do Fools Fall in Love?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646482" start="81977" end="81995" title="Lin-Manuel Miranda" label="Lin-Manuel Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="82020" end="82030" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810054" start="82128" end="82142" title="In the Heights" label="In the Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q19320959" start="82159" end="82167" title="Hamilton (musical)" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q373936" start="82177" end="82201" title="Theodore Edgar McCarrick" label="Theodore Edgar McCarrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365883" start="82238" end="82278" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Washington" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216902" start="82294" end="82313" title="Daniel D. McCracken" label="Daniel D. McCracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777580" start="82364" end="82375" title="Knox Martin" label="Knox Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169904" start="82423" end="82427" title="Mims (rapper)" label="Mims"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761048" start="82469" end="82479" title="Andy Mineo" label="Andy Mineo"/>
<link wikidata="Q377206" start="82569" end="82582" title="Karina Pasian" label="Karina Pasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="82606" end="82613" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q654283" start="82626" end="82641" title="Def Jam Records" label="Def Jam Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153423" start="82645" end="82656" title="Manny Pérez" label="Manny Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q927245" start="82705" end="82716" title="Third Watch" label="Third Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452844" start="82726" end="82736" title="Jim Powers" label="Jim Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="82758" end="82779" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="82820" end="82846" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365298" start="82868" end="82882" title="Freddie Prinze" label="Freddie Prinze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248114" start="82979" end="82996" title="Chico and the Man" label="Chico and the Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q344735" start="83015" end="83029" title="Jack Albertson" label="Jack Albertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q375648" start="83033" end="83046" title="Manny Ramírez" label="Manny Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="83094" end="83113" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q289070" start="83117" end="83129" title="Kenny Rankin" label="Kenny Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q558664" start="83178" end="83192" title="Alex Rodriguez" label="Alex Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="83249" end="83265" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141721" start="83269" end="83285" title="James R. Russell" label="James R. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q445375" start="83343" end="83357" title="Merlin Santana" label="Merlin Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422581" start="83399" end="83409" title="Vin Scully" label="Vin Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="83444" end="83463" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580540" start="83467" end="83496" title="William Shea" label="William &amp;quot;Bill&amp;quot; Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="83554" end="83567" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="83572" end="83590" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="83604" end="83616" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437326" start="83619" end="83633" title="Scott Stringer" label="Scott Stringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14568260" start="83647" end="83672" title="New York City Comptroller" label="New York City Comptroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946327" start="83677" end="83694" title="Borough President" label="Borough President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="83698" end="83707" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731893" start="83711" end="83722" title="Allen Swift" label="Allen Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601422" start="83819" end="83837" title="Simon Bar Sinister" label="Simon Bar Sinister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031065" start="83859" end="83879" title="Underdog (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Underdog&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034550" start="83895" end="83903" title="TAKI 183" label="TAKI 183"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="83919" end="83927" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q979347" start="83933" end="83941" title="Tiny Tim (musician)" label="Tiny Tim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808986" start="84047" end="84072" title="Tiptoe Through the Tulips" label="Tiptoe Through the Tulips"/>
<link wikidata="Q534925" start="84082" end="84095" title="Leslie Uggams" label="Leslie Uggams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247168" start="84156" end="84161" title="Roots (1977 miniseries)" label="Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642856" start="84178" end="84195" title="Hallelujah, Baby!" label="Hallelujah, Baby!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453819" start="84204" end="84219" title="George Weinberg (psychologist)" label="George Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="84284" end="84294" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244731" start="84312" end="84327" title="Joel Westheimer" label="Joel Westheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q627969" start="84371" end="84391" title="University of Ottawa" label="University of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q77688" start="84394" end="84409" title="Ruth Westheimer" label="Ruth Westheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q252054" start="84570" end="84577" title="Haganah" label="Haganah"/>
<link wikidata="Q537722" start="84588" end="84600" title="Jerry Wexler" label="Jerry Wexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="84655" end="84671" title="Rhythm and blues" label="Rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q562093" start="84681" end="84693" title="Guy Williams (actor)" label="Guy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="84707" end="84723" title="Italian American" label="Italian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127030" start="84733" end="84748" title="Rafael Yglesias" label="Rafael Yglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810054" start="84832" end="84846" title="In the Heights (musical)" label="In the Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="84867" end="84875" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q63698573" start="84929" end="84949" title="In the Heights (film)" label="2021 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q572625" start="85011" end="85031" title="191st Street station" label="191st Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="85046" end="85049" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q21152164" start="85057" end="85078" title="The Deuce (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Deuce&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q130388" start="85085" end="85101" title="Tenth Avenue (Manhattan)" label="Amsterdam Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="85146" end="85158" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971909" start="85182" end="85200" title="Washington Heights (film)" label="Washington Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153423" start="85216" end="85227" title="Manny Pérez" label="Manny Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725978" start="85376" end="85392" title="Mad Hot Ballroom" label="Mad Hot Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="85458" end="85461" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971908" start="85469" end="85499" title="Washington Heights (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Washington Heights&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970206" start="85588" end="85604" title="Ryan&amp;#x27;s Hope" label="Ryan&amp;#x27;s Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="85654" end="85657" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q628139" start="85708" end="85712" title="Salt (2010 film)" label="Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589766" start="85841" end="85856" title="Riverside Drive (Manhattan)" label="Riverside Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q703931" start="85880" end="85895" title="Pride and Glory (film)" label="Pride and Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342027" start="86000" end="86028" title="The Saint of Fort Washington" label="The Saint of Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564794" start="86117" end="86146" title="Fort Washington Avenue Armory" label="Fort Washington Avenue Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166847" start="86203" end="86222" title="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Bluff" label="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="86255" end="86269" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="86313" end="86320" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q427091" start="86366" end="86379" title="The Brave One (2007 film)" label="The Brave One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190346" start="86493" end="86508" title="Fort Tryon Park" label="Fort Tryon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="86587" end="86595" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478692" start="86636" end="86646" title="Frances Ha" label="Frances Ha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182695" wikidata="Q419775" url="?curid=182695" title="Chlorin">
<text>In organic chemistry, chlorins are tetrapyrrole pigments that are partially hydrogenated porphyrins. The parent chlorin is an unstable compound which undergoes air oxidation to porphine. The name chlorin derives from chlorophyll. Chlorophylls are magnesium-containing chlorins and occur as photosynthetic pigments in chloroplasts. The term &quot;chlorin&quot; strictly speaking refers to only compounds with the same ring oxidation state as chlorophyll.

Chlorins are excellent photosensitizing agents. Various synthetic chlorins analogues such as m-tetrahydroxyphenylchlorin (mTHPC) and mono-L-aspartyl chlorin e6 are effectively employed in experimental photodynamic therapy as photosensitizer.

==Chlorophylls ==
The most abundant chlorin is the photosynthetic pigment chlorophyll. Chlorophylls have a fifth, ketone-containing ring unlike the chlorins. Diverse chlorophylls exists, such as chlorophyll &quot;a&quot;, chlorophyll &quot;b&quot;, chlorophyll &quot;d&quot;, chlorophyll &quot;e&quot;, chlorophyll &quot;f&quot;, and chlorophyll &quot;g&quot;. Chlorophylls usually feature magnesium as a central metal atom, replacing the two N&quot;H&quot; centers in the parent.

== Variation ==

Microbes produce two reduced variants of chlorin, bacteriochlorins and isobacteriochlorins. Bacteriochlorins are found in some bacteriochlorophylls; the ring structure is produced by Chlorophyllide a reductase (COR) reducing a chlorin ring at the C7-8 double boud. Isobacteriochlorins are found in nature mostly as sirohydrochlorin, a biosynthetic intermediate of vitamin B12, produced without going through a chlorin. In living organisms, both are ultimately derived from uroporphyrinogen III, a near-universal intermediate in tetrapyrrole biosynthesis.

== Synthetic chlorins ==
Numerous synthetic chlorins with different functional groups and/or ring modifications have been examined.

Contracted chlorins can be synthesised by reduction of B(III)subporphyrin or by oxidation of corresponding B(III)subbacteriochlorin. The B(III)subchlorins were directly synthesized as &quot;meso&quot;-ester B(III)subchlorin from &quot;meso&quot;-diester tripyrromethane, these class of compound showed very good fluorescence quantum yield and singlet oxygen producing efficiency

==See also==
* Corrin
* Photodynamic therapy

==Further reading==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="3" end="20" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q419775" start="22" end="30" title="Chlorin" label="chlorins"/>
<link wikidata="Q422399" start="35" end="47" title="tetrapyrrole" label="tetrapyrrole"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="76" end="88" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenated"/>
<link wikidata="Q422926" start="89" end="98" title="porphyrin" label="porphyrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421246" start="177" end="185" title="porphine" label="porphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43177" start="217" end="228" title="chlorophyll" label="chlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="317" end="328" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698204" start="548" end="575" title="Temoporfin" label="m-tetrahydroxyphenylchlorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678897" start="588" end="614" title="Talaporfin" label="mono-L-aspartyl chlorin e6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428072" start="656" end="676" title="photodynamic therapy" label="photodynamic therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="749" end="763" title="Photosynthesis" label="photosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43177" start="772" end="783" title="chlorophyll" label="chlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q133878" start="893" end="918" title="Chlorophyll a" label="chlorophyll &amp;quot;a&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943387" start="920" end="945" title="Chlorophyll b" label="chlorophyll &amp;quot;b&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q82182" start="947" end="972" title="Chlorophyll d" label="chlorophyll &amp;quot;d&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q82129" start="1001" end="1026" title="Chlorophyll f" label="chlorophyll &amp;quot;f&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="1088" end="1097" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992180" start="1324" end="1343" title="bacteriochlorophyll" label="bacteriochlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374949" start="1380" end="1406" title="Chlorophyllide a reductase" label="Chlorophyllide a reductase"/>
<link wikidata="Q48838605" start="1512" end="1528" title="sirohydrochlorin" label="sirohydrochlorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187706" start="1561" end="1572" title="vitamin B12" label="vitamin B12"/>
<link wikidata="Q897727" start="1670" end="1690" title="uroporphyrinogen III" label="uroporphyrinogen III"/>
<link wikidata="Q120384" start="2281" end="2287" title="Corrin" label="Corrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428072" start="2290" end="2310" title="Photodynamic therapy" label="Photodynamic therapy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182696" wikidata="Q650978" url="?curid=182696" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)">
<text>Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) is the accounting standard adopted by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and is the default accounting standard used by companies based in the United States.

The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) publishes and maintains the Accounting Standards Codification (ASC), which is the single source of authoritative nongovernmental U.S. GAAP. The FASB published U.S. GAAP in Extensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) beginning in 2008.

==Sources==
The FASB Accounting Standards Codification is the source of authoritative GAAP recognized by the FASB to be applied by nongovernmental entities. Rules and interpretive releases of the SEC under authority of federal securities laws are also sources of authoritative GAAP for SEC registrants. In addition to the SEC&#x27;s rules and interpretive releases, the SEC staff issues Staff Accounting Bulletins that represent practices followed by the staff in administering SEC disclosure requirements, and it utilizes SEC Staff Announcements and Observer comments made at Emerging Issues Task Force meetings to publicly announce its views on certain accounting issues for SEC registrants.

Examples of nonauthoritative accounting guidance and literature include the following:
* Practices that are widely recognized and prevalent either generally or in the industry
* FASB Concepts Statements
* American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) Issues Papers
* International Financial Reporting Standards of the International Accounting Standards Board
* Pronouncements of professional associations or regulatory agencies
* Technical Information Service Inquiries and Replies included in AICPA Technical Practice Aids
* Accounting textbooks, handbooks, and articles.

The FASB issues an Accounting Standards Update (Update or ASU) to communicate changes to the FASB Codification, including changes to non-authoritative SEC content. ASUs are not authoritative standards. Each ASU explains:
* How the FASB has changed U.S. GAAP, including each specific amendment to the FASB Codification
* Why the FASB decided to change U.S. GAAP and background information related to the change
* When the changes will be effective and the transition method.

==Basic concepts==

To achieve basic objectives and implement fundamental qualities, GAAP has four basic assumptions, four basic principles, and five basic constraints.

===Assumptions===
* Business entity: assumes that the business is separate from its owners or other businesses. Revenue and expense should be kept separate from personal expenses.
* Going concern: assumes that the business will be in operation indefinitely. This validates the methods of asset capitalization, depreciation, and amortization. Only when liquidation is certain is this assumption not applicable. The business will continue to exist in the unforeseeable future. 
* Monetary unit principle: assumes a stable currency is going to be the unit of record. The FASB accepts the nominal value of the US dollar as the monetary unit of record unadjusted for inflation.
* Time-period principle: implies that the economic activities of an enterprise can be divided into artificial time periods.

===Principles===
* Historical cost principle: requires companies to account and report assets&#x27; and liabilities&#x27; acquisition costs rather than fair market value. This principle provides information that is reliable (removing opportunity to provide subjective and potentially biased market values), but not very relevant. Thus there is a trend to use fair values. Most debts and securities are now reported at market values.
* Revenue recognition principle: holds that companies should record revenue when earned but not when received. The flow of cash does not have any bearing on the recognition of revenue. This is the essence of accrual basis accounting. Conversely, however, losses must be recognized when their occurrence becomes probable, whether or not it has actually occurred. This comports with the constraint of conservatism, yet brings it into conflict with the constraint of consistency, in that reflecting revenues/gains is inconsistent with the way in which losses are reflected.
* Matching principle: expenses have to be matched with revenues as long as it is reasonable to do so. Expenses are recognized not when the work is performed, or when a product is produced, but when the work or the product actually makes its contribution to revenue. Only if no connection with revenue can be established may cost be charged as expenses to the current period (e.g., office salaries and other administrative expenses). This principle allows greater evaluation of actual profitability and performance (shows how much was spent to earn revenue). Depreciation and Cost of Goods Sold are good examples of application of this principle.
* Full disclosure principle: Amount and kinds of information disclosed should be decided based on trade-off analysis as a larger amount of information costs more to prepare and use. Information disclosed should be enough to make a judgment while keeping costs reasonable. Information is presented in the main body of financial statements, in the notes or as supplementary information

===Constraints===
* Objectivity principle: The company financial statements provided by the accountants should be based on objective evidence.
* Materiality principle: The significance of an item should be considered when it is reported. An item is considered significant when it would affect the decision of a reasonable individual. 
* Consistency principle: The company uses the same accounting principles and methods from period to period.
* Conservatism principle: When choosing between two solutions, the one which has the less favorable outcome is the solution which should be chosen (see convention of conservatism)
* Cost constraint: The benefits of reporting financial information should justify and be greater than the costs imposed on supplying it.

==Required departures from GAAP==

Under the AICPA&#x27;s Code of Professional Ethics under &quot;Rule 203 – Accounting Principles&quot;, a member must depart from GAAP if following it would lead to a material misstatement on the financial statements, or otherwise be misleading. In the departure, the member must disclose, if practical, the reasons why compliance with the accounting principle would result in a misleading financial statement. Under &quot;Rule 203-1 – Departures from Established Accounting Principles&quot;, the departures are rare, and usually take place when there is new legislation, the evolution of new forms of business transactions, an unusual degree of materiality, or the existence of conflicting industry practices.

==History==
Accounting standards are currently set by the Financial Accounting Standards Board and were historically set by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) subject to U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulations. Auditors took the leading role in developing GAAP for business enterprises.

===Standard-setting prior to the creation of the FASB===
The United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) was created as a result of the Great Depression. At that time there was no organization setting accounting standards. The SEC encouraged the establishment of private standard-setting bodies through the AICPA and later the FASB, believing that the private sector had the proper knowledge, resources, and talents. Currently, the SEC works closely with various private organizations setting GAAP, but does not set GAAP itself.

In 1939, urged by the SEC, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) appointed the Committee on Accounting Procedure (CAP). During 1939 to 1959 CAP issued 51 Accounting Research Bulletins that dealt with a variety of timely accounting problems. However, this problem-by-problem approach failed to develop the much needed structured body of accounting principles. Thus, in 1959, the AICPA created the Accounting Principles Board (APB), whose mission it was to develop an overall conceptual framework. It issued 31 opinions until it was dissolved in 1973.

Realizing the need to reform the APB, leaders in the accounting profession appointed a Study Group on the Establishment of Accounting Principles (commonly known as the Wheat Committee for its chairman Francis Wheat). This group determined that the APB must be dissolved and a new standard-setting structure created.

===Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)===
In 1973, the APB was replaced by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) under the supervision of the Financial Accounting Foundation with the Financial Accounting Standards Advisory Council serving to advise and provide input on the accounting standards.

After the creation of the FASB, the AICPA established the Accounting Standards Executive Committee (AcSEC). It publishes:
*Audit and Accounting Guidelines, which summarizes the accounting practices of specific industries (e.g. casinos, colleges, and airlines) and provides specific guidance on matters not addressed by FASB or the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB).
*Statements of Position, which provides guidance on financial reporting topics until the FASB or GASB sets standards on the issue.
*Practice Bulletins, which indicate the AcSEC&#x27;s views on narrow financial reporting issues not considered by the FASB or the GASB.

In 1984, the FASB created the Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF). The mission of the EITF is to &quot;assist the FASB in improving financial reporting through the timely identification, discussion, and resolution of financial accounting issues within the framework of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification.&quot;

The FASB currently publishes the following:
* Accounting Standards Codification, the only source of authoritative nongovernmental U.S. GAAP. In 2009, the Codification superseded the FASB&#x27;s Statements of Financial Accounting Standards. 168 standards had been issued before the Codification.
* Concepts Statements, first issued in 1978. They are part of the FASB&#x27;s conceptual framework project and set forth fundamental objectives and concepts that the FASB use in developing future standards. As they are not part of the Codification, they are not authoritative GAAP. There have been 8 concepts published to date, of which 5 have been superseded.
* Technical Bulletins or Staff Positions, guidelines on applying standards, interpretations, and opinions. Usually solve some very specific accounting issue that will not have a significant, lasting effect or respond to questions from practitioners.
* Accounting Standards Updates (ASU), where the FASB issues an ASU to communicate changes to the FASB Codification, including changes to non-authoritative SEC content.
* Exposure Documents, where the FASB issues Exposure Documents to solicit an ASU to communicate changes to the FASB Codification, including changes to non-authoritative SEC content.

====FASB Accounting Standards Codification====
Circa 2008, the FASB issued the FASB Accounting Standards Codification, which reorganized the thousands of U.S. GAAP pronouncements into roughly 90 accounting topics.

The Codification is effective for interim and annual periods ending after September 15, 2009. All existing accounting standards documents are superseded as described in FASB Statement No. 168, The FASB Accounting Standards Codification and the Hierarchy of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. All other accounting literature not included in the Codification is non-authoritative.

The Codification reorganizes the thousands of U.S. GAAP pronouncements into roughly 90 accounting topics and displays all topics using a consistent structure. It also includes relevant Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), guidance that follows the same topical structure in separate sections in the Codification.

To prepare users for the change, the AICPA has provided a number of tools and training resources.

While the Codification does not change GAAP, it introduces a new structure—one that is organized in an easily accessible, user-friendly online research system. The FASB expects that the new system will reduce the amount of time and effort required to research an accounting issue, mitigate the risk of noncompliance with standards through improved usability of the literature, provide accurate information with real-time updates as new standards are released, and assist the FASB with the research efforts required during the standard-setting process.

===Other organizations===
Other organizations involved in determining United States accounting standards include:
* Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). Created in 1984, the GASB addresses state and local government reporting issues. Its structure is similar to that of the FASB&#x27;s, and the FASB and GASB are located together and share resources.
* Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB). Created in 1990, the FASAB addresses federal government financial reporting issues. The FASAB issues federal financial accounting standards and provides guidance to federal reporting entities.

Other influential organizations include the Government Finance Officer&#x27;s Association (GFOA), American Accounting Association, Institute of Management Accountants, and Financial Executives Institute.

===Convergence with International Financial Reporting Standards===
In 2006, the FASB began working with the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) to reduce or eliminate the differences between U.S. GAAP and the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), known as the IASB-FASB convergence project. The scope of the overall IASB-FASB convergence project has evolved over time. The IASB and FASB issued converged standards for accounting topics including Business combinations (2008), Consolidation (2011), Fair value measurement (2011), and Revenue recognition (2014). Other convergence projects have been discontinued. As of 2022, the convergence project is coming to an end and no new projects will be added to the agenda.

In 2008, the Securities and Exchange Commission issued a preliminary &quot;roadmap&quot; that indicated it was considering whether to adopt or allow domestic issuers to use IFRS instead of U.S. GAAP. In 2010, the SEC expressed their aim to fully adopt International Financial Reporting Standards in the U.S. by 2014. However, standards under IFRS differ considerably from U.S. GAAP, so progress was slow and uncertain. In 2017, the SEC has acknowledged that there is no longer a push to move more U.S companies to IFRS, so the two sets of standards will &quot;continue to coexist&quot; for the foreseeable future.

==See also==

*Fin 48
*International Financial Reporting Standards
*Other comprehensive basis of accounting
*Philosophy of accounting
*Statutory accounting principles for U.S. insurance companies
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*SEC Accounting Bulletins – United States
*SEC Division of Corporate Finance – United States
*Financial Accounting Standards Board Website (FASB) – United States
*Government Accounting Standards Board Website (GASB) – United States
* U.S. GAAP vs. IFRS comparisons from RSM US
*US GAAP XBRL Taxonomy – United States</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q650978" start="0" end="40" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q650978" start="42" end="46" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)" label="GAAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779838" start="55" end="74" title="accounting standard" label="accounting standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="90" end="129" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416161" start="227" end="263" title="Financial Accounting Standards Board" label="Financial Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672774" start="299" end="332" title="Accounting Standards Codification" label="Accounting Standards Codification"/>
<link wikidata="Q959950" start="443" end="481" title="Extensible Business Reporting Language" label="Extensible Business Reporting Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999032" start="799" end="810" title="Securities Exchange Act of 1934" label="registrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q565043" start="2618" end="2631" title="Going concern" label="Going concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q474182" start="2764" end="2776" title="Amortization (accounting)" label="amortization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="2956" end="2964" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416161" start="3004" end="3008" title="FASB" label="FASB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="3042" end="3051" title="US dollar" label="US dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q362098" start="3253" end="3268" title="Historical cost" label="Historical cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429965" start="3386" end="3403" title="fair market value" label="fair market value"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146785" start="3669" end="3688" title="Revenue recognition" label="Revenue recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q832927" start="3875" end="3899" title="accrual basis accounting" label="accrual basis accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388479" start="4240" end="4258" title="Matching principle" label="Matching principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13516686" start="4260" end="4267" title="expense" label="expense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166278" start="5864" end="5890" title="convention of conservatism" label="convention of conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q465177" start="6075" end="6080" title="AICPA" label="AICPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416161" start="6834" end="6870" title="Financial Accounting Standards Board" label="Financial Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q465177" start="6904" end="6954" title="American Institute of Certified Public Accountants" label="American Institute of Certified Public Accountants"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="6974" end="7013" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="7171" end="7219" title="United States Securities and Exchange Commission" label="United States Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="7257" end="7273" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q465177" start="7428" end="7433" title="AICPA" label="AICPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416161" start="7448" end="7452" title="FASB" label="FASB"/>
<link wikidata="Q465177" start="7682" end="7732" title="American Institute of Certified Public Accountants" label="American Institute of Certified Public Accountants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560342" start="8175" end="8193" title="List of Accounting Principles Board Opinions" label="issued 31 opinions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416161" start="8395" end="8410" title="Wheat Committee" label="Wheat Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416161" start="8631" end="8667" title="Financial Accounting Standards Board" label="Financial Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449572" start="8704" end="8735" title="Financial Accounting Foundation" label="Financial Accounting Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570494" start="10417" end="10478" title="List of FASB Statements of Financial Accounting Concepts" label="8 concepts published to date, of which 5 have been superseded"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="11868" end="11902" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589435" start="12770" end="12809" title="Governmental Accounting Standards Board" label="Governmental Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439993" start="13018" end="13061" title="Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board" label="Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142430" start="13578" end="13618" title="International Accounting Standards Board" label="International Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q176831" start="13691" end="13734" title="International Financial Reporting Standards" label="International Financial Reporting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449314" start="14844" end="14850" title="Fin 48" label="Fin 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q176831" start="14852" end="14895" title="International Financial Reporting Standards" label="International Financial Reporting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108650" start="14897" end="14936" title="Other comprehensive basis of accounting" label="Other comprehensive basis of accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186255" start="14938" end="14962" title="Philosophy of accounting" label="Philosophy of accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604695" start="14964" end="14995" title="Statutory accounting principles" label="Statutory accounting principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801356" start="15339" end="15345" title="RSM US" label="RSM US"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182697" wikidata="Q3345334" url="?curid=182697" title="Technical University of Nova Scotia">
<text>The Technical University of Nova Scotia (TUNS) was a Canadian university located in Halifax, Nova Scotia.

TUNS was officially founded as the Nova Scotia Technical College on 25 April 1907, and was renamed as the Technical University of Nova Scotia in 1980. On 1 April 1997 it was merged into Dalhousie University. The former TUNS campus is now called the Sexton Campus, in honour of Dr. Frederick Sexton, founding principal of the Nova Scotia Technical College.

==History==
By the early 20th century, Nova Scotia businesses and industries recognized the growing need for technical education in the province, particularly in light of the coal mining and steel manufacturing boom underway in Industrial Cape Breton. Competing engineering diploma programs were established by four universities in the province but no institution could afford the expense of operating a full engineering program. In 1902, Dalhousie University began offering degrees in mining engineering and it established a faculty three years later, but it was too expensive to maintain.

Following an April 19, 1906 meeting between the Halifax Board of Trade, the Mining Society of Nova Scotia, and four provincial universities, it was agree to request that the Government of Nova Scotia establish a degree-granting technical college. The resulting &quot;Technical Education Act&quot; received Royal Assent on April 25, 1907 and established both the Nova Scotia Technical College (NSTC) as well as a system of local technical education/vocational training schools throughout the province. Dr. Frederick Henry Sexton was appointed Principal.

NSTC started classes in September 1909 in a new building on Spring Garden Road (presently occupied by the Faculty of Architecture and Planning). This property was former military land that had been vacated with the withdrawal of the Royal Navy and British Army from Halifax in 1906; the provision of the land included a requirement that NSTC include military instruction in its curriculum. Compulsory military training at NSTC ended in 1945. Initially NSTC offered programs in civil engineering, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering and mining engineering. In 1947 NSTC began offering chemical engineering and metallurgical engineering. In 1961 the School of Architecture was established (the first and only program in Atlantic Canada). In 1964 NSTC began offering geological engineering followed by industrial engineering in 1965. In 1982 the School of Computer Science was established.

Dr. Sexton served as Principal and Director of Technical Education from 1907 to 1925 when the post was renamed; he continued serving as president from 1925 until 1947. In 1947 the &quot;Technical College Act&quot; received Royal Assent which removed responsibility for the province&#x27;s vocational training and education system from the NSTC president. NSTC expanded to include a graduate program, beginning with master&#x27;s degrees in the 1950s, followed by Doctorate degrees in the 1960s.

From 1907 until 1963 the Government of Nova Scotia&#x27;s Department of Education (and its predecessors) was responsible for the direct funding and operation of NSTC. Similarly the government&#x27;s Department of Public Works was responsible for maintenance of NSTC buildings and construction of new buildings. A revision to the &quot;Nova Scotia Technical College Act&quot; in 1963 made the NSTC&#x27;s Board of Governors responsible for financial affairs. In 1965 the maintenance and construction of buildings was transferred to the NSTC. The 1960s-1990s was a period of significant expansion to the college&#x27;s campus which saw many buildings constructed to encompass much of the block bounded by Spring Garden Road, Barrington Street, Morris Street and the Halifax Infirmary property to the west (along Queen Street).

The Nova Scotia Technical College was frequently being confused by the public with the Nova Scotia Institute of Technology (NSIT) - now part of the Nova Scotia Community College system - and the NSTC abbreviation was often confused by the public with the Nova Scotia Teachers College; there was also identification issues resulting from the institution&#x27;s name as a &quot;college&quot; when it was offering university-level instruction. On 3 June 1980, following 40 years of lobbying, the Government of Nova Scotia changed the name of the institution to the Technical University of Nova Scotia (TUNS). The mission of TUNS was described as &quot;contribute to the development of Nova Scotia by providing high quality education, research and community and industry collaboration in architecture, computer science and engineering.&quot;

==Organisation==
During the 1990s, TUNS had the following academic units:

* School of Architecture
* School of Computer Science
* School of Engineering
** Department of Chemical Engineering
** Department of Civil Engineering
** Department of Electrical Engineering
** Department of Food Science and Technology
** Department of Geological Engineering
** Department of Industrial Engineering
** Department of Mechanical Engineering
** Department of Metallurgical Engineering
** Department of Mining Engineering
** Department of Engineering Physics (final graduating class in 1991)
* School of Planning

==Merger into Dalhousie University==

The provincial government forced TUNS to amalgamate with Dalhousie University in April 1997. For several years the former TUNS faculties formed a separate college called Dalhousie University Polytechnic (nicknamed DalTech) but in 2001 the college structure was dissolved and the faculties simply became part of Dalhousie University.

Today, the TUNS campus is known as the Sexton Campus of Dalhousie University. It includes the Faculty of Engineering and the Faculty of Architecture and Planning. The TUNS School of Computer Science was merged with Dalhousie&#x27;s Computer Science division (which had previously been a part of the Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science) following the 1997 amalgamation to become the Faculty of Computer Science.

In honour of Dr. Sexton, Dalhousie University has named the former TUNS campus the Sexton Campus. There are also two buildings and a prestigious scholarship named after Dr. Sexton.

== See also ==
* T-Room
* TUNS, a Canadian indie supergroup named for the university

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3345334" start="4" end="39" title="Technical University of Nova Scotia" label="Technical University of Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345334" start="41" end="45" title="Technical University of Nova Scotia" label="TUNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="62" end="72" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="84" end="91" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="93" end="104" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345334" start="142" end="171" title="Technical University of Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q579321" start="293" end="313" title="Dalhousie University" label="Dalhousie University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498009" start="384" end="404" title="Frederick Henry Sexton" label="Dr. Frederick Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027513" start="692" end="714" title="Industrial Cape Breton" label="Industrial Cape Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q579321" start="903" end="923" title="Dalhousie University" label="Dalhousie University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370637" start="950" end="968" title="mining engineering" label="mining engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589276" start="1230" end="1255" title="Government of Nova Scotia" label="Government of Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498009" start="1557" end="1583" title="Frederick Henry Sexton" label="Dr. Frederick Henry Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1716" end="1752" title="Faculty of Architecture and Planning, Dalhousie University" label="Faculty of Architecture and Planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="1843" end="1853" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1858" end="1870" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589276" start="3030" end="3055" title="Government of Nova Scotia" label="Government of Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270360" start="3769" end="3786" title="Queen Elizabeth II Health Sciences Centre" label="Halifax Infirmary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3918" end="3953" title="Nova Scotia Institute of Technology" label="Nova Scotia Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345335" start="3979" end="4008" title="Nova Scotia Community College" label="Nova Scotia Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064241" start="4086" end="4114" title="Nova Scotia Teachers College" label="Nova Scotia Teachers College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050847" start="5351" end="5361" title="Consolidation (business)" label="amalgamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q579321" start="5367" end="5387" title="Dalhousie University" label="Dalhousie University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428951" start="5738" end="5760" title="Faculty of Engineering, Dalhousie University" label="Faculty of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5769" end="5805" title="Faculty of Architecture and Planning, Dalhousie University" label="Faculty of Architecture and Planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428928" start="6050" end="6077" title="Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University" label="Faculty of Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667849" start="6279" end="6285" title="T-Room" label="T-Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232758" start="6288" end="6292" title="Tuns (band)" label="TUNS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182704" wikidata="Q5462019" url="?curid=182704" title="Flour bomb">
<text>A flour bomb is a fragile container (e.g. a paper bag) filled with flour for the purpose to be thrown at a person or object to cause an inconvenient and messy stain, called flour bombing. Alternately, sometimes a bucket of flour can be used.

Flour bombs and flour bombing are a classic protest method, along with the throwing of eggs and overripe tomatoes.

The effect of flour bombs is made worse by the inclusion of eggs, or containers of other liquid, making the removal of the resultant mixture difficult.

== Notable incidents ==
Flour bombs saw notable use during the controversial 1981 Springbok Tour at Eden Park in Auckland, New Zealand. In an attempt to disrupt the match, flour bombs, along with flares, leaflets and a parachute-support banner reading &quot;Biko&quot; were dropped into Eden Park from a light plane flying overhead. A New Zealand All Blacks player was felled by one of the flour bombs.

On 19 May 2004, during Prime Minister&#x27;s Questions, two members of the Fathers 4 Justice organisation threw condoms filled with purple-dyed flour at Tony Blair, in the chamber of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom. The event highlighted the poor security methods employed in and around the Houses of Parliament at the time.

Several candidates in the 2017 French Presidential Election, including future president Emmanuel Macron, were hit by flour bombs.

==See also==

*Acid throwing
*Egging
*Glitter bombing
*Inking (attack)
*Milkshaking
*Pieing
*Shoe-throwing
*Zapping
*Zelyonka attack
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5462019" start="2" end="12" title="Flour bomb" label="flour bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="67" end="72" title="flour" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462019" start="173" end="186" title="Flour bomb" label="flour bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="287" end="294" title="protest" label="protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535458" start="589" end="608" title="1981 Springbok Tour" label="1981 Springbok Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q312411" start="612" end="621" title="Eden Park" label="Eden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q214473" start="770" end="774" title="Steve Biko" label="Biko"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="847" end="869" title="New Zealand All Blacks" label="New Zealand All Blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380597" start="939" end="970" title="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Questions" label="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398039" start="991" end="1008" title="Fathers 4 Justice" label="Fathers 4 Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="1028" end="1035" title="condoms" label="condoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="1069" end="1079" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="1103" end="1141" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="1218" end="1238" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020999" start="1279" end="1312" title="2017 French Presidential Election" label="2017 French Presidential Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="1341" end="1356" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540534" start="1399" end="1412" title="Acid throwing" label="Acid throwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347909" start="1414" end="1420" title="Egging" label="Egging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339234" start="1422" end="1437" title="Glitter bombing" label="Glitter bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614477" start="1439" end="1454" title="Inking (attack)" label="Inking (attack)"/>
<link wikidata="Q64831160" start="1456" end="1467" title="Milkshaking" label="Milkshaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670875" start="1469" end="1475" title="Pieing" label="Pieing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040342" start="1477" end="1490" title="Shoe-throwing" label="Shoe-throwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525941" start="1492" end="1499" title="Zap (action)" label="Zapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q29639124" start="1501" end="1516" title="Zelyonka attack" label="Zelyonka attack"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182705" wikidata="Q1048416" url="?curid=182705" title="Petroleum geology">
<text>Petroleum geology is the study of the origins, occurrence, movement, accumulation, and exploration of hydrocarbon fuels. It refers to the specific set of geological disciplines that are applied to the search for hydrocarbons (oil exploration).

==Sedimentary basin analysis==
Petroleum geology is principally concerned with the evaluation of seven key elements in sedimentary basins:
* Source
* Reservoir
* Seal
* Trap
* Timing
* Maturation
* Migration

In general, all these elements must be assessed via a limited &#x27;window&#x27; into the subsurface world, provided by one (or possibly more) exploration wells. These wells present only a one-dimensional segment through the Earth, and the skill of inferring three-dimensional characteristics from them is one of the most fundamental in petroleum geology. Recently, the availability of inexpensive, high-quality 3D seismic data (from reflection seismology) and data from various electromagnetic geophysical techniques (such as magnetotellurics) has greatly aided the accuracy of such interpretation. The following section discusses these elements in brief. For a more in-depth treatise, see the second half of this article below.

Evaluation of the &quot;source&quot; uses the methods of geochemistry to quantify the nature of organic-rich rocks which contain the precursors to hydrocarbons, such that the type and quality of expelled hydrocarbon can be assessed.

The &quot;reservoir&quot; is a porous and permeable lithological unit or set of units that holds the hydrocarbon reserves. Analysis of reservoirs at the simplest level requires an assessment of their porosity (to calculate the volume of &quot;in situ&quot; hydrocarbons) and their permeability (to calculate how easily hydrocarbons will flow out of them). Some of the key disciplines used in reservoir analysis are the fields of structural analysis, stratigraphy, sedimentology, and reservoir engineering.

The &quot;seal&quot;, or &quot;cap&quot; rock, is a unit with low permeability that impedes the escape of hydrocarbons from the reservoir rock. Common seals include evaporites, chalks and shales. Analysis of seals involves assessment of their thickness and extent, such that their effectiveness can be quantified.

The &quot;geological trap&quot; is the stratigraphic or structural feature that ensures the juxtaposition of reservoir and seal such that hydrocarbons remain trapped in the subsurface, rather than escaping (due to their natural buoyancy) and being lost.

Analysis of &quot;maturation&quot; involves assessing the thermal history of the source rock in order to make predictions of the amount and timing of hydrocarbon generation and expulsion.

Finally, careful studies of &quot;migration&quot; reveal information on how hydrocarbons move from source to reservoir and help quantify the source (or &quot;kitchen&quot;) of hydrocarbons in a particular area.

==Major subdisciplines in petroleum geology==
Several major subdisciplines exist in petroleum geology specifically to study the seven key elements discussed above.

===Critical moment===
The critical moment is the time of the generation, migration, and accumulation of most hydrocarbons in their primary traps. The migration and accumulation of hydrocarbons occur over a short period in relation to geologic time. These processes (generation, migration, and accumulation) occur near the end of a duration of a petroleum system. The duration being the time crucial elements of the petroleum system are being accumulated.

The critical moment is crucial since it is based on the burial history of the source rock when it is at maximum burial depth. This is when most of the hydrocarbons are generated. Approximately 50%-90% petroleum is made and expelled at this point. The next step is the hydrocarbons entering the oil window. The oil window has to do with the source rock being the appropriate maturity, and also being at the right depth for oil exploration. Geoscientists will be need this to gather stratigraphic data of the petroleum system for analysis.

===Source rock analysis===
In terms of source rock analysis, several facts need to be established. Firstly, the question of whether there actually &quot;is&quot; any source rock in the area must be answered. Delineation and identification of potential source rocks depends on studies of the local stratigraphy, palaeogeography and sedimentology to determine the likelihood of organic-rich sediments having been deposited in the past.

If the likelihood of there being a source rock is thought to be high, the next matter to address is the state of thermal maturity of the source, and the timing of maturation. Maturation of source rocks (see diagenesis and fossil fuels) depends strongly on temperature, such that the majority of oil generation occurs in the range. Gas generation starts at similar temperatures, but may continue up beyond this range, perhaps as high as . In order to determine the likelihood of oil/gas generation, therefore, the thermal history of the source rock must be calculated. This is performed with a combination of geochemical analysis of the source rock (to determine the type of kerogens present and their maturation characteristics) and basin modelling methods, such as back-stripping, to model the thermal gradient in the sedimentary column.

===Geochemical analysis===
The mid-twentieth century was when scientists began to seriously study petroleum geochemistry. Geochemistry was originally utilized for surface prospecting for subsurface hydrocarbons. Today geochemistry serves the petroleum industry by helping seek out effective petroleum systems. The use of geochemistry is relatively cost-effective that allows geologists to assess reservoir-related issues. Once oil to source rock correlation is found, petroleum geologists will use this information to render a 3D model of the basin. Now they can assess the timing of generation, migration, and accumulation relative to the trap formation. This aids in the decision-making process on whether further exploration is necessary. Additionally, this can increase recoveries of the petroleum remaining in reservoirs that were initially deemed unrecoverable.

===Basin analysis===
A full scale basin analysis is usually carried out prior to defining leads and prospects for future drilling. This study tackles the petroleum system and studies source rock (presence and quality); burial history; maturation (timing and volumes); migration and focus; and potential regional seals and major reservoir units (that define carrier beds). All these elements are used to investigate where potential hydrocarbons might migrate towards. Traps and potential leads and prospects are then defined in the area that is likely to have received hydrocarbons.

===Exploration stage===
Although a basin analysis is usually part of the first study a company conducts prior to moving into an area for future exploration, it is also sometimes conducted during the exploration phase. Exploration geology comprises all the activities and studies necessary for finding new hydrocarbon occurrence. Usually seismic (or 3D seismic) studies are shot, and old exploration data (seismic lines, well logs, reports) are used to expand upon the new studies. Sometimes gravity and magnetic studies are conducted, and oil seeps and spills are mapped to find potential areas for hydrocarbon occurrences. As soon as a significant hydrocarbon occurrence is found by an exploration- or wildcat-well, the appraisal stage starts.

===Appraisal stage===
The appraisal stage is used to delineate the extent of the discovery. Hydrocarbon reservoir properties, connectivity, hydrocarbon type and gas-oil and oil-water contacts are determined to calculate potential recoverable volumes. This is usually done by drilling more appraisal wells around the initial exploration well. Production tests may also give insight in reservoir pressures and connectivity. Geochemical and petrophysical analysis gives information on the type (viscosity, chemistry, API, carbon content, etc.) of the hydrocarbon and the nature of the reservoir (porosity, permeability, etc.).

===Production stage===
After a hydrocarbon occurrence has been discovered and appraisal has indicated it is a commercial find, the production stage is initiated. This stage focuses on extracting the hydrocarbons in a controlled way (without damaging the formation, within commercial favorable volumes, etc.). Production wells are drilled and completed in strategic positions. 3D seismic is usually available by this stage to target wells precisely for optimal recovery. Sometimes enhanced recovery (steam injection, pumps, etc.) is used to extract more hydrocarbons or to redevelop abandoned fields.

===Reservoir analysis===
The existence of a reservoir rock (typically, sandstones and fractured limestones) is determined through a combination of regional studies (i.e. analysis of other wells in the area), stratigraphy and sedimentology (to quantify the pattern and extent of sedimentation) and seismic interpretation. Once a possible hydrocarbon reservoir is identified, the key physical characteristics of a reservoir that are of interest to a hydrocarbon explorationist are its bulk rock volume, net-to-gross ratio, porosity and permeability.

Bulk rock volume, or the gross rock volume of rock above any hydrocarbon-water contact, is determined by mapping and correlating sedimentary packages. The net-to-gross ratio, typically estimated from analogues and wireline logs, is used to calculate the proportion of the sedimentary packages that contains reservoir rocks. The bulk rock volume multiplied by the net-to-gross ratio gives the net rock volume of the reservoir. The net rock volume multiplied by porosity gives the total hydrocarbon pore volume, i.e. the volume within the sedimentary package that fluids (importantly, hydrocarbons and water) can occupy. The summation of these volumes (see STOIIP and GIIP) for a given exploration prospect will allow explorers and commercial analysts to determine whether a prospect is financially viable.

Traditionally, porosity and permeability were determined through the study of drilling samples, analysis of cores obtained from the wellbore, examination of contiguous parts of the reservoir that outcrop at the surface (see e.g. Guerriero et al., 2009, 2011, in references below) and by the technique of formation evaluation using wireline tools passed down the well itself. Modern advances in seismic data acquisition and processing have meant that seismic attributes of subsurface rocks are readily available and can be used to infer physical/sedimentary properties of the rocks themselves.

==See also==
*Bituminous rocks
*Controlled source electro-magnetic

==References==
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Brian Frehner. &quot;Finding Oil: The Nature of Petroleum Geology, 1859–1920&quot; (University of Nebraska Press; 2011) 232 pages

==External links==
*Petroleum Geology — A forum dedicated to all aspects of petroleum geology from exploration to production
*Oil On My Shoes — Website devoted to the science and practical application of petroleum geology
*AAPG — American Association of Petroleum Geologists
*PetroleumGeology.org — Website about the history and technology of petroleum geology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1048416" start="0" end="17" title="Petroleum geology" label="Petroleum geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q111765628" start="102" end="118" title="hydrocarbon fuel" label="hydrocarbon fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="212" end="224" title="hydrocarbons" label="hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="226" end="241" title="oil exploration" label="oil exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q785020" start="364" end="381" title="sedimentary basin" label="sedimentary basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988844" start="386" end="392" title="Source rock" label="Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="395" end="404" title="petroleum reservoir" label="Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440812" start="407" end="411" title="caprock" label="Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261773" start="414" end="418" title="Petroleum trap" label="Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792011" start="430" end="440" title="Maturity (geology)" label="Maturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q929568" start="443" end="452" title="Catagenesis (geology)" label="Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q587682" start="609" end="614" title="oil well" label="wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500431" start="888" end="909" title="reflection seismology" label="reflection seismology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413106" start="981" end="997" title="magnetotellurics" label="magnetotellurics"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="1242" end="1254" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538759" start="1471" end="1483" title="lithological" label="lithological"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="1619" end="1627" title="porosity" label="porosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="1662" end="1669" title="in situ" label="in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q256699" start="1700" end="1712" title="Permeability (fluid)" label="permeability"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1848" end="1867" title="#References" label="structural analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="1869" end="1881" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205768" start="1883" end="1896" title="sedimentology" label="sedimentology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916050" start="1902" end="1923" title="reservoir engineering" label="reservoir engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="2054" end="2068" title="reservoir rock" label="reservoir rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q491689" start="2091" end="2100" title="evaporite" label="evaporite"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="2103" end="2108" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="2114" end="2119" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261773" start="2251" end="2266" title="Petroleum trap" label="geological trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="2280" end="2293" title="Stratigraphy" label="stratigraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="2469" end="2477" title="buoyancy" label="buoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988844" start="2577" end="2588" title="source rock" label="source rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="4354" end="4366" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52151" start="4368" end="4383" title="palaeogeography" label="palaeogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q205768" start="4388" end="4401" title="sedimentology" label="sedimentology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792011" start="4605" end="4621" title="maturity (geology)" label="thermal maturity"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="4699" end="4709" title="diagenesis" label="diagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="4714" end="4725" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="5100" end="5111" title="geochemical" label="geochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q938398" start="5166" end="5173" title="kerogen" label="kerogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867503" start="5225" end="5240" title="basin modelling" label="basin modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839013" start="5258" end="5272" title="back-stripping" label="back-stripping"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="5287" end="5303" title="temperature" label="thermal gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="7471" end="7482" title="Exploration well" label="exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001033" start="7487" end="7499" title="Wildcat well" label="wildcat-well"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080707" start="7968" end="7981" title="Petrophysics" label="petrophysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="8022" end="8031" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860587" start="8654" end="8669" title="Steam injection (oil industry)" label="steam injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="8827" end="8836" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="8852" end="8861" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="9204" end="9227" title="hydrocarbon exploration" label="hydrocarbon exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081418" start="9960" end="9966" title="STOIIP" label="STOIIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q113484830" start="9971" end="9975" title="Gas Initially In Place" label="GIIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q502102" start="10243" end="10251" title="wellbore" label="wellbore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10340" end="10368" title="#References" label="Guerriero et al., 2009, 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470036" start="10415" end="10435" title="formation evaluation" label="formation evaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026910" start="10442" end="10450" title="Wireline (cabling)" label="wireline"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="10505" end="10512" title="seismic" label="seismic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172399" start="10513" end="10529" title="data acquisition" label="data acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711131" start="10561" end="10578" title="seismic attribute" label="seismic attribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101792" start="10719" end="10735" title="Bituminous rocks" label="Bituminous rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165930" start="10737" end="10771" title="Controlled source electro-magnetic" label="Controlled source electro-magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551355" start="10901" end="10929" title="University of Nebraska Press" label="University of Nebraska Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182708" wikidata="Q1375924" url="?curid=182708" title="Hoare logic">
<text>Hoare logic (also known as Floyd–Hoare logic or Hoare rules) is a formal system with a set of logical rules for reasoning rigorously about the correctness of computer programs. It was proposed in 1969 by the British computer scientist and logician Tony Hoare, and subsequently refined by Hoare and other researchers. The original ideas were seeded by the work of Robert W. Floyd, who had published a similar system for flowcharts.

==Hoare triple==
The central feature of Hoare logic is the Hoare triple. A triple describes how the execution of a piece of code changes the state of the computation. A Hoare triple is of the form

: formula_1

where formula_2 and formula_3 are &quot;assertions&quot; and formula_4 is a &quot;command&quot;. formula_2 is named the &quot;precondition&quot; and formula_3 the &quot;postcondition&quot;: when the precondition is met, executing the command establishes the postcondition. Assertions are formulae in predicate logic.

Hoare logic provides axioms and inference rules for all the constructs of a simple imperative programming language. In addition to the rules for the simple language in Hoare&#x27;s original paper, rules for other language constructs have been developed since then by Hoare and many other researchers. There are rules for concurrency, procedures, jumps, and pointers.

== Partial and total correctness ==

Using standard Hoare logic, only partial correctness can be proven. Total correctness additionally requires termination, which can be proven separately or with an extended version of the While rule. Thus the intuitive reading of a Hoare triple is: Whenever formula_2 holds of the state before the execution of formula_4, then formula_3 will hold afterwards, or formula_4 does not terminate. In the latter case, there is no &quot;after&quot;, so formula_3 can be any statement at all. Indeed, one can choose formula_3 to be false to express that formula_4 does not terminate.

&quot;Termination&quot; here and in the rest of this article is meant in the broader sense that computation will eventually be finished, that is it implies the absence of infinite loops; it does not imply the absence of implementation limit violations (e.g. division by zero) stopping the program prematurely. In his 1969 paper, Hoare used a narrower notion of termination which also entailed the absence of implementation limit violations, and expressed his preference for the broader notion of termination as it keeps assertions implementation-independent:

== Rules ==

===Empty statement axiom schema===

The empty statement rule asserts that the statement does not change the state of the program, thus whatever holds true before also holds true afterwards.

: formula_14

===Assignment axiom schema===

The assignment axiom states that, after the assignment, any predicate that was previously true for the right-hand side of the assignment now holds for the variable. Formally, let be an assertion in which the variable is free. Then:
: formula_15

where formula_16 denotes the assertion in which each free occurrence of has been replaced by the expression .

The assignment axiom scheme means that the truth of formula_16 is equivalent to the after-assignment truth of . Thus were formula_16 true prior to the assignment, by the assignment axiom, then would be true subsequent to which. Conversely, were formula_16 false (i.e. formula_20 true) prior to the assignment statement, must then be false afterwards.

Examples of valid triples include:
:*formula_21
:*formula_22

All preconditions that are not modified by the expression can be carried over to the postcondition. In the first example, assigning formula_23 does not change the fact that formula_24, so both statements may appear in the postcondition. Formally, this result is obtained by applying the axiom schema with being (formula_25 and formula_24), which yields formula_27 being (formula_24 and formula_24), which can in turn be simplified to the given precondition formula_24.

The assignment axiom scheme is equivalent to saying that to find the precondition, first take the post-condition and replace all occurrences of the left-hand side of the assignment with the right-hand side of the assignment. Be careful not to try to do this backwards by following this &quot;incorrect&quot; way of thinking: formula_31;
this rule leads to nonsensical examples like:
: formula_32

Another &quot;incorrect&quot; rule looking tempting at first glance is formula_33; it leads to nonsensical examples like:
: formula_34

While a given postcondition uniquely determines the precondition formula_16, the converse is not true. For example:
:*formula_36,
:*formula_37,
:*formula_38, and
:*formula_39
are valid instances of the assignment axiom scheme.

The assignment axiom proposed by Hoare &quot;does not apply&quot; when more than one name may refer to the same stored value. For example,
: formula_40
is wrong if and refer to the same variable (aliasing), although it is a proper instance of the assignment axiom scheme (with both formula_41 and formula_42 being formula_43).

===Rule of composition===
Hoare&#x27;s rule of composition applies to sequentially executed programs and , where executes prior to and is written formula_44 ( is called the &quot;midcondition&quot;):

:formula_45

For example, consider the following two instances of the assignment axiom:

:formula_46

and

:formula_47

By the sequencing rule, one concludes:

:formula_48

Another example is shown in the right box.

===Conditional rule===

:formula_49

The conditional rule states that a postcondition common to and part is also a postcondition of the whole statement.
In the and the part, the unnegated and negated condition can be added to the precondition , respectively.
The condition, , must not have side effects.
An example is given in the next section.

This rule was not contained in Hoare&#x27;s original publication.
However, since a statement 
:formula_50
has the same effect as a one-time loop construct
:formula_51
the conditional rule can be derived from the other Hoare rules.
In a similar way, rules for other derived program constructs, like loop, loop, , , can be reduced by program transformation to the rules from Hoare&#x27;s original paper.

===Consequence rule===

:formula_52

This rule allows to strengthen the precondition formula_53 and/or to weaken the postcondition formula_54.
It is used e.g. to achieve literally identical postconditions for the and the part.

For example, a proof of
:formula_55
needs to apply the conditional rule, which in turn requires to prove
:formula_56,   or simplified 
:formula_57
for the part, and
:formula_58,   or simplified 
:formula_59
for the part.

However, the assignment rule for the part requires to choose as formula_60; rule application hence yields
:formula_61,   which is logically equivalent to
:formula_62.
The consequence rule is needed to strengthen the precondition formula_63 obtained from the assignment rule to formula_64 required for the conditional rule.

Similarly, for the part, the assignment rule yields
:formula_65,   or equivalently
:formula_66,
hence the consequence rule has to be applied with formula_67 and formula_53 being formula_69 and formula_70, respectively, to strengthen again the precondition. Informally, the effect of the consequence rule is to &quot;forget&quot; that formula_69 is known at the entry of the part, since the assignment rule used for the part doesn&#x27;t need that information.

===While rule===

:formula_72

Here is the loop invariant, which is to be preserved by the loop body .
After the loop is finished, this invariant still holds, and moreover formula_73 must have caused the loop to end.
As in the conditional rule, must not have side effects.

For example, a proof of 
:formula_74
by the while rule requires to prove
:formula_75,   or simplified
:formula_76,
which is easily obtained by the assignment rule.
Finally, the postcondition formula_77 can be simplified to formula_78.

For another example, the while rule can be used to formally verify the following strange program to compute the exact square root of an arbitrary number —even if is an integer variable and is not a square number:
:formula_79
After applying the while rule with being , it remains to prove
:formula_80,
which follows from the skip rule and the consequence rule.

In fact, the strange program is &quot;partially&quot; correct: if it happened to terminate, it is certain that must have contained (by chance) the value of &#x27;s square root.
In all other cases, it will not terminate; therefore it is not &quot;totally&quot; correct.

===While rule for total correctness===

If the above ordinary while rule is replaced by the following one, the Hoare calculus can also be used to prove total correctness, i.e. termination as well as partial correctness. Commonly, square brackets are used here instead of curly braces to indicate the different notion of program correctness.

:formula_81

In this rule, in addition to maintaining the loop invariant, one also proves termination by way of an expression , called the loop variant, whose value strictly decreases with respect to a well-founded relation on some domain set during each iteration. Since is well-founded, a strictly decreasing chain of members of can have only finite length, so cannot keep decreasing forever. (For example, the usual order is well-founded on positive integers formula_82, but neither on the integers formula_83 nor on positive real numbers formula_84; all these sets are meant in the mathematical, not in the computing sense, they are all infinite in particular.)

Given the loop invariant , the condition must imply that is not a minimal element of , for otherwise the body could not decrease any further, i.e. the premise of the rule would be false. (This is one of various notations for total correctness.)
Resuming the first example of the previous section, for a total-correctness proof of
:formula_85
the while rule for total correctness can be applied with e.g. being the non-negative integers with the usual order, and the expression being formula_86, which then in turn requires to prove
:formula_87
Informally speaking, we have to prove that the distance formula_88 decreases in every loop cycle, while it always remains non-negative; this process can go on only for a finite number of cycles.

The previous proof goal can be simplified to
:formula_89,
which can be proven as follows:
:formula_90 is obtained by the assignment rule, and 
:formula_91 can be strengthened to formula_92 by the consequence rule.

For the second example of the previous section, of course no expression can be found that is decreased by the empty loop body, hence termination cannot be proved.

== See also ==

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Robert D. Tennent. &quot;Specifying Software&quot; (a textbook that includes an introduction to Hoare logic, written in 2002) 

== External links==
* KeY-Hoare is a semi-automatic verification system built on top of the KeY theorem prover. It features a Hoare calculus for a simple while language.
* j-Algo Hoare Calculus module (j-Algo on GitHub, j-Algo on SourceForge) – A visualisation of the Hoare calculus in the algorithm visualisation program j-Algo.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1375924" start="0" end="11" title="Hoare logic" label="Hoare logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375924" start="27" end="44" title="Hoare logic" label="Floyd–Hoare logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375924" start="48" end="59" title="Hoare logic" label="Hoare rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q649732" start="66" end="79" title="formal system" label="formal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q360812" start="143" end="175" title="correctness of computer programs" label="correctness of computer programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="239" end="247" title="mathematical logic" label="logician"/>
<link wikidata="Q92602" start="248" end="258" title="Tony Hoare" label="Tony Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q92641" start="363" end="378" title="Robert W. Floyd" label="Robert W. Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q185092" start="419" end="428" title="flowchart" label="flowchart"/>
<link wikidata="Q741248" start="683" end="693" title="assertion (computing)" label="assertions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413450" start="769" end="781" title="precondition" label="precondition"/>
<link wikidata="Q360690" start="812" end="825" title="postcondition" label="postcondition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="943" end="958" title="predicate logic" label="predicate logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="982" end="987" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068763" start="993" end="1007" title="inference rule" label="inference rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="1044" end="1075" title="Imperative programming" label="imperative programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414548" start="1282" end="1293" title="Concurrency (computer science)" label="concurrency"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="1295" end="1304" title="procedure (computer science)" label="procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q813911" start="1307" end="1311" title="jump (computer science)" label="jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="1318" end="1325" title="pointer (computer programming)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q360812" start="1399" end="1418" title="partial correctness" label="partial correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q360812" start="1434" end="1451" title="Total correctness" label="Total correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702793" start="1474" end="1485" title="Termination analysis" label="termination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791410" start="2555" end="2570" title="NOP (code)" label="empty statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q935944" start="2971" end="2975" title="Free variables and bound variables" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q935944" start="3050" end="3065" title="Free variables and bound variables" label="free occurrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522579" start="3078" end="3086" title="Substitution (logic)" label="replaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q127046" start="4949" end="4957" title="aliasing (computing)" label="aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5830" end="5842" title="#Consequence_rule" label="next section"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248437" start="6177" end="6199" title="program transformation" label="program transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238838" start="7526" end="7540" title="loop invariant" label="loop invariant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8671" end="8696" title="#While_rule" label="above ordinary while rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q360812" start="8776" end="8793" title="total correctness" label="total correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702793" start="9056" end="9067" title="termination proof" label="termination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675865" start="9105" end="9117" title="loop variant" label="loop variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q338021" start="9168" end="9189" title="well-founded relation" label="well-founded relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="9277" end="9282" title="chain (order theory)" label="chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="9419" end="9426" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176558" start="9486" end="9507" title="positive real numbers" label="positive real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475294" start="9699" end="9714" title="minimal element" label="minimal element"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9912" end="9928" title="#While_rule" label="previous section"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10618" end="10634" title="#While_rule" label="previous section"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382043" start="11042" end="11045" title="KeY" label="KeY"/>
<link wikidata="Q364" start="11162" end="11168" title="GitHub" label="GitHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q165400" start="11180" end="11191" title="SourceForge" label="SourceForge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182719" wikidata="Q1073080" url="?curid=182719" title="Mickey Finn (drugs)">
<text>In slang, a Mickey Finn, or simply a Mickey (often called a spiked drink), is a drink laced with an incapacitating agent, particularly chloral hydrate, given to someone without their consent with the intent to incapacitate them or &quot;knock them out&quot;; hence the colloquial name knockout drops. Serving someone a Mickey is most commonly referred to as &quot;slipping someone a mickey&quot;. The &quot;spiking&quot; of drinks is a practice used by sexual predators and murderers at drinking establishments who lace alcoholic drinks with sedative drugs.

== History ==

===Michael &quot;Mickey&quot; Finn===
The &quot;Mickey Finn&quot; is most likely named after the manager and bartender of the Lone Star Saloon and Palm Garden Restaurant, which operated on South State Street in the Loop neighborhood of Chicago from 1896 to 1903. In December 1903, several Chicago newspapers documented that a Michael &quot;Mickey&quot; Finn managed the Lone Star Saloon and was accused of using knockout drops to incapacitate and rob some of his customers. Moreover, the first known written example of the term, according to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; (&quot;OED&quot;), is in 1915, 12 years after his trial.

The first popular account of Mickey Finn was given by Herbert Asbury in his 1940 book &quot;Gem of the Prairie: An Informal History of the Chicago Underworld&quot;. His cited sources are Chicago newspapers and the 1903 court testimony of Lone Star prostitute &quot;Gold Tooth&quot; Mary Thornton. Before his days as a saloon proprietor, Mickey Finn was known as a pickpocket and thief who often preyed on drunken bar patrons. The act of serving a &quot;Mickey Finn Special&quot; was a coordinated robbery orchestrated by Finn. First, Finn or one of his employees (including &quot;house girls&quot;) would slip chloral hydrate into the unsuspecting patron&#x27;s drink. The incapacitated patron would be escorted or carried into a back room by one of Finn&#x27;s associates, who would then rob him and dump him in an alley. The victim would wake up the next morning in a nearby alley and would remember little or nothing of what had happened. 

Finn&#x27;s saloon was ordered to be closed on December 16, 1903. He was apparently arrested again in 1918, this time for running an illegal bar in South Chicago.

===Chicago restaurant poisonings===
On June 22, 1918, four people were arrested and over one hundred waiters taken into custody over the apparent widespread practice of poisoning by waiters in Chicago. Guests who tipped poorly were given &quot;Mickey Finn powder&quot; in their food or drinks. Chemical analysis showed that it contained antimony potassium tartrate, also called &quot;emetic tartar&quot;; which in addition to causing vomiting, headaches, dizziness and depression, can be lethal in large quantities. Two bartenders were arrested for selling the powder at the bar at the waiters&#x27; union headquarters, and W. Stuart Wood and his wife were arrested for manufacturing the powder. Wood sold packets of it for 20 cents and referred to it as &quot;Mickey Finn Powder&quot; in a letter to union bartender John Millian. A follow-up article mentions the pursuit of a man named Jean Crones, who was believed to be responsible for poisoning over 100 people at a banquet held at the University Club of Chicago at which three people died.

==Society and culture==

===Media===
The &quot;OED&quot; gives a chronology of the term, starting in 1915: 
*The 1915 citation is from a photograph of a saloon in the December 26 edition of the &quot;Los Angeles Examiner&quot;. In the photograph is a sign that reads: &quot;Try a Michael Finn cocktail&quot;. 
*In the September 3, 1927 issue of the &quot;Chicago Daily Tribune&quot;, the phrase appears in an article on the use of ethylene for artificial ripening of fruit: &quot;Applied to a human, ethylene is an anaesthetic as the old-time Mickey Finn in a lumber-jack saloon.&quot;

==See also==
*Date rape drug
*Gray death
*Rape culture

==References==
Notes
Further reading
*

==External links==
*Chicago City of the Century - supports Chicago bartender origin
*The Phrase Finder — thorough history of the phrase
*The Straight Dope — supporting the knockout explanation
*Word Detective — supporting the noxious substance explanation, but acknowledging common usage as knockout drug.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1073080" start="12" end="23" title="Mickey Finn (drugs)" label="Mickey Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073080" start="37" end="43" title="Mickey Finn (drugs)" label="Mickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073080" start="60" end="72" title="Mickey Finn (drugs)" label="spiked drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q40050" start="80" end="85" title="drink" label="drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115958" start="100" end="120" title="incapacitating agent" label="incapacitating agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q412340" start="135" end="150" title="chloral hydrate" label="chloral hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073080" start="285" end="299" title="Mickey Finn (drugs)" label="knockout drops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073080" start="407" end="414" title="Mickey Finn (drugs)" label="spiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207313" start="453" end="469" title="sexual predators" label="sexual predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="474" end="483" title="Murder" label="murderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307737" start="487" end="509" title="drinking establishment" label="drinking establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468645" start="515" end="519" title="lacing (drugs)" label="lace"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="520" end="535" title="alcoholic drink" label="alcoholic drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="542" end="550" title="sedative" label="sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q808266" start="683" end="692" title="bartender" label="bartender"/>
<link wikidata="Q986343" start="769" end="781" title="State Street (Chicago)" label="State Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q70626" start="789" end="793" title="Chicago Loop" label="Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="810" end="817" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="1126" end="1151" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182406" start="1270" end="1284" title="Herbert Asbury" label="Herbert Asbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q873750" start="1580" end="1590" title="pickpocket" label="pickpocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q412340" start="1826" end="1841" title="chloral hydrate" label="chloral hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q423129" start="2661" end="2688" title="antimony potassium tartrate" label="antimony potassium tartrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="2708" end="2714" title="emetic" label="emetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="2758" end="2766" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="2768" end="2776" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916362" start="2779" end="2788" title="dizziness" label="dizziness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="2793" end="2803" title="depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894601" start="3314" end="3340" title="University Club of Chicago" label="University Club of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422401" start="3523" end="3529" title="Western saloon" label="saloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q63390358" start="3570" end="3590" title="Los Angeles Examiner" label="Los Angeles Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="3725" end="3746" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Daily Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="3801" end="3809" title="ethylene" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q899702" start="3971" end="3985" title="Date rape drug" label="Date rape drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q30001024" start="3987" end="3997" title="Gray death" label="Gray death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252195" start="3999" end="4011" title="Rape culture" label="Rape culture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182727" wikidata="Q917909" url="?curid=182727" title="Mach's principle">
<text>In theoretical physics, particularly in discussions of gravitation theories, Mach&#x27;s principle (or Mach&#x27;s conjecture) is the name given by Albert Einstein to an imprecise hypothesis often credited to the physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach. The hypothesis attempted to explain how rotating objects, such as gyroscopes and spinning celestial bodies, maintain a frame of reference. 

The proposition is that the existence of absolute rotation (the distinction of local inertial frames vs. rotating reference frames) is determined by the large-scale distribution of matter, as exemplified by this anecdote:

You are standing in a field looking at the stars. Your arms are resting freely at your side, and you see that the distant stars are not moving. Now start spinning. The stars are whirling around you and your arms are pulled away from your body. Why should your arms be pulled away when the stars are whirling? Why should they be dangling freely when the stars don&#x27;t move? 
Mach&#x27;s principle says that this is not a coincidence—that there is a physical law that relates the motion of the distant stars to the local inertial frame. If you see all the stars whirling around you, Mach suggests that there is some physical law which would make it so you would feel a centrifugal force. There are a number of rival formulations of the principle, often stated in vague ways like &quot;mass out there influences inertia here&quot;. A very general statement of Mach&#x27;s principle is &quot;local physical laws are determined by the large-scale structure of the universe&quot;.

Mach&#x27;s concept was a guiding factor in Einstein&#x27;s development of the general theory of relativity. Einstein realized that the overall distribution of matter would determine the metric tensor which indicates which frame is stationary with respect to rotation. Frame-dragging and conservation of gravitational angular momentum makes this into a true statement in the general theory in certain solutions. But because the principle is so vague, many distinct statements have been made which would qualify as a Mach principle, some of which are false. The Gödel rotating universe is a solution of the field equations that is designed to disobey Mach&#x27;s principle in the worst possible way. In this example, the distant stars seem to be revolving faster and faster as one moves further away. This example does not completely settle the question of the physical relevance of the principle because it has closed timelike curves.

== History ==
Mach put forth the idea in his book &quot;The Science of Mechanics&quot; (1883 in German, 1893 in English). Before Mach&#x27;s time, the basic idea also appears in the writings of George Berkeley. After Mach, the book &quot;Absolute or Relative Motion?&quot; (1896) by Benedict Friedlaender and his brother Immanuel contained ideas similar to Mach&#x27;s principle.

== Einstein&#x27;s use of the principle ==
There is a fundamental issue in relativity theory: if all motion is relative, how can we measure the inertia of a body? We must measure the inertia with respect to something else. But what if we imagine a particle completely on its own in the universe? We might hope to still have some notion of its state of motion. Mach&#x27;s principle is sometimes interpreted as the statement that such a particle&#x27;s state of motion has no meaning in that case.

In Mach&#x27;s words, the principle is embodied as follows:

Albert Einstein seemed to view Mach&#x27;s principle as something along the lines of:

In this sense, at least some of Mach&#x27;s principles are related to philosophical holism. Mach&#x27;s suggestion can be taken as the injunction that gravitation theories should be relational theories. Einstein brought the principle into mainstream physics while working on general relativity. Indeed, it was Einstein who first coined the phrase &quot;Mach&#x27;s principle&quot;. There is much debate as to whether Mach really intended to suggest a new physical law since he never states it explicitly.

The writing in which Einstein found inspiration was Mach&#x27;s book &quot;The Science of Mechanics&quot; (1883, tr. 1893), where the philosopher criticized Newton&#x27;s idea of absolute space, in particular the argument that Newton gave sustaining the existence of an advantaged reference system: what is commonly called &quot;Newton&#x27;s bucket argument&quot;.

In his &quot;Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica&quot;, Newton tried to demonstrate that one can always decide if one is rotating with respect to the absolute space, measuring the apparent forces that arise only when an absolute rotation is performed. If a bucket is filled with water, and made to rotate, initially the water remains still, but then, gradually, the walls of the vessel communicate their motion to the water, making it curve and climb up the borders of the bucket, because of the centrifugal forces produced by the rotation. This experiment demonstrates that the centrifugal forces arise only when the water is in rotation with respect to the absolute space (represented here by the earth&#x27;s reference frame, or better, the distant stars) instead, when the bucket was rotating with respect to the water no centrifugal forces were produced, this indicating that the latter was still with respect to the absolute space.

Mach, in his book, says that the bucket experiment only demonstrates that when the water is in rotation with respect to the bucket no centrifugal forces are produced, and that we cannot know how the water would behave if in the experiment the bucket&#x27;s walls were increased in depth and width until they became leagues big. In Mach&#x27;s idea this concept of absolute motion should be substituted with a total relativism in which every motion, uniform or accelerated, has sense only in reference to other bodies (&quot;i.e.&quot;, one cannot simply say that the water is rotating, but must specify if it&#x27;s rotating with respect to the vessel or to the earth). In this view, the apparent forces that seem to permit discrimination between relative and &quot;absolute&quot; motions should only be considered as an effect of the particular asymmetry that there is in our reference system between the bodies which we consider in motion, that are small (like buckets), and the bodies that we believe are still (the earth and distant stars), that are overwhelmingly bigger and heavier than the former.

This same thought had been expressed by the philosopher George Berkeley in his &quot;De Motu&quot;. It is then not clear, in the passages from Mach just mentioned, if the philosopher intended to formulate a new kind of physical action between heavy bodies. This physical mechanism should determine the inertia of bodies, in a way that the heavy and distant bodies of our universe should contribute the most to the inertial forces. More likely, Mach only suggested a mere &quot;redescription of motion in space as experiences that do not invoke the term &quot;space&quot;&quot;. What is certain is that Einstein interpreted Mach&#x27;s passage in the former way, originating a long-lasting debate.

Most physicists believe Mach&#x27;s principle was never developed into a quantitative physical theory that would explain a mechanism by which the stars can have such an effect. Mach himself never made his principle exactly clear. Although Einstein was intrigued and inspired by Mach&#x27;s principle, Einstein&#x27;s formulation of the principle is not a fundamental assumption of general relativity, although the principle of equivalence of gravitational and inertial mass is most certainly fundamental.

== Mach&#x27;s principle in general relativity ==

Because intuitive notions of distance and time no longer apply, what exactly is meant by &quot;Mach&#x27;s principle&quot; in general relativity is even less clear than in Newtonian physics and at least 21 formulations of Mach&#x27;s principle are possible, some being considered more strongly Machian than others. A relatively weak formulation is the assertion that the motion of matter in one place should affect which frames are inertial in another.

Einstein, before completing his development of the general theory of relativity, found an effect which he interpreted as being evidence of Mach&#x27;s principle. We assume a fixed background for conceptual simplicity, construct a large spherical shell of mass, and set it spinning in that background. The reference frame in the interior of this shell will precess with respect to the fixed background. This effect is known as the Lense–Thirring effect. Einstein was so satisfied with this manifestation of Mach&#x27;s principle that he wrote a letter to Mach expressing this:
The Lense–Thirring effect certainly satisfies the very basic and broad notion that &quot;matter there influences inertia here&quot;. The plane of the pendulum would not be dragged around if the shell of matter were not present, or if it were not spinning. As for the statement that &quot;inertia originates in a kind of interaction between bodies&quot;, this, too, could be interpreted as true in the context of the effect.

More fundamental to the problem, however, is the very existence of a fixed background, which Einstein describes as &quot;the fixed stars&quot;. Modern relativists see the imprints of Mach&#x27;s principle in the initial-value problem. Essentially, we humans seem to wish to separate spacetime into slices of constant time. When we do this, Einstein&#x27;s equations can be decomposed into one set of equations, which must be satisfied on each slice, and another set, which describe how to move between slices. The equations for an individual slice are elliptic partial differential equations. In general, this means that only part of the geometry of the slice can be given by the scientist, while the geometry everywhere else will then be dictated by Einstein&#x27;s equations on the slice.

In the context of an asymptotically flat spacetime, the boundary conditions are given at infinity. Heuristically, the boundary conditions for an asymptotically flat universe define a frame with respect to which inertia has meaning. By performing a Lorentz transformation on the distant universe, of course, this inertia can also be transformed.

A stronger form of Mach&#x27;s principle applies in Wheeler–Mach–Einstein spacetimes, which require spacetime to be spatially compact and globally hyperbolic. In such universes Mach&#x27;s principle can be stated as &quot;the distribution of matter and field energy-momentum (and possibly other information) at a particular moment in the universe determines the inertial frame at each point in the universe&quot; (where &quot;a particular moment in the universe&quot; refers to a chosen Cauchy surface).

There have been other attempts to formulate a theory that is more fully Machian, such as the Brans–Dicke theory and the Hoyle–Narlikar theory of gravity, but most physicists argue that none have been fully successful. At an exit poll of experts, held in Tübingen in 1993, when asked the question &quot;Is general relativity perfectly Machian?&quot;, 3 respondents replied &quot;yes&quot;, and 22 replied &quot;no&quot;. To the question &quot;Is general relativity with appropriate boundary conditions of closure of some kind very Machian?&quot; the result was 14 &quot;yes&quot; and 7 &quot;no&quot;.

However, Einstein was convinced that a valid theory of gravity would necessarily have to include the relativity of inertia:
== Inertial induction ==
In 1953, in order to express Mach&#x27;s Principle in quantitative terms, the Cambridge University physicist Dennis W. Sciama proposed the addition of an acceleration dependent term to the Newtonian gravitation equation. Sciama&#x27;s acceleration dependent term was formula_1 where &quot;r&quot; is the distance between the particles, &quot;G&quot; is the gravitational constant, a is the relative acceleration and &quot;c&quot; represents the speed of light in vacuum. Sciama referred to the effect of the acceleration dependent term as Inertial Induction.

== Variations in the statement of the principle ==

The broad notion that &quot;mass there influences inertia here&quot; has been expressed in several forms.
Hermann Bondi and Joseph Samuel have listed eleven distinct statements that can be called Mach principles, labelled &quot;Mach0&quot; through &quot;Mach10&quot; (taking inspiration from the Mach number). Though their list is not necessarily exhaustive, it does give a flavor for the variety possible.
# Newton&#x27;s gravitational constant &quot;G&quot; is a dynamical field.
# An isolated body in otherwise empty space has no inertia.
# Local inertial frames are affected by the cosmic motion and distribution of matter.
# The universe is spatially closed.
# The total energy, angular and linear momentum of the universe are zero.
# Inertial mass is affected by the global distribution of matter.
# If you take away all matter, there is no more space.
# formula_2 is a definite number, of order unity, where formula_3 is the mean density of matter in the universe, and formula_4 is the Hubble time.
# The theory contains no absolute elements.
# Overall rigid rotations and translations of a system are unobservable.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* This textbook, among other writings by Sciama, helped revive interest in Mach&#x27;s principle.
* 

==External links==
* 

* Ernst Mach, &quot;The Science of Mechanics&quot; (tr. 1893) at Archive.org
* &quot;Mach&#x27;s Principle&quot; (1995) from Einstein Studies vol. 6 (13MB PDF)
* (originally published in Italian as Gasco E. &quot;Il contributo di mach sull&#x27;origine dell&#x27;inerzia.&quot; Quaderni di Storia della Fisica, 2004.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="3" end="22" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179875" start="40" end="51" title="discussions" label="discussions"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55" end="75" title=":Category:Theories of gravity" label="gravitation theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q917909" start="77" end="98" title="Mach&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Mach&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q917909" start="103" end="125" title="Mach&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Mach&amp;#x27;s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="148" end="163" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="213" end="222" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="227" end="238" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="239" end="249" title="Ernst Mach#Philosophy of science" label="Ernst Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="317" end="326" title="gyroscope" label="gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q184876" start="370" end="388" title="frame of reference" label="frame of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669833" start="433" end="450" title="absolute rotation" label="absolute rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192735" start="477" end="491" title="inertial frame" label="inertial frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310692" start="497" end="521" title="rotating reference frame" label="rotating reference frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q178733" start="1285" end="1302" title="centrifugal force" label="centrifugal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="1401" end="1405" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q122508" start="1427" end="1434" title="inertia" label="inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="1673" end="1701" title="general theory of relativity" label="general theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045231" start="1781" end="1794" title="Metric tensor (general relativity)" label="metric tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149343" start="1863" end="1877" title="Frame-dragging" label="Frame-dragging"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="1912" end="1928" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q917909" start="2110" end="2124" title="Mach&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Mach principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559192" start="2155" end="2178" title="Gödel metric" label="Gödel rotating universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876815" start="2505" end="2526" title="closed timelike curve" label="closed timelike curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q82049" start="2724" end="2739" title="George Berkeley" label="George Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q66624" start="2813" end="2834" title="Benedict Friedlaender" label="Benedict Friedlaender"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="3470" end="3485" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="3641" end="3647" title="holism" label="holism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142479" start="3739" end="3758" title="relational theory" label="relational theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="3832" end="3850" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="4220" end="4226" title="Isaac Newton" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19314" start="4242" end="4256" title="absolute space" label="absolute space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585683" start="4406" end="4421" title="bucket argument" label="bucket argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="4443" end="4487" title="Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica" label="Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="4985" end="4995" title="experiment" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q82049" start="6540" end="6555" title="George Berkeley" label="George Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q171280" start="6569" end="6576" title="De Motu (Berkeley&amp;#x27;s essay)" label="De Motu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="7563" end="7581" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q210546" start="7596" end="7620" title="equivalence principle" label="principle of equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q104225" start="8549" end="8556" title="Precession" label="precess"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083519" start="8623" end="8644" title="Lense–Thirring effect" label="Lense–Thirring effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="9477" end="9486" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="9534" end="9559" title="Einstein&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Einstein&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607962" start="9746" end="9784" title="elliptic partial differential equation" label="elliptic partial differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812194" start="10007" end="10036" title="asymptotically flat spacetime" label="asymptotically flat spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="10234" end="10256" title="Lorentz transformation" label="Lorentz transformation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10384" end="10415" title="Wheeler–Mach–Einstein spacetime" label="Wheeler–Mach–Einstein spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="10458" end="10465" title="Compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570942" start="10470" end="10489" title="Globally hyperbolic manifold" label="globally hyperbolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054343" start="10819" end="10833" title="Cauchy surface" label="Cauchy surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q898809" start="10930" end="10948" title="Brans–Dicke theory" label="Brans–Dicke theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027715" start="10957" end="10989" title="Hoyle–Narlikar theory of gravity" label="Hoyle–Narlikar theory of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="11666" end="11686" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q284336" start="11697" end="11713" title="Dennis W. Sciama" label="Dennis W. Sciama"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="11777" end="11798" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation" label="Newtonian gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12127" end="12145" title="Inertial Induction" label="Inertial Induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q380235" start="12306" end="12319" title="Hermann Bondi" label="Hermann Bondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="12496" end="12507" title="Mach number" label="Mach number"/>
<link wikidata="Q18373" start="12623" end="12645" title="gravitational constant" label="gravitational constant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12665" end="12680" title="dynamical field" label="dynamical field"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12846" end="12862" title="Shape of the universe#Curvature of the universe" label="spatially closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="13193" end="13204" title="Hubble time" label="Hubble time"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="13593" end="13604" title="Archive.org" label="Archive.org"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182728" wikidata="Q26159" url="?curid=182728" title="De Havilland Comet">
<text>The de Havilland DH.106 Comet is the world&#x27;s first commercial jet airliner. Developed and manufactured by de Havilland in the United Kingdom, the Comet 1 prototype first flew in 1949. It features an aerodynamically clean design with four de Havilland Ghost turbojet engines buried in the wing roots, a pressurised cabin, and large windows. For the era, it offered a relatively quiet, comfortable passenger cabin and was commercially promising at its debut in 1952.

Within a year of the airliner&#x27;s entry into service, three Comets were lost in highly publicized accidents after suffering catastrophic mishaps mid-flight. Two of these were found to be caused by structural failure resulting from metal fatigue in the airframe, a phenomenon not fully understood at the time; the other was due to overstressing of the airframe during flight through severe weather. The Comet was withdrawn from service and extensively tested. Design and construction flaws, including improper riveting and dangerous stress concentrations around square cut-outs for the ADF (automatic direction finder) antennas were ultimately identified. As a result, the Comet was extensively redesigned, with structural reinforcements and other changes. Rival manufacturers heeded the lessons learned from the Comet when developing their own aircraft.

Although sales never fully recovered, the improved Comet 2 and the prototype Comet 3 culminated in the redesigned Comet 4 series which debuted in 1958 and remained in commercial service until 1981. The Comet was also adapted for a variety of military roles such as VIP, medical and passenger transport, as well as surveillance; the last Comet 4, used as a research platform, made its final flight in 1997. The most extensive modification resulted in a specialised maritime patrol derivative, the Hawker Siddeley Nimrod, which remained in service with the Royal Air Force until 2011, over 60 years after the Comet&#x27;s first flight.
==Development==
===Origins===
On 11 March 1943, the Cabinet of the United Kingdom formed the Brabazon Committee, which was tasked with determining the UK&#x27;s airliner needs after the conclusion of the Second World War. One of its recommendations was for the development and production of a pressurised, transatlantic mailplane that could carry of payload at a cruising speed of non-stop. 

Aviation company de Havilland was interested in this requirement, but chose to challenge the then widely held view that jet engines were too fuel-hungry and unreliable for such a role. As a result, committee member Sir Geoffrey de Havilland, head of the de Havilland company, used his personal influence and his company&#x27;s expertise to champion the development of a jet-propelled aircraft; proposing a specification for a pure turbojet-powered design.

The committee accepted the proposal, calling it the &quot;Type IV&quot; (of five designs), and in 1945 awarded a development and production contract to de Havilland under the designation &quot;Type 106&quot;. The type and design were to be so advanced that de Havilland had to undertake the design and development of &quot;both&quot; the airframe and the engines. This was because in 1945 no turbojet engine manufacturer in the world was drawing-up a design specification for an engine with the thrust and specific fuel consumption that could power an aircraft at the proposed cruising altitude (), speed, and transatlantic range as was called for by the Type 106. First-phase development of the DH.106 focused on short- and intermediate-range mailplanes with small passenger compartments and as few as six seats, before being redefined as a long-range airliner with a capacity of 24 seats. Out of all the Brabazon designs, the DH.106 was seen as the riskiest: both in terms of introducing untried design elements and for the financial commitment involved. Nevertheless, the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC) found the Type IV&#x27;s specifications attractive, and initially proposed a purchase of 25 aircraft; in December 1945, when a firm contract was created, the order total was revised to 10.

A design team was formed in 1946 under the leadership of chief designer Ronald Bishop, who had been responsible for the Mosquito fighter-bomber. Several unorthodox configurations were considered, ranging from canard to tailless designs; All were rejected. The Ministry of Supply was interested in the most radical of the proposed designs, and ordered two experimental tailless DH 108s to serve as proof of concept aircraft for testing swept-wing configurations in both low-speed and high-speed flight. During flight tests, the DH 108 gained a reputation for being accident-prone and unstable, leading de Havilland and BOAC to gravitate to conventional configurations and, necessarily, designs with less technical risk. The DH 108s were later modified to test the DH.106&#x27;s power controls.

In September 1946, before completion of the DH 108s, BOAC requests necessitated a redesign of the DH.106 from its previous 24-seat configuration to a larger 36-seat version. With no time to develop the technology necessary for a proposed tailless configuration, Bishop opted for a more conventional 20-degree swept-wing design with unswept tail surfaces, married to an enlarged fuselage accommodating 36 passengers in a four-abreast arrangement with a central aisle. Replacing previously specified Halford H.1 Goblin engines, four new, more-powerful Rolls-Royce Avons were to be incorporated in pairs buried in the wing roots; Halford H.2 Ghost engines were eventually applied as an interim solution while the Avons cleared certification. The redesigned aircraft was named the DH.106 &quot;Comet&quot; in December 1947. Revised first orders from BOAC and British South American Airways totalled 14 aircraft, with delivery projected for 1952.

===Testing and prototypes===
As the Comet represented a new category of passenger aircraft, more rigorous testing was a development priority. From 1947 to 1948, de Havilland conducted an extensive research and development phase, including the use of several stress test rigs at Hatfield Aerodrome for small components and large assemblies alike. Sections of pressurised fuselage were subjected to high-altitude flight conditions via a large decompression chamber on-site and tested to failure. Tracing fuselage failure points proved difficult with this method, and de Havilland ultimately switched to conducting structural tests with a water tank that could be safely configured to increase pressures gradually. The entire forward fuselage section was tested for metal fatigue by repeatedly pressurising to overpressure and depressurising through more than 16,000 cycles, equivalent to about 40,000 hours of airline service. The windows were also tested under a pressure of , above expected pressures at the normal service ceiling of . One window frame survived , about 1,250 per cent over the maximum pressure it was expected to encounter in service.

The first prototype DH.106 Comet (carrying Class B markings G-5-1) was completed in 1949 and was initially used to conduct ground tests and brief early flights. The prototype&#x27;s maiden flight, out of Hatfield Aerodrome, took place on 27 July 1949 and lasted 31 minutes. At the controls was de Havilland chief test pilot John &quot;Cats Eyes&quot; Cunningham, a famous night-fighter pilot of the Second World War, along with co-pilot Harold &quot;Tubby&quot; Waters, engineers John Wilson (electrics) and Frank Reynolds (hydraulics), and flight test observer Tony Fairbrother.

The prototype was registered G-ALVG just before it was publicly displayed at the 1949 Farnborough Airshow before the start of flight trials. A year later, the second prototype G-5-2 made its maiden flight. The second prototype was registered G-ALZK in July 1950 and it was used by the BOAC Comet Unit at Hurn from April 1951 to carry out 500 flying hours of crew training and route-proving. Australian airline Qantas also sent its own technical experts to observe the performance of the prototypes, seeking to quell internal uncertainty about its prospective Comet purchase. Both prototypes could be externally distinguished from later Comets by the large single-wheeled main landing gear, which was replaced on production models starting with G-ALYP by four-wheeled bogies.

==Design==

===Overview===
The Comet was an all-metal low-wing cantilever monoplane powered by four jet engines; it had a four-place cockpit occupied by two pilots, a flight engineer, and a navigator. The clean, low-drag design of the aircraft featured many design elements that were fairly uncommon at the time, including a swept-wing leading edge, integral wing fuel tanks, and four-wheel bogie main undercarriage units designed by de Havilland. Two pairs of turbojet engines (on the Comet 1s, Halford H.2 Ghosts, subsequently known as de Havilland Ghost 50 Mk1s) were buried in the wings.

The original Comet was the approximate length of, but not as wide as, the later Boeing 737-100, and carried fewer people in a significantly more-spacious environment. BOAC installed 36 reclining &quot;slumberseats&quot; with centres on its first Comets, allowing for greater leg room in front and behind; Air France had 11 rows of seats with four seats to a row installed on its Comets. Large picture window views and table seating accommodations for a row of passengers afforded a feeling of comfort and luxury unusual for transportation of the period. Amenities included a galley that could serve hot and cold food and drinks, a bar, and separate men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s toilets. Provisions for emergency situations included several life rafts stored in the wings near the engines, and individual life vests were stowed under each seat.

One of the most striking aspects of Comet travel was the quiet, &quot;vibration-free flying&quot; as touted by BOAC. For passengers used to propeller-driven airliners, smooth and quiet jet flight was a novel experience.

===Avionics and systems===
For ease of training and fleet conversion, de Havilland designed the Comet&#x27;s flight deck layout with a degree of similarity to the Lockheed Constellation, an aircraft that was popular at the time with key customers such as BOAC. The cockpit included full dual-controls for the captain and first officer, and a flight engineer controlled several key systems, including fuel, air conditioning and electrical systems. The navigator occupied a dedicated station, with a table across from the flight engineer.

Several of the Comet&#x27;s avionics systems were new to civil aviation. One such feature was irreversible, powered flight controls, which increased the pilot&#x27;s ease of control and the safety of the aircraft by preventing aerodynamic forces from changing the directed positions and placement of the aircraft&#x27;s control surfaces. Many of the control surfaces, such as the elevators, were equipped with a complex gearing system as a safeguard against accidentally over-stressing the surfaces or airframe at higher speed ranges.

The Comet had a total of four hydraulic systems: two primaries, one secondary, and a final emergency system for basic functions such as lowering the undercarriage. The undercarriage could also be lowered by a combination of gravity and a hand-pump. Power was syphoned from all four engines for the hydraulics, cabin air conditioning, and the de-icing system; these systems had operational redundancy in that they could keep working even if only a single engine was active. The majority of hydraulic components were centred in a single avionics bay. A pressurised refuelling system, developed by Flight Refuelling Ltd, allowed the Comet&#x27;s fuel tanks to be refuelled at a far greater rate than by other methods.
The cockpit was significantly altered for the Comet 4&#x27;s introduction, on which an improved layout focusing on the onboard navigational suite was introduced. An EKCO E160 radar unit was installed in the Comet 4&#x27;s nose cone, providing search functions as well as ground and cloud-mapping capabilities, and a radar interface was built into the Comet 4 cockpit along with redesigned instruments.

Sud-Est&#x27;s design bureau, while working on the Sud Aviation Caravelle in 1953, licensed several design features from de Havilland, building on previous collaborations on earlier licensed designs, including the DH 100 Vampire; the nose and cockpit layout of the Comet 1 was grafted onto the Caravelle. In 1969, when the Comet 4&#x27;s design was modified by Hawker Siddeley to become the basis for the Nimrod, the cockpit layout was completely redesigned and bore little resemblance to its predecessors except for the control yoke.

===Fuselage===
Diverse geographic destinations and cabin pressurisation alike on the Comet demanded the use of a high proportion of alloys, plastics, and other materials new to civil aviation across the aircraft to meet certification requirements. The Comet&#x27;s high cabin pressure and high operating speeds were unprecedented in commercial aviation, making its fuselage design an experimental process. At its introduction, Comet airframes would be subjected to an intense, high-speed operating schedule which included simultaneous extreme heat from desert airfields and frosty cold from the kerosene-filled fuel tanks, still cold from cruising at high altitude.
The Comet&#x27;s thin metal skin was composed of advanced new alloys and was both riveted and chemically bonded, which saved weight and reduced the risk of fatigue cracks spreading from the rivets. The chemical bonding process was accomplished using a new adhesive, Redux, which was liberally used in the construction of the wings and the fuselage of the Comet; it also had the advantage of simplifying the manufacturing process.

When several of the fuselage alloys were discovered to be vulnerable to weakening via metal fatigue, a detailed routine inspection process was introduced. As well as thorough visual inspections of the outer skin, mandatory structural sampling was routinely conducted by both civil and military Comet operators. The need to inspect areas not easily viewable by the naked eye led to the introduction of widespread radiography examination in aviation; this also had the advantage of detecting cracks and flaws too small to be seen otherwise.

Operationally, the design of the cargo holds led to considerable difficulty for the ground crew, especially baggage handlers at the airports. The cargo hold had its doors located directly underneath the aircraft, so each item of baggage or cargo had to be loaded vertically upward from the top of the baggage truck, then slid along the hold floor to be stacked inside. The individual pieces of luggage and cargo also had to be retrieved in a similarly slow manner at the arriving airport.

===Propulsion===

The Comet was powered by two pairs of turbojet engines buried in the wings close to the fuselage. Chief designer Bishop chose the Comet&#x27;s embedded-engine configuration because it avoided the drag of podded engines and allowed for a smaller fin and rudder since the hazards of asymmetric thrust were reduced. The engines were outfitted with baffles to reduce noise emissions, and extensive soundproofing was also implemented to improve passenger conditions.
Placing the engines within the wings had the advantage of a reduction in the risk of foreign object damage, which could seriously damage jet engines. The low-mounted engines and good placement of service panels also made aircraft maintenance easier to perform. The Comet&#x27;s buried-engine configuration increased its structural weight and complexity. Armour had to be placed around the engine cells to contain debris from any serious engine failures; also, placing the engines inside the wing required a more complicated wing structure.

The Comet 1 featured de Havilland Ghost 50 Mk1 turbojet engines. Two hydrogen peroxide-powered de Havilland Sprite booster rockets were originally intended to be installed to boost takeoff under hot and high altitude conditions from airports such as Khartoum and Nairobi. These were tested on 30 flights, but the Ghosts alone were considered powerful enough and some airlines concluded that rocket motors were impractical. Sprite fittings were retained on production aircraft. Comet 1s subsequently received more powerful Ghost DGT3 series engines.

From the Comet 2 onward, the Ghost engines were replaced by the newer and more powerful Rolls-Royce Avon AJ.65 engines. To achieve optimum efficiency with the new powerplants, the air intakes were enlarged to increase mass air flow. Upgraded Avon engines were introduced on the Comet 3, and the Avon-powered Comet 4 was highly praised for its takeoff performance from high-altitude locations such as Mexico City where it was operated by Mexicana de Aviacion, a major scheduled passenger air carrier.

==Operational history==

===Introduction===
The earliest production aircraft, registered G-ALYP (&quot;Yoke Peter&quot;), first flew on 9 January 1951 and was subsequently lent to BOAC for development flying by its Comet Unit. On 22 January 1952, the fifth production aircraft, registered G-ALYS, received the first Certificate of Airworthiness awarded to a Comet, six months ahead of schedule. On 2 May 1952, as part of BOAC&#x27;s route-proving trials, G-ALYP took off on the world&#x27;s first jetliner flight with fare-paying passengers and inaugurated scheduled service from London to Johannesburg. The final Comet from BOAC&#x27;s initial order, registered G-ALYZ, began flying in September 1952 and carried cargo along South American routes while simulating passenger schedules.

Prince Philip returned from the Helsinki Olympic Games with G-ALYS on 4 August 1952. Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother and Princess Margaret were guests on a special flight of the Comet on 30 June 1953 hosted by Sir Geoffrey and Lady de Havilland. Flights on the Comet were about twice as fast as advanced piston-engined aircraft such as the Douglas DC-6 (
vs , respectively), and a faster rate of climb further cut flight times. In August 1953 BOAC scheduled the nine-stop London to Tokyo flights by Comet for 36 hours, compared to 86 hours and 35 minutes on its Argonaut (a DC-4 variant) piston airliner. (Pan Am&#x27;s DC-6B was scheduled for 46 hours 45 minutes.) The five-stop flight from London to Johannesburg was scheduled for 21 hr 20 min.

In their first year, Comets carried 30,000 passengers. As the aircraft could be profitable with a load factor as low as 43 per cent, commercial success was expected. The Ghost engines allowed the Comet to fly above weather that competitors had to fly through. They ran smoothly and were less noisy than piston engines, had low maintenance costs and were fuel-efficient above . In summer 1953, eight BOAC Comets left London each week: three to Johannesburg, two to Tokyo, two to Singapore and one to Colombo.

In 1953, the Comet appeared to have achieved success for de Havilland. &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot; wrote that Britain had a lead of three to five years on the rest of the world in jetliners. As well as the sales to BOAC, two French airlines, Union Aéromaritime de Transport and Air France, each acquired three Comet 1As, an upgraded variant with greater fuel capacity, for flights to West Africa and the Middle East. A slightly longer version of the Comet 1 with more powerful engines, the Comet 2, was being developed, and orders were placed by Air India, British Commonwealth Pacific Airlines, Japan Air Lines, Linea Aeropostal Venezolana, and Panair do Brasil. American carriers Capital Airlines, National Airlines and Pan Am placed orders for the planned Comet 3, an even-larger, longer-range version for transatlantic operations. Qantas was interested in the Comet 1 but concluded that a version with more range and better takeoff performance was needed for the London to Canberra route.

===Early hull losses===

On 26 October 1952, the Comet suffered its first hull loss when a BOAC flight departing Rome&#x27;s Ciampino airport failed to become airborne and ran into rough ground at the end of the runway. Two passengers sustained minor injuries, but the aircraft, G-ALYZ, was a write-off. On 3 March 1953, a new Canadian Pacific Airlines Comet 1A, registered CF-CUN and named &quot;Empress of Hawaii,&quot; failed to become airborne while attempting a night takeoff from Karachi, Pakistan, on a delivery flight to Australia. The aircraft plunged into a dry drainage canal and collided with an embankment, killing all five crew and six passengers on board. The accident was the first fatal jetliner crash. In response, Canadian Pacific cancelled its remaining order for a second Comet 1A and never operated the type in commercial service.

Both early accidents were originally attributed to pilot error, as overrotation had led to a loss of lift from the leading edge of the aircraft&#x27;s wings. It was later determined that the Comet&#x27;s wing profile experienced a loss of lift at a high angle of attack, and its engine inlets also suffered a lack of pressure recovery in the same conditions. As a result, de Havilland re-profiled the wings&#x27; leading edge with a pronounced &quot;droop&quot;, and wing fences were added to control spanwise flow. A fictionalised investigation into the Comet&#x27;s takeoff accidents was the subject of the novel &quot;Cone of Silence&quot; (1959) by Arthur David Beaty, a former BOAC captain. &quot;Cone of Silence&quot; was made into a film in 1960, and Beaty also recounted the story of the Comet&#x27;s takeoff accidents in a chapter of his non-fiction work, &quot;Strange Encounters: Mysteries of the Air&quot; (1984).

The Comet&#x27;s second fatal accident occurred on 2 May 1953, when BOAC Flight 783, a Comet 1, registered G-ALYV, crashed in a severe thundersquall six minutes after taking off from Calcutta-Dum Dum (now Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport), India, killing all 43 on board. Witnesses observed the wingless Comet on fire plunging into the village of Jagalgori, leading investigators to suspect structural failure.

====India Court of Inquiry====
After the loss of G-ALYV, the Government of India convened a court of inquiry to examine the cause of the accident. Professor Natesan Srinivasan joined the inquiry as the main technical expert. A large portion of the aircraft was recovered and reassembled at Farnborough, during which the break-up was found to have begun with a left elevator spar failure in the horizontal stabilizer. The inquiry concluded that the aircraft had encountered extreme negative g-forces during takeoff; severe turbulence generated by adverse weather was determined to have induced down-loading, leading to the loss of the wings. Examination of the cockpit controls suggested that the pilot may have inadvertently over-stressed the aircraft when pulling out of a steep dive by over-manipulation of the fully powered flight controls. Investigators did not consider metal fatigue as a contributory cause.

The inquiry&#x27;s recommendations revolved around the enforcement of stricter speed limits during turbulence, and two significant design changes also resulted: all Comets were equipped with weather radar and the &quot;Q feel&quot; system was introduced, which ensured that control column forces (invariably called stick forces) would be proportional to control loads. This artificial feel was the first of its kind to be introduced in any aircraft. The Comet 1 and 1A had been criticised for a lack of &quot;feel&quot; in their controls, and investigators suggested that this might have contributed to the pilot&#x27;s alleged over-stressing of the aircraft; Comet chief test pilot John Cunningham contended that the jetliner flew smoothly and was highly responsive in a manner consistent with other de Havilland aircraft.

===Comet disasters of 1954===

Just over a year later, Rome&#x27;s Ciampino airport, the site of the first Comet hull loss, was the origin of a more-disastrous Comet flight. On 10 January 1954, 20 minutes after taking off from Ciampino, the first production Comet, G-ALYP, broke up in mid-air while operating BOAC Flight 781 and crashed into the Mediterranean off the Italian island of Elba with the loss of all 35 on board. With no witnesses to the disaster and only partial radio transmissions as incomplete evidence, no obvious reason for the crash could be deduced. Engineers at de Havilland immediately recommended 60 modifications aimed at any possible design flaw, while the Abell Committee met to determine potential causes of the crash. BOAC also voluntarily grounded its Comet fleet pending investigation into the causes of the accident.

====Abell Committee Court of Inquiry====
Media attention centred on potential sabotage; other speculation ranged from clear-air turbulence to an explosion of vapour in an empty fuel tank. The Abell Committee focused on six potential aerodynamic and mechanical causes: control flutter (which had led to the loss of DH 108 prototypes), structural failure due to high loads or metal fatigue of the wing structure, failure of the powered flight controls, failure of the window panels leading to explosive decompression, or fire and other engine problems. The committee concluded that fire was the most likely cause of the problem, and changes were made to the aircraft to protect the engines and wings from damage that might lead to another fire.

During the investigation, the Royal Navy conducted recovery operations. The first pieces of wreckage were discovered on 12 February 1954 and the search continued until September 1954, by which time 70 per cent by weight of the main structure, 80 per cent of the power section, and 50 per cent of the aircraft&#x27;s systems and equipment had been recovered. The forensic reconstruction effort had just begun when the Abell Committee reported its findings. No apparent fault in the aircraft was found, and the British government decided against opening a further public inquiry into the accident. The prestigious nature of the Comet project, particularly for the British aerospace industry, and the financial impact of the aircraft&#x27;s grounding on BOAC&#x27;s operations both served to pressure the inquiry to end without further investigation. Comet flights resumed on 23 March 1954.

On 8 April 1954, Comet G-ALYY (&quot;Yoke Yoke&quot;), on charter to South African Airways, was on a leg from Rome to Cairo (of a longer route, SA Flight 201 from London to Johannesburg), when it crashed in the Mediterranean near Naples with the loss of all 21 passengers and crew on board. The Comet fleet was immediately grounded once again and a large investigation board was formed under the direction of the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE). Prime Minister Winston Churchill tasked the Royal Navy with helping to locate and retrieve the wreckage so that the cause of the accident could be determined. The Comet&#x27;s Certificate of Airworthiness was revoked, and Comet 1 line production was suspended at the Hatfield factory while the BOAC fleet was permanently grounded, cocooned and stored.

====Cohen Committee Court of Inquiry====
On 19 October 1954, the Cohen Committee was established to examine the causes of the Comet crashes. Chaired by Lord Cohen, the committee tasked an investigation team led by Sir Arnold Hall, Director of the RAE at Farnborough, to perform a more-detailed investigation. Hall&#x27;s team began considering fatigue as the most likely cause of both accidents and initiated further research into measurable strain on the aircraft&#x27;s skin. With the recovery of large sections of G-ALYP from the Elba crash and BOAC&#x27;s donation of an identical airframe, G-ALYU, for further examination, an extensive &quot;water torture&quot; test eventually provided conclusive results. This time, the entire fuselage was tested in a dedicated water tank that was built specifically at Farnborough to accommodate its full length.

In water-tank testing, engineers subjected G-ALYU to repeated repressurisation and over-pressurisation, and on 24 June 1954, after 3,057 flight cycles (1,221 actual and 1,836 simulated), G-ALYU burst open. Hall, Geoffrey de Havilland and Bishop were immediately called to the scene, where the water tank was drained to reveal that the fuselage had ripped open at a bolt hole, forward of the forward left escape hatch cut out. The failure then occurred longitudinally along a fuselage stringer at the widest point of the fuselage and through a cut out for an escape hatch. The skin thickness was discovered to be insufficient to distribute the load across the structure, leading to overloading of fuselage frames adjacent to fuselage cut outs. (Cohen Inquiry accident report Fig 7). The fuselage frames did not have sufficient strength to prevent the crack from propagating. Although the fuselage failed after a number of cycles that represented three times the life of G-ALYP at the time of the accident, it was still much earlier than expected. A further test reproduced the same results. Based on these findings, Comet 1 structural failures could be expected at anywhere from 1,000 to 9,000 cycles. Before the Elba accident, G-ALYP had made 1,290 pressurised flights, while G-ALYY had made 900 pressurised flights before crashing. Dr P. B. Walker, Head of the Structures Department at the RAE, said he was not surprised by this, noting that the difference was about three to one, and previous experience with metal fatigue suggested a total range of nine to one between experiment and outcome in the field could result in failure.

The RAE also reconstructed about two-thirds of G-ALYP at Farnborough and found fatigue crack growth from a rivet hole at the low-drag fibreglass forward aperture around the Automatic Direction Finder, which had caused a catastrophic break-up of the aircraft in high-altitude flight. The exact origin of the fatigue failure could not be identified but was localised to the ADF antenna cut out. A countersunk bolt hole and manufacturing damage that had been repaired at the time of construction using methods that were common, but were likely insufficient allowing for the stresses involved, were both located along the failure crack. Once the crack initiated the skin failed from the point of the ADF cut out and propagated downward and rearward along a stringer resulting in an explosive decompression.

It was also found that the punch-rivet construction technique employed in the Comet&#x27;s design had exacerbated its structural fatigue problems; the aircraft&#x27;s windows had been engineered to be glued and riveted, but had been punch-riveted only. Unlike drill riveting, the imperfect nature of the hole created by punch-riveting could cause fatigue cracks to start developing around the rivet. Principal investigator Hall accepted the RAE&#x27;s conclusion of design and construction flaws as the likely explanation for G-ALYU&#x27;s structural failure after 3,060 pressurisation cycles.

====Earlier structural indications====
The issue of the lightness of Comet 1 construction (in order to not tax the relatively low thrust de Havilland Ghost engines), had been noted by de Havilland test pilot John Wilson, while flying the prototype during a Farnborough flypast in 1949. On the flight, he was accompanied by Chris Beaumont, Chief Test Pilot of the de Havilland Engine Company who stood in the entrance to the cockpit behind the Flight Engineer. He stated &quot;Every time we pulled 2 1/2-3G to go around the corner, Chris found that the floor on which he was standing, bulging up and there was a loud bang at that speed from the nose of the aircraft where the skin &#x27;panted&#x27; (flexed), so when we heard this bang we knew without checking the airspeed indicator, that we were doing 340 knots. In later years we realised that these were the indications of how flimsy the structure really was.&quot;

====Square window myths====
Despite findings of the Cohen Inquiry, a number of myths have evolved around the cause of the Comet 1&#x27;s accidents. Most commonly quoted are the &#x27;square&#x27; passenger windows. While the report noted that stress around fuselage cut-outs, emergency exits and windows was found to be much higher than expected due to DeHavilland&#x27;s assumptions and testing methods the passenger windows shape has been commonly misunderstood and cited as a cause of the fuselage failure. In fact the mention of &#x27;windows&#x27; in the Cohen report&#x27;s conclusion, refers specifically to the origin point of failure in the ADF Antenna cut-out &#x27;windows&#x27;, located above the cockpit, not passenger windows. The shape of the passenger windows were not indicated in any failure mode detailed in the accident report and were not viewed as a contributing factor. A number of other pressurised airliners of the period including the Boeing 377 Stratocruiser, Douglas DC-7, and DC-8 had larger and more &#x27;square&#x27; windows than the Comet 1, and experienced no such failures. In fact, the Comet 1&#x27;s window general shape resembles a slightly larger Boeing 737 window mounted horizontally. They are rectangular &quot;not square&quot;, have rounded corners and are within 5% of the radius of the Boeing 737 windows and virtually identical to modern airliners. Paul Withey, Professor of Casting at the University of Birmingham School of Metallurgy states in a video presentation delivered in 2019, analysing all available data that: &quot;The fact that DeHavilland put oval windows into later marks, is not because of any &#x27;squareness&#x27; of the windows that caused failure.&quot; &quot;DeHavilland went to oval windows on the subsequent Marks because it was easier to Redux them in (use adhesive) – nothing to do with the stress concentration and it&#x27;s purely to remove rivets.&quot; (from the structure)

Surviving Comet 1s can be seen on view at the RAF Museum Cosford and the DeHavilland Museum at Salisbury Hall, London Colney.

====Response====
In responding to the report de Havilland stated: &quot;Now that the danger of high level fatigue in pressure cabins has been generally appreciated, de Havillands will take adequate measures to deal with this problem. To this end we propose to use thicker gauge materials in the pressure cabin area and to strengthen and redesign windows and cut outs and so lower the general stress to a level at which local stress concentrations either at rivets and bolt holes or as such may occur by reason of cracks caused accidentally during manufacture or subsequently, will not constitute a danger.&quot;

The Cohen inquiry closed on 24 November 1954, having &quot;found that the basic design of the Comet was sound&quot;, and made no observations or recommendations regarding the shape of the windows. De Havilland nonetheless began a refit programme to strengthen the fuselage and wing structure, employing thicker-gauge skin and replacing the rectangular windows and panels with rounded versions, although this was not related to the erroneous &#x27;square&#x27; window claim, as can be seen by the fact that the fuselage escape hatch cut-outs (the source of the failure in test aircraft G-ALYU) retained their rectangular shape.

Following the Comet enquiry, aircraft were designed to &quot;fail-safe&quot; or safe-life standards, though several subsequent catastrophic fatigue failures, such as Aloha Airlines Flight 243 of April 28, 1988 have occurred.

===Resumption of service===
With the discovery of the structural problems of the early series, all remaining Comets were withdrawn from service, while de Havilland launched a major effort to build a new version that would be both larger and stronger. All outstanding orders for the Comet 2 were cancelled by airline customers. All production Comet 2s were also modified with thicker gauge skin to better distribute loads and alleviate the fatigue problems (most of these served with the RAF as the Comet C2); a programme to produce a Comet 2 with more powerful Avons was delayed. The prototype Comet 3 first flew in July 1954 and was tested in an unpressurised state pending completion of the Cohen inquiry. Comet commercial flights would not resume until 1958.

Development flying and route proving with the Comet 3 allowed accelerated certification of what was destined to be the most successful variant of the type, the Comet 4. All airline customers for the Comet 3 subsequently cancelled their orders and switched to the Comet 4, which was based on the Comet 3 but with improved fuel capacity. BOAC ordered 19 Comet 4s in March 1955, and American operator Capital Airlines ordered 14 Comets in July 1956. Capital&#x27;s order included 10 Comet 4As, a variant modified for short-range operations with a stretched fuselage and short wings, lacking the pinion (outboard wing) fuel tanks of the Comet 4. Financial problems and a takeover by United Airlines meant that Capital would never operate the Comet.

The Comet 4 first flew on 27 April 1958 and received its Certificate of Airworthiness on 24 September 1958; the first was delivered to BOAC the next day. The base price of a new Comet 4 was roughly £1.14 million (£ million in ). The Comet 4 enabled BOAC to inaugurate the first regular jet-powered transatlantic services on 4 October 1958 between London and New York (albeit still requiring a fuel stop at Gander International Airport, Newfoundland, on westward North Atlantic crossings). While BOAC gained publicity as the first to provide transatlantic jet service, by the end of the month rival Pan American World Airways was flying the Boeing 707 on the New York-Paris route, with a fuel stop at Gander in both directions, and in 1960 began flying Douglas DC-8&#x27;s on its transatlantic routes as well. The American jets were larger, faster, longer-ranged and more cost-effective than the Comet. After analysing route structures for the Comet, BOAC reluctantly cast-about for a successor, and in 1956 entered into an agreement with Boeing to purchase the 707.

The Comet 4 was ordered by two other airlines: Aerolíneas Argentinas took delivery of six Comet 4s from 1959 to 1960, using them between Buenos Aires and Santiago, New York and Europe, and East African Airways received three new Comet 4s from 1960 to 1962 and operated them to the United Kingdom and to Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. The Comet 4A ordered by Capital Airlines was instead built for BEA as the Comet 4B, with a further fuselage stretch of and seating for 99 passengers. The first Comet 4B flew on 27 June 1959 and BEA began Tel Aviv to London-Heathrow services on 1 April 1960. Olympic Airways was the only other customer to order the type. The last Comet 4 variant, the Comet 4C, first flew on 31 October 1959 and entered service with Mexicana in 1960. The Comet 4C had the Comet 4B&#x27;s longer fuselage and the longer wings and extra fuel tanks of the original Comet 4, which gave it a longer range than the 4B. Ordered by Kuwait Airways, Middle East Airlines, Misrair (later Egyptair), and Sudan Airways, it was the most popular Comet variant.

===Later service===
In 1959, BOAC began shifting its Comets from transatlantic routes and released the Comet to associate companies, making the Comet 4&#x27;s ascendancy as a premier airliner brief. Besides the 707 and DC-8, the introduction of the Vickers VC10 allowed competing aircraft to assume the high-speed, long-range passenger service role pioneered by the Comet. In 1960, as part of a government-backed consolidation of the British aerospace industry, de Havilland itself was acquired by Hawker Siddeley, within which it became a wholly owned division.

In the 1960s, orders declined, a total of 76 Comet 4s being delivered from 1958 to 1964. In November 1965, BOAC retired its Comet 4s from revenue service; other operators continued commercial passenger flights with the Comet until 1981. Dan-Air played a significant role in the fleet&#x27;s later history and, at one time, owned all 49 remaining airworthy civil Comets. On 14 March 1997 a Comet 4C serial &quot;XS235&quot; and named &quot;Canopus&quot;, which had been acquired by the British Ministry of Technology and used for radio, radar and avionics trials, made the last documented production Comet flight.

==Legacy==
The Comet is widely regarded as both an adventurous step forward and a supreme tragedy; the aircraft&#x27;s legacy includes advances in aircraft design and in accident investigations. The inquiries into the accidents that plagued the Comet 1 were perhaps some of the most extensive and revolutionary that have ever taken place, establishing precedents in accident investigation; many of the deep-sea salvage and aircraft reconstruction techniques employed have remained in use within the aviation industry. In spite of the Comet being subjected to what was then the most rigorous testing of any contemporary airliner, pressurisation and the dynamic stresses involved were not thoroughly understood at the time of the aircraft&#x27;s development, nor was the concept of metal fatigue. Though these lessons could be implemented on the drawing board for future aircraft, corrections could only be retroactively applied to the Comet.

According to de Havilland&#x27;s chief test pilot John Cunningham, who had flown the prototype&#x27;s first flight, representatives from American manufacturers such as Boeing and Douglas privately disclosed that if de Havilland had not experienced the Comet&#x27;s pressurisation problems first, it would have happened to them. Cunningham likened the Comet to the later Concorde and added that he had assumed that the aircraft would change aviation, which it subsequently did. Aviation author Bill Withuhn concluded that the Comet had pushed &quot;&#x27;the state-of-the-art&#x27; beyond its limits.&quot;

Aeronautical-engineering firms were quick to respond to the Comet&#x27;s commercial advantages and technical flaws alike; other aircraft manufacturers learned from, and profited by, the hard-earned lessons embodied by de Havilland&#x27;s Comet. The Comet&#x27;s buried engines were used on some other early jet airliners, such as the Tupolev Tu-104, but later aircraft, such as the Boeing 707 and Douglas DC-8, differed by employing podded engines held on pylons beneath the wings. Boeing stated that podded engines were selected for their passenger airliners because buried engines carried a higher risk of catastrophic wing failure in the event of engine fire. In response to the Comet tragedies, manufacturers also developed ways of pressurisation testing, often going so far as to explore rapid depressurisation; subsequent fuselage skins were of a greater thickness than the skin of the Comet.

==Variants==
===Comet 1===
The Comet 1 was the first model produced, a total of 12 aircraft in service and test. Following closely the design features of the two prototypes, the only noticeable change was the adoption of four-wheel bogie main undercarriage units, replacing the single main wheels. Four Ghost 50 Mk 1 engines were fitted (later replaced by more powerful Ghost DGT3 series engines). The span was , and overall length ; the maximum takeoff weight was over and over 40 passengers could be carried.

* An updated Comet 1A was offered with higher-allowed weight, greater fuel capacity, and water-methanol injection; 10 were produced. In the wake of the 1954 disasters, all Comet 1s and 1As were brought back to Hatfield, placed in a protective cocoon and retained for testing. All were substantially damaged in stress testing or were scrapped entirely.
* Comet 1X: Two RCAF Comet 1As were rebuilt with heavier-gauge skins to a Comet 2 standard for the fuselage, and renamed Comet 1X.
* Comet 1XB: Four Comet 1As were upgraded to a 1XB standard with a reinforced fuselage structure and oval windows. Both 1X series were limited in number of pressurisation cycles.
* The DH 111 Comet Bomber, a nuclear bomb-carrying variant developed to Air Ministry specification B35/46, was submitted to the Air Ministry on 27 May 1948. It had been originally proposed in 1948 as the &quot;PR Comet&quot;, a high-altitude photo reconnaissance adaptation of the Comet 1. The Ghost DGT3-powered airframe featured a narrowed fuselage, a bulbous nose with H2S Mk IX radar, and a four-crewmember pressurised cockpit under a large bubble canopy. Fuel tanks carrying were added to attain a range of . The proposed DH 111 received a negative evaluation from the Royal Aircraft Establishment over serious concerns regarding weapons storage; this, along with the redundant capability offered by the RAF&#x27;s proposed V bomber trio, led de Havilland to abandon the project on 22 October 1948.

===Comet 2===
The Comet 2 had a slightly larger wing, higher fuel capacity and more-powerful Rolls-Royce Avon engines, which all improved the aircraft&#x27;s range and performance; its fuselage was longer than the Comet 1&#x27;s. Design changes had been made to make the aircraft more suitable for transatlantic operations. Following the Comet 1 disasters, these models were rebuilt with heavier-gauge skin and rounded windows, and the Avon engines featuring larger air intakes and outward-curving jet tailpipes. A total of 12 of the 44-seat Comet 2s were ordered by BOAC for the South Atlantic route. The first production aircraft (G-AMXA) flew on 27 August 1953. Although these aircraft performed well on test flights on the South Atlantic, their range was still not suitable for the North Atlantic. All but four Comet 2s were allocated to the RAF, deliveries beginning in 1955. Modifications to the interiors allowed the Comet 2s to be used in several roles. For VIP transport, the seating and accommodations were altered and provisions for carrying medical equipment including iron lungs were incorporated. Specialised signals intelligence and electronic surveillance capability was later added to some airframes.
* Comet 2X: Limited to a single Comet Mk 1 powered by four Rolls-Royce Avon 502 turbojet engines and used as a development aircraft for the Comet 2.
* Comet 2E: Two Comet 2 airliners were fitted with Avon 504s in the inner nacelles and Avon 524s in the outer ones. These aircraft were used by BOAC for proving flights during 1957–1958.
* Comet T2: The first two of 10 Comet 2s for the RAF were fitted out as crew trainers, the first aircraft (XK669) flying initially on 9 December 1955.
* Comet C2: Eight Comet 2s originally destined for the civil market were completed for the RAF and assigned to No. 216 Squadron.
* Comet 2R: Three Comet 2s were modified for use in radar and electronic systems development, initially assigned to No. 90 Group (later Signals Command) for the RAF. In service with No. 192 and No. 51 Squadrons, the 2R series was equipped to monitor Warsaw Pact signal traffic and operated in this role from 1958.

===Comet 3===
The Comet 3, which flew for the first time on 19 July 1954, was a Comet 2 lengthened by and powered by Avon M502 engines developing . The variant added wing pinion tanks, and offered greater capacity and range. The Comet 3 was destined to remain a development series since it did not incorporate the fuselage-strengthening modifications of the later series aircraft, and was not able to be fully pressurised. Only two Comet 3s began construction; G-ANLO, the only airworthy Comet 3, was demonstrated at the Farnborough SBAC Show in September 1954. The other Comet 3 airframe was not completed to production standard and was used primarily for ground-based structural and technology testing during development of the similarly sized Comet 4. Another nine Comet 3 airframes were not completed and their construction was abandoned at Hatfield. 

In BOAC colours, G-ANLO was flown by John Cunningham in a marathon round-the-world promotional tour in December 1955. As a flying testbed, it was later modified with Avon RA29 engines fitted, as well as replacing the original long-span wings with reduced span wings as the Comet 3B and demonstrated in British European Airways (BEA) livery at the Farnborough Airshow in September 1958. Assigned in 1961 to the Blind Landing Experimental Unit (BLEU) at RAE Bedford, the final testbed role played by G–ANLO was in automatic landing system experiments. When retired in 1973, the airframe was used for foam-arrester trials before the fuselage was salvaged at BAE Woodford, to serve as the mock-up for the Nimrod.

===Comet 4===
The Comet 4 was a further improvement on the stretched Comet 3 with even greater fuel capacity. The design had progressed significantly from the original Comet 1, growing by and typically seating 74 to 81 passengers compared to the Comet 1&#x27;s 36 to 44 (119 passengers could be accommodated in a special charter seating package in the later 4C series). The Comet 4 was considered the definitive series, having a longer range, higher cruising speed and higher maximum takeoff weight. These improvements were possible largely because of Avon engines, with twice the thrust of the Comet 1&#x27;s Ghosts. Deliveries to BOAC began on 30 September 1958 with two 48-seat aircraft, which were used to initiate the first scheduled transatlantic services.

* Comet 4B: Originally developed for Capital Airlines as the 4A, the 4B featured greater capacity through a 2m longer fuselage, and a shorter wingspan; 18 were produced.
* Comet 4C: This variant featured the Comet 4&#x27;s wings and the 4B&#x27;s longer fuselage; 28 were produced.

The last two Comet 4C fuselages were used to build prototypes of the Hawker Siddeley Nimrod maritime patrol aircraft. A Comet 4C (SA-R-7) was ordered by Saudi Arabian Airlines with an eventual disposition to the Saudi Royal Flight for the exclusive use of King Saud bin Abdul Aziz. Extensively modified at the factory, the aircraft included a VIP front cabin, a bed, special toilets with gold fittings and was distinguished by a green, gold and white colour scheme with polished wings and lower fuselage that was commissioned from aviation artist John Stroud. Following its first flight, the special order Comet 4C was described as &quot;the world&#x27;s first executive jet.&quot;

===Comet 5 proposal===
The Comet 5 was proposed as an improvement over previous models, including a wider fuselage with five-abreast seating, a wing with greater sweep and podded Rolls-Royce Conway engines. Without support from the Ministry of Transport, the proposal languished as a hypothetical aircraft and was never realised.

===Hawker Siddeley Nimrod===
The last two Comet 4C aircraft produced were modified as prototypes (XV148 &amp; XV147) to meet a British requirement for a maritime patrol aircraft for the Royal Air Force; initially named &quot;Maritime Comet&quot;, the design was designated Type HS 801. This variant became the Hawker Siddeley Nimrod and production aircraft were built at the Hawker Siddeley factory at Woodford Aerodrome. Entering service in 1969, five Nimrod variants were produced. The final Nimrod aircraft were retired in June 2011.

==Operators==


The original operators of the early Comet 1 and the Comet 1A were BOAC, Union Aéromaritime de Transport and Air France. All early Comets were withdrawn from service for accident inquiries, during which orders from British Commonwealth Pacific Airlines, Japan Air Lines, Linea Aeropostal Venezolana, National Airlines, Pan American World Airways and Panair do Brasil were cancelled. When the redesigned Comet 4 entered service, it was flown by customers BOAC, Aerolíneas Argentinas, and East African Airways, while the Comet 4B variant was operated by customers BEA and Olympic Airways and the Comet 4C model was flown by customers Kuwait Airways, Mexicana, Middle East Airlines, Misrair Airlines and Sudan Airways.

Other operators used the Comet either through leasing arrangements or through second-hand acquisitions. BOAC&#x27;s Comet 4s were leased out to Air Ceylon, Air India, AREA Ecuador, Central African Airways and Qantas; after 1965 they were sold to AREA Ecuador, Dan-Air, Mexicana, Malaysian Airways, and the Ministry of Defence. BEA&#x27;s Comet 4Bs were chartered by Cyprus Airways, Malta Airways and Transportes Aéreos Portugueses. Channel Airways obtained five Comet 4Bs from BEA in 1970 for inclusive tour charters. Dan-Air bought all of the surviving flyable Comet 4s from the late 1960s into the 1970s; some were for spares reclamation, but most were operated on the carrier&#x27;s inclusive-tour charters; a total of 48 Comets of all marks were acquired by the airline.

In military service, the United Kingdom&#x27;s Royal Air Force was the largest operator, with 51 Squadron (1958–1975; Comet C2, 2R), 192 Squadron (1957–1958; Comet C2, 2R), 216 Squadron (1956–1975; Comet C2 and C4), and the Royal Aircraft Establishment using the aircraft. The Royal Canadian Air Force also operated Comet 1As (later retrofitted to 1XB) through its 412 Squadron from 1953 to 1963.

==Accidents and incidents==
The Comet was involved in 25 hull-loss accidents, including 13 fatal crashes which resulted in 492 fatalities. Pilot error was blamed for the type&#x27;s first fatal accident, which occurred during takeoff at Karachi, Pakistan, on 3 March 1953 and involved a Canadian Pacific Airlines Comet 1A. Three fatal Comet 1 crashes were due to structural problems, specifically British Overseas Airways Corporation flight 783 on 2 May 1953, British Overseas Airways Corporation flight 781 on 10 January 1954, and South African Airways flight 201 on 8 April 1954. These accidents led to the grounding of the entire Comet fleet. After design modifications were implemented, Comet services resumed on October 4, 1958, with Comet 4s.

Pilot error resulting in controlled flight into terrain was blamed for five fatal Comet 4 accidents: an Aerolíneas Argentinas crash near Asunción, Paraguay, on 27 August 1959, Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 322 at Campinas near São Paulo, Brazil, on 23 November 1961, United Arab Airlines Flight 869 in Thailand&#x27;s Khao Yai mountains on 19 July 1962, a Saudi Arabian Government crash in the Italian Alps on 20 March 1963, and United Arab Airlines Flight 844 in Tripoli, Libya, on 2 January 1971. The Dan-Air de Havilland Comet crash in Spain&#x27;s Montseny range on 3 July 1970 was attributed to navigational errors by air traffic control and pilots. Other fatal Comet 4 accidents included a British European Airways crash in Ankara, Turkey, following instrument failure on 21 December 1961, a United Arab Airlines Flight 869 crash during inclement weather near Bombay, India, on 28 July 1963, and the terrorist bombing of Cyprus Airways Flight 284 off the Turkish coast on 12 October 1967.

Nine Comets, including Comet 1s operated by BOAC and Union Aeromaritime de Transport and Comet 4s flown by Aerolíneas Argentinas, Dan-Air, Malaysian Airlines and United Arab Airlines, were irreparably damaged during takeoff or landing accidents that were survived by all on board. A hangar fire damaged a No. 192 Squadron RAF Comet 2R beyond repair on 13 September 1957, and three Middle East Airlines Comet 4Cs were destroyed by Israeli troops at Beirut, Lebanon, on 28 December 1968.

==Aircraft on display==

Since retirement, three early-generation Comet airframes have survived in museum collections. The only complete remaining Comet 1, a Comet 1XB with the registration G-APAS, the last Comet 1 built, is displayed at the RAF Museum Cosford. Though painted in BOAC colours, it never flew for the airline, having been first delivered to Air France and then to the Ministry of Supply after conversion to 1XB standard; this aircraft also served with the RAF as XM823. 

The sole surviving Comet fuselage with the original square-shaped windows, part of a Comet 1A registered F-BGNX, has undergone restoration and is on display at the de Havilland Aircraft Museum near St Albans in Hertfordshire, England. A Comet C2 &quot;Sagittarius&quot; with serial &quot;XK699&quot;, later maintenance serial 7971M, was on display at the gate of RAF Lyneham in Wiltshire, England from 1987. In 2012, with the planned closure of RAF Lyneham, the aircraft was slated to be dismantled and shipped to the RAF Museum Cosford where it was to be re-assembled for display. The move was cancelled due to the level of corrosion and the majority of the airframe was scrapped in 2013, the cockpit section going to the Boscombe Down Aviation Collection at Old Sarum Airfield.

Six complete Comet 4s are housed in museum collections. The Imperial War Museum Duxford has a Comet 4 (G-APDB), originally in Dan-Air colours as part of its Flight Line Display, and later in BOAC livery at its AirSpace building. A Comet 4B (G-APYD) is stored in a facility at the Science Museum at Wroughton in Wiltshire, England. Comet 4Cs are exhibited at the &quot;Flugausstellung Peter Junior&quot; at Hermeskeil, Germany (G-BDIW), the Museum of Flight Restoration Center near Everett, Washington (N888WA), and the National Museum of Flight near Edinburgh, Scotland (G-BDIX).

The last Comet to fly, Comet 4C &quot;Canopus&quot; (XS235), is kept in running condition at Bruntingthorpe Aerodrome, where fast taxi-runs are regularly conducted. Since the 2000s, several parties have proposed restoring &quot;Canopus&quot;, which is maintained by a staff of volunteers, to airworthy, fully flight-capable condition. The Bruntingthorpe Aerodrome also displays a related Hawker Siddeley Nimrod MR2 aircraft.

==Specifications==


==In popular culture==


==See also==

* Arnold Alexander Hall
* Seymour Collection, an aerophilately collection relating to the Comet in the British Library.

==References==
; Notes
; Citations
; Bibliography

* Abzug, Malcolm J. and Eugene Larrabee. &quot;Airplane Stability and Control: A History of the Technologies That Made Aviation Possible&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002. .
* &quot;Antennas and Propagation, Part 1.&quot; London: Institution of Electrical Engineers, 1978. .
* Atkinson, R. J., W. J. Winkworth and G. M. Norris. &quot;Behaviour of Skin Fatigue Cracks at the Corners of Windows in a &quot;Comet&quot; I Fuselage&quot; . Ministry of Aviation via Her Majesty&#x27;s Stationery Office, 1962.
* Avrane, A. &quot;Sud Est Caravelle&quot;. London: Jane&#x27;s Publishing, 1981. .
* Beaty, David. &quot;Strange Encounters: Mysteries of the Air&quot;. London: Atheneum, 1984. .
* Bibel, George D. &quot;Beyond the Black Box: The Forensics of Airplane Crashes&quot;. Baltimore, Maryland: JHU Press, 2008. .
* Birtles, P.J. &quot;Classic Civil Aircraft 3: De Havilland Comet&quot;. Shepperton, UK: Ian Allan, 1990. .
* Birtles, P.J. &quot;The de Havilland Comet Srs. 1–4.&quot; &quot;Aircraft in Profile, Volume 5.&quot; New York: Doubleday, 1970, first edition 1967.
* Bray, Robin. &quot;The Comet that Fell to Earth&quot;. Cumbria, UK: Hayloft Publishing, 2015. .
* Cacutt, Len. &quot;The World&#x27;s Greatest Aircraft&quot;. Devon, UK: Exeter Books, 1989. .
* &quot;The Comet Accidents: History of Events: Sir Lionel Heald&#x27;s Introductory Summary at the Enquiry&quot;. &quot;Flight&quot;, 29 October 1954, pp. 652–654.
* &quot;Comet Resurgent: A decade of D.H. Jet Transport Design&quot;. &quot;Flight&quot; No. 2566 Vol. 73, 28 March 1958, pp. 420–425.
* Darling, Kev. &quot;De Havilland Comet&quot;. North Branch, Minnesota: Specialty Press, 2001. .
* Darling, Kev. &quot;De Havilland Comet&quot;. Ramsbury, Marlborough, Wiltshire, UK: Crowood Press, 2005. .
* Davies, R.E.G. and Philip J. Birtles. &quot;Comet: The World&#x27;s First Jet Airliner&quot;. McLean, Virginia: Paladwr Press, 1999. .
* Dennies, Daniel P. &quot;How to Organize And Run a Failure Investigation&quot;. Materials Park, Ohio: ASM International, 2005. .
* Dick, Ron and Dan Patterson. &quot;50 Aircraft That Changed the World.&quot; Erin, Ontario, Canada: Boston Mills Press, 2010. .
* Faith, Nicholas. &quot;Black Box: Why Air Safety is no Accident, The Book Every Air Traveller Should Read&quot;. London: Boxtree, 1996. .
* Floyd, Jim. &quot;The Avro Canada C102 Jetliner.&quot; Erin, Ontario: Boston Mills Press, 1986. .
* Francis, Decon. &quot;I Saw This Jet Liner Fly 500 m.p.h.&quot; &quot;Popular Science&quot;, 156(5), May 1950, pp. 98–104.
* Green, William and Gordon Swanborough, eds. &quot;Jet Jubilee (Part 1)&quot;. &quot;Air International&quot;, Vol. 12, No. 3, March 1977, pp. 124–131 (Part 2); &quot;Air International&quot;, Vol. 12, No. 4, April 1977, pp. 171–180.
* Gunn, John. &quot;Challenging Horizons: Qantas 1939–1954&quot;. St Lucia, Queensland: University of Queensland Press, 1987. .
* Haddon-Cave, Charles. &quot;The Nimrod Review: an Independent Review into the Broader Issues Surrounding the Loss of the RAF Nimrod MR2 Aircraft XV230 in Afghanistan in 2006.&quot; London: The Stationery Office, 2009.
* Hill, Malcolm L. &quot;de Havilland&#x27;s Comet: Pushing the Boundaries.&quot; &quot;Airliners&quot;, Volume 15, No. 4, July/August 2002.
* Jackson, A.J. &quot;British Civil Aircraft 1919–1972: Volume II&quot;. London: Putnam (Conway Maritime Press), 1988. .
* Jackson, A.J. &quot;De Havilland Aircraft since 1909&quot;. London: Putnam, Third edition, 1987. .
* Jefford, C.G., ed. &quot;The RAF and Nuclear Weapons, 1960–1998.&quot; London: Royal Air Force Historical Society, 2001.
* Job, Macarthur. &quot;Air Disaster: Volume 1&quot;. Fyshwick, Australian Capital Territory: Aerospace Publications, 1996. .
* Jones, Barry. &quot;Database: D.H. 106 Comet&quot;. &quot;Aeroplane&quot;, Volume 38, No. 4, Issue no. 444, April 2010.
* Keith, Ronald A. &quot;Bush Pilot with a Briefcase: The Incredible Story of Aviation Pioneer Grant McConachie.&quot; Vancouver: Douglas &amp; McIntyre Ltd., 1997, First edition 1992. .
* Kodera, Craig, Mike Machat and Jon Proctor. &quot;From Props to Jets: Commercial Aviation&#x27;s Transition to the Jet Age 1952–1962.&quot; North Branch, Minnesota: Specialty Press, 2010. .
* Lane, Peter. &quot;The Queen Mother.&quot; London: Hale, 1979. .
* Lo Bao, Phil, ed. &quot;The de Havilland Comet (Airlines &amp; Airliners)&quot;. Middlesex, UK: The Aviation Data Centre Ltd., 1996.
* McNeil, Ian, ed. &quot;An Encyclopedia of the History of Technology&quot;. London: Routledge, 2002 (E-edition), First edition 1990. .
* Motem, John, ed. &quot;European Civil Background&quot;. &quot;The Putnam Aeronautical Review, Volume Three&quot;. London: Conway Maritime Press, 1990. .
* Munson, Kenneth. &quot;Civil Airliners since 1946.&quot; London: Blandford Press, 1967.
* Painter, Martin. &quot;The DH. 106 Comet: An Illustrated History&quot;. Tonbridge, Kent, UK: Air Britain (Historians) Ltd., 2002. .
* Proctor, Jon, Mike Machat and Craig Kodera. &quot;From Props to Jets: Commercial Aviation&#x27;s Transition to the Jet Age 1952–1962.&quot; North Branch, Minnesota: Specialty Press, 2010. .
* Prins, François. &quot;World Beater: Homage to the DH. 106 Comet.&quot; &quot;Air Enthusiast,&quot; Issue 78, November/December 1998.
* Roach, J. R. and A. B. Eastwood. &quot;Jet Airliner Production List.&quot; West Drayton, UK: The Aviation Hobby Shop, 1992, .
* Schnaars, Stephen P. &quot;Managing Imitation Strategies.&quot; New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 2002. .
* Simons, Graham M. &quot;Comet! The World&#x27;s First Jet Airliner&quot; U.K. Pen and Sword, 2013 .
* Smith, Adrian. &quot;The Dawn of the Jet Age in Austerity Britain: David Lean&#x27;s The Sound Barrier&quot;. &quot;Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television&quot;, 2010. 30(4), pp. 487–514.
* Stewart, Stanley. &quot;Air Disasters.&quot; London: Arrow Books, 1989, First edition 1986. .
* Stroud, John. &quot;Soviet Transport Aircraft since 1945.&quot; London: Putnam, 1968. .
* Swanborough, F. G. &quot;Civil Aircraft of the World.&quot; London: C. Scribner&#x27;s Sons, 1980. .
* Swanborough, F. G. &quot;Turbine-engined Airliners of the World.&quot; London: Temple Press Books, 1962.
* Taylor, John W. R. &quot;Jane&#x27;s All The World&#x27;s Aircraft 1965–66&quot;. London: Sampson Low, Marston &amp; Company, 1965.
* Taylor, John William Ransom. &quot;The Lore of Flight.&quot; New York: Barnes &amp; Noble, 1996, First edition 1988. .
* Tegler, Jan. &quot;B-47 Stratojet: Boeing&#x27;s Brilliant Bomber&quot; (Walter J. Boyne Military Aircraft Series). New York: McGraw-Hill Professional, 2000. .
* Trischler, Helmuth and Stefan Zeilinger, eds. &quot;Tackling Transport, Volume 3&quot; (Artefacts Series: Studies in the History of Science and Technology). London: NMSI Trading Ltd, 2003. .
* Walker, Timothy. &quot;The First Jet Airliner: The Story of the de Havilland Comet&quot;. Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Scoval Publishing Ltd., 2000. .
* Watkins, David. &quot;de Havilland Vampire: The Complete History.&quot; Thrupp, Stroud, UK: Budding Books, 1996. .
* Winchester, Jim, ed. &quot;De Havilland DH.106 Comet.&quot; &quot;Civil Aircraft (The Aviation Factfile)&quot;. London: Grange Books plc, 2004. .
* Withuhn, Bill. &quot;Triumph, Tragedy and Triumph Again... The Comet Story.&quot; &quot;Air Classics Airliner Special No. 2&quot;, Summer 1976.
==External links==

* De Havilland DH106 Comet 1 &amp; 2 from BAE Systems site
* &quot;The Comet Emerges&quot;—A 1949 &quot;Flight&quot; article on the unveiling of the Comet prototype
* &quot;Comet in the Sky&quot;—A 1949 &quot;Flight&quot; article on the Comet&#x27;s maiden flight
* Film of BOAC De Havilland Comet 3 G-ANLO at Vancouver International Airport in December 1955
* The de Havilland Comet in RCAF Service
* &quot;Comet Construction Methods&quot;—A 1951 &quot;Flight&quot; article
* &quot;The Tale of the Comet&quot;—A 1952 &quot;Flight&quot; article on the design and development of the Comet
* &quot;Conversion to Comets&quot;—A 1953 &quot;Flight&quot; article on the Comet&#x27;s handling
* &quot;Comet Engineering&quot;—A 1953 &quot;Flight&quot; article by Bill Gunston
* &quot;The Comet Accidents: History of Events&quot;—A 1954 &quot;Flight&quot; article of Sir Lionel Heald&#x27;s summary of the enquiry
* &quot;Report of the Comet Inquiry&quot;—A 1955 &quot;Flight&quot; article on the publishing of the enquiry into the Comet design
* Project Comet—Documentary produced by &quot;Full Focus&quot;
* &quot;The Comet Is Twenty&quot;—A 1969 &quot;Flight&quot; article
* &quot;Jet Transport&#x27;s Next 40 Years&quot;—A 1989 &quot;Flight&quot; article on the Comet&#x27;s influence</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26159" start="4" end="29" title="De Havilland Comet" label="de Havilland DH.106 Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120025" start="67" end="79" title="jet airliner" label="jet airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q283666" start="111" end="123" title="de Havilland" label="de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q287493" start="243" end="261" title="de Havilland Ghost" label="de Havilland Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="262" end="270" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389519" start="307" end="324" title="cabin pressurization" label="pressurised cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q507234" start="705" end="718" title="metal fatigue" label="metal fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q222946" start="726" end="734" title="airframe" label="airframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q212500" start="983" end="988" title="rivet" label="rivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q542690" start="1006" end="1026" title="stress concentration" label="stress concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q658414" start="1793" end="1808" title="maritime patrol aircraft" label="maritime patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q128993" start="1825" end="1847" title="Hawker Siddeley Nimrod" label="Hawker Siddeley Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1884" end="1899" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="2015" end="2044" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q896488" start="2056" end="2074" title="Brabazon Committee" label="Brabazon Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2167" end="2183" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q283666" start="2373" end="2385" title="de Havilland" label="de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="2476" end="2486" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q654779" start="2575" end="2596" title="Geoffrey de Havilland" label="Geoffrey de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="2787" end="2795" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994681" start="3319" end="3344" title="thrust specific fuel consumption" label="specific fuel consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="3888" end="3924" title="British Overseas Airways Corporation" label="British Overseas Airways Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q931489" start="4194" end="4207" title="Ronald Eric Bishop" label="Ronald Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q221344" start="4242" end="4250" title="de Havilland Mosquito" label="Mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q826939" start="4331" end="4337" title="Canard (aeronautics)" label="canard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326722" start="4341" end="4349" title="Tailless aircraft" label="tailless"/>
<link wikidata="Q965321" start="4382" end="4400" title="Ministry of Supply" label="Ministry of Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050321" start="4499" end="4505" title="de Havilland DH 108" label="DH 108"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201019" start="4519" end="4535" title="proof of concept" label="proof of concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050411" start="5414" end="5432" title="de Havilland Goblin" label="Halford H.1 Goblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164321" start="5466" end="5482" title="Rolls-Royce Avon" label="Rolls-Royce Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q287493" start="5543" end="5560" title="de Havilland Ghost" label="Halford H.2 Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971082" start="5771" end="5801" title="British South American Airways" label="British South American Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887282" start="6137" end="6155" title="Hatfield Aerodrome" label="Hatfield Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q740460" start="6300" end="6321" title="pressure vessel" label="decompression chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887962" start="7055" end="7071" title="United Kingdom aircraft test serials" label="Class B markings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181303" start="7336" end="7373" title="John Cunningham (RAF officer)" label="John &amp;quot;Cats Eyes&amp;quot; Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016123" start="7574" end="7590" title="Tony Fairbrother" label="Tony Fairbrother"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887960" start="7611" end="7621" title="United Kingdom aircraft registration" label="registered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396967" start="7679" end="7698" title="Farnborough Airshow" label="Farnborough Airshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q580409" start="7897" end="7901" title="Bournemouth Airport" label="Hurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="8003" end="8009" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="8269" end="8281" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8360" end="8366" title="bogie#Bogie (aircraft)" label="bogies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="8423" end="8442" title="Cantilever wing" label="low-wing cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q194156" start="8502" end="8509" title="Cockpit (aviation)" label="cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="9042" end="9056" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="9267" end="9277" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q497741" start="9537" end="9543" title="galley (kitchen)" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="9593" end="9596" title="bar (counter)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746393" start="9701" end="9710" title="lifeboat (shipboard)" label="life raft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262971" start="9765" end="9774" title="personal flotation device" label="life vest"/>
<link wikidata="Q677122" start="10190" end="10212" title="Lockheed Constellation" label="Lockheed Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481471" start="10681" end="10696" title="aircraft flight control system" label="flight controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705284" start="10885" end="10901" title="flight control surfaces" label="control surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="11131" end="11147" title="hydraulic system" label="hydraulic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="11417" end="11433" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796906" start="11443" end="11458" title="de-icing system" label="de-icing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204361" start="11490" end="11500" title="redundancy (engineering)" label="redundancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138896" start="11696" end="11717" title="Cobham plc" label="Flight Refuelling Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323238" start="11981" end="11985" title="EKCO" label="EKCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="11991" end="11996" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713784" start="12038" end="12047" title="nose cone" label="nose cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428793" start="12219" end="12226" title="Sud Aviation" label="Sud-Est"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503" start="12270" end="12292" title="Sud Aviation Caravelle" label="Sud Aviation Caravelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179835" start="12433" end="12447" title="De Havilland Vampire" label="DH 100 Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q952062" start="12580" end="12595" title="Hawker Siddeley" label="Hawker Siddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q507234" start="13577" end="13591" title="Fatigue (material)" label="fatigue cracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="13677" end="13685" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306421" start="13687" end="13692" title="Redux (adhesive)" label="Redux"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="14264" end="14275" title="radiography" label="radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841568" start="14500" end="14515" title="baggage handler" label="baggage handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206687" start="15104" end="15117" title="podded engine" label="podded engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080767" start="15145" end="15159" title="vertical stabilizer" label="fin and rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564743" start="15245" end="15251" title="sound baffle" label="baffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q589260" start="15294" end="15307" title="soundproofing" label="soundproofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426877" start="15447" end="15468" title="foreign object damage" label="foreign object damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="15972" end="15989" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244424" start="15998" end="16017" title="de Havilland Sprite" label="de Havilland Sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676551" start="16078" end="16083" title="RATO" label="boost"/>
<link wikidata="Q854248" start="16084" end="16091" title="takeoff" label="takeoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078112" start="16098" end="16110" title="hot and high" label="hot and high"/>
<link wikidata="Q53085" start="16890" end="16910" title="Mexicana de Aviación (1921–2010)" label="Mexicana de Aviacion"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="17534" end="17540" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="17544" end="17556" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="17826" end="17859" title="Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon" label="Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q153815" start="17864" end="17881" title="Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon" label="Princess Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q503761" start="18083" end="18095" title="Douglas DC-6" label="Douglas DC-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="18225" end="18230" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q302439" start="18305" end="18313" title="Canadair North Star" label="Argonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="18349" end="18355" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="18969" end="18978" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="18990" end="18997" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274577" start="19077" end="19094" title="Popular Mechanics" label="Popular Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885376" start="19244" end="19275" title="Union Aéromaritime de Transport" label="Union Aéromaritime de Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q69906" start="19548" end="19557" title="Air India" label="Air India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590596" start="19559" end="19596" title="British Commonwealth Pacific Airlines" label="British Commonwealth Pacific Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q213140" start="19598" end="19613" title="Japan Air Lines" label="Japan Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826405" start="19615" end="19642" title="Linea Aeropostal Venezolana" label="Linea Aeropostal Venezolana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758698" start="19648" end="19664" title="Panair do Brasil" label="Panair do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937375" start="19684" end="19700" title="Capital Airlines (United States)" label="Capital Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040537" start="19702" end="19719" title="National Airlines (NA)" label="National Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132616" start="20121" end="20137" title="Rome Ciampino Airport" label="Ciampino airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q986941" start="20323" end="20348" title="Canadian Pacific Airlines" label="Canadian Pacific Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="20482" end="20499" title="Karachi, Pakistan" label="Karachi, Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="20525" end="20534" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370303" start="20917" end="20929" title="rotation (aeronautics)" label="overrotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754137" start="20965" end="20977" title="leading edge" label="leading edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q370906" start="21104" end="21119" title="angle of attack" label="angle of attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545843" start="21317" end="21327" title="wing fence" label="wing fence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798411" start="21503" end="21521" title="Arthur David Beaty" label="Arthur David Beaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159466" start="21590" end="21594" title="Cone of Silence (film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q11616908" start="21845" end="21860" title="BOAC Flight 783" label="BOAC Flight 783"/>
<link wikidata="Q853213" start="21912" end="21925" title="squall" label="thundersquall"/>
<link wikidata="Q388535" start="21982" end="22031" title="Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport" label="Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="22267" end="22286" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737615" start="22363" end="22381" title="Natesan Srinivasan" label="Natesan Srinivasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096168" start="22600" end="22621" title="tailplane" label="horizontal stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="22696" end="22703" title="g-force" label="g-force"/>
<link wikidata="Q863343" start="23312" end="23325" title="weather radar" label="weather radar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23495" end="23510" title="aircraft flight control system#Artificial feel devices" label="artificial feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="23630" end="23634" title="feedback" label="feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q962966" start="24255" end="24270" title="BOAC Flight 781" label="BOAC Flight 781"/>
<link wikidata="Q45328" start="24332" end="24336" title="Elba" label="Elba"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="24873" end="24881" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099481" start="24913" end="24933" title="clear-air turbulence" label="clear-air turbulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q381448" start="25071" end="25078" title="wing flutter" label="flutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q507234" start="25169" end="25182" title="fatigue (material)" label="metal fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="25569" end="25579" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223763" start="26497" end="26518" title="South African Airways" label="South African Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="26546" end="26551" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078122" start="26572" end="26585" title="South African Airways Flight 201" label="SA Flight 201"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="26658" end="26664" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419175" start="26841" end="26869" title="Royal Aircraft Establishment" label="Royal Aircraft Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203381" start="27208" end="27216" title="cocooning (aircraft)" label="cocooned"/>
<link wikidata="Q895738" start="27382" end="27392" title="Lionel Cohen, Baron Cohen" label="Lord Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794935" start="27444" end="27459" title="Arnold Alexander Hall" label="Sir Arnold Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="29854" end="29864" title="fibreglass" label="fibreglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434802" start="29873" end="29881" title="aperture" label="aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="29893" end="29919" title="Automatic Direction Finder" label="Automatic Direction Finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q542690" start="33903" end="33923" title="stress concentration" label="stress concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392940" start="35420" end="35429" title="fail-safe" label="fail-safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211429" start="35439" end="35448" title="safe-life design" label="safe-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q665566" start="35525" end="35550" title="Aloha Airlines Flight 243" label="Aloha Airlines Flight 243"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="36072" end="36075" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="37027" end="37042" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431350" start="37500" end="37528" title="Gander International Airport" label="Gander International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="37734" end="37744" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q223315" start="37846" end="37865" title="Douglas DC-8" label="Douglas DC-8&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q83535" start="38208" end="38229" title="Aerolíneas Argentinas" label="Aerolíneas Argentinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q954747" start="38350" end="38370" title="East African Airways" label="East African Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021591" start="38751" end="38766" title="Olympic Airways" label="Olympic Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q860389" start="39100" end="39114" title="Kuwait Airways" label="Kuwait Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q859510" start="39116" end="39136" title="Middle East Airlines" label="Middle East Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q374740" start="39138" end="39145" title="EgyptAir" label="Misrair"/>
<link wikidata="Q864117" start="39168" end="39181" title="Sudan Airways" label="Sudan Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q947947" start="39472" end="39484" title="Vickers VC10" label="Vickers VC10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158942" start="40024" end="40031" title="Dan-Air" label="Dan-Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888177" start="40185" end="40191" title="United Kingdom military aircraft serials" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564336" start="40280" end="40302" title="Minister of Technology" label="Ministry of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="41511" end="41517" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q651778" start="41522" end="41529" title="Douglas Aircraft Company" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="41713" end="41721" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q506090" start="42284" end="42298" title="Tupolev Tu-104" label="Tupolev Tu-104"/>
<link wikidata="Q938476" start="43288" end="43310" title="maximum takeoff weight" label="maximum takeoff weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q407579" start="44096" end="44122" title="Air Ministry specification" label="Air Ministry specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q521916" start="44396" end="44405" title="H2S radar" label="H2S Mk IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419175" start="44598" end="44626" title="Royal Aircraft Establishment" label="Royal Aircraft Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047097" start="44753" end="44761" title="V bomber" label="V bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="45952" end="45972" title="signals intelligence" label="signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043156" start="46645" end="46661" title="No. 216 Squadron RAF" label="No. 216 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275563" start="46799" end="46814" title="RAF Signals Command" label="Signals Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043063" start="46845" end="46852" title="No. 192 Squadron RAF" label="No. 192"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064279" start="46857" end="46872" title="No. 51 Squadron RAF" label="No. 51 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="46913" end="46924" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q919252" start="48137" end="48161" title="British European Airways" label="British European Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630510" start="48347" end="48371" title="autoland" label="automatic landing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569832" start="48490" end="48502" title="Woodford, Greater Manchester" label="BAE Woodford"/>
<link wikidata="Q128993" start="48536" end="48542" title="Hawker Siddeley Nimrod" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937375" start="49346" end="49362" title="Capital Airlines (United States)" label="Capital Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414724" start="49804" end="49822" title="Royal Saudi Air Force" label="Saudi Royal Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q244206" start="49848" end="49872" title="Saud of Saudi Arabia" label="King Saud bin Abdul Aziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q284143" start="50454" end="50472" title="Rolls-Royce Conway" label="Rolls-Royce Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="50507" end="50528" title="Department for Transport" label="Ministry of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q658414" start="50759" end="50783" title="maritime patrol aircraft" label="maritime patrol aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915289" start="51008" end="51026" title="Woodford Aerodrome" label="Woodford Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530156" start="52020" end="52030" title="Air Ceylon" label="Air Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053680" start="52057" end="52080" title="Central African Airways" label="Central African Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060578" start="52155" end="52172" title="Malaysian Airways" label="Malaysian Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q28719599" start="52242" end="52256" title="Cyprus Airways" label="Cyprus Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q208232" start="52276" end="52306" title="Transportes Aéreos Portugueses" label="Transportes Aéreos Portugueses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062247" start="52308" end="52323" title="Channel Airways" label="Channel Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064279" start="52746" end="52757" title="No. 51 Squadron RAF" label="51 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043063" start="52785" end="52797" title="No. 192 Squadron RAF" label="192 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043156" start="52825" end="52837" title="No. 216 Squadron RAF" label="216 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="52929" end="52953" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637532" start="53017" end="53029" title="No. 412 Squadron RCAF" label="412 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q15931405" start="53107" end="53126" title="hull loss" label="hull-loss accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q61052" start="53287" end="53304" title="Jinnah International Airport" label="Karachi, Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11616908" start="53447" end="53494" title="BOAC Flight 783" label="British Overseas Airways Corporation flight 783"/>
<link wikidata="Q962966" start="53510" end="53557" title="BOAC Flight 781" label="British Overseas Airways Corporation flight 781"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078122" start="53582" end="53614" title="South African Airways Flight 201" label="South African Airways flight 201"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129232" start="53825" end="53855" title="controlled flight into terrain" label="controlled flight into terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q926160" start="53976" end="54008" title="Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 322" label="Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 322"/>
<link wikidata="Q171617" start="54012" end="54020" title="Campinas" label="Campinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887397" start="54066" end="54097" title="United Arab Airlines Flight 869 (1962)" label="United Arab Airlines Flight 869"/>
<link wikidata="Q8186827" start="54302" end="54334" title="Dan-Air Flight 1903" label="Dan-Air de Havilland Comet crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="54422" end="54441" title="air traffic control" label="air traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079825" start="54597" end="54628" title="United Arab Airlines Flight 869 (1963)" label="United Arab Airlines Flight 869"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055787" start="54726" end="54751" title="Cyprus Airways Flight 284" label="Cyprus Airways Flight 284"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373617" start="55524" end="55542" title="RAF Museum Cosford" label="RAF Museum Cosford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244410" start="55933" end="55961" title="de Havilland Aircraft Museum" label="de Havilland Aircraft Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226" start="55967" end="55976" title="St Albans" label="St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770752" start="56132" end="56143" title="RAF Lyneham" label="RAF Lyneham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915612" start="56492" end="56525" title="Boscombe Down Aviation Collection" label="Boscombe Down Aviation Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915612" start="56529" end="56547" title="Old Sarum Airfield" label="Old Sarum Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758240" start="56610" end="56637" title="Imperial War Museum Duxford" label="Imperial War Museum Duxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433574" start="56830" end="56857" title="Science Museum at Wroughton" label="Science Museum at Wroughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430648" start="56918" end="56946" title="Flugausstellung Peter Junior" label="Flugausstellung Peter Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q519344" start="56956" end="56966" title="Hermeskeil" label="Hermeskeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402597" start="56990" end="57006" title="Museum of Flight" label="Museum of Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q11839325" start="57069" end="57094" title="National Museum of Flight" label="National Museum of Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888424" start="57224" end="57248" title="Bruntingthorpe Aerodrome" label="Bruntingthorpe Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794935" start="57619" end="57640" title="Arnold Alexander Hall" label="Arnold Alexander Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930919" start="57643" end="57661" title="Seymour Collection" label="Seymour Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q381623" start="57666" end="57679" title="aerophilately" label="aerophilately"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="57944" end="57970" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q751377" start="58241" end="58261" title="Ministry of Aviation" label="Ministry of Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607738" start="58266" end="58302" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Stationery Office" label="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Stationery Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428742" start="59193" end="59199" title="Flight International" label="Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428742" start="59313" end="59319" title="Flight International" label="Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828207" start="60428" end="60445" title="Air International" label="Air International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828207" start="60509" end="60526" title="Air International" label="Air International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722666" start="61411" end="61425" title="Macarthur Job" label="Job, Macarthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262482" start="64015" end="64033" title="John W. R. Taylor" label="Taylor, John W. R."/>
<link wikidata="Q4909245" start="65958" end="65970" title="Bill Gunston" label="Bill Gunston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326289" start="66285" end="66295" title="Full Focus" label="Full Focus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182732" wikidata="Q785020" url="?curid=182732" title="Sedimentary basin">
<text>Sedimentary basins are region-scale depressions of the Earth&#x27;s crust where subsidence has occurred and a thick sequence of sediments have accumulated to form a large three-dimensional body of sedimentary rock. They form when long-term subsidence creates a regional depression that provides accommodation space for accumulation of sediments. Over millions or tens or hundreds of millions of years the deposition of sediment, primarily gravity-driven transportation of water-borne eroded material, acts to fill the depression. As the sediments are buried, they are subject to increasing pressure and begin the processes of compaction and lithification that transform them into sedimentary rock.
Sedimentary basins are created by deformation of Earth&#x27;s lithosphere in diverse geological settings, usually as a result of plate tectonic activity. Mechanisms of crustal deformation that lead to subsidence and sedimentary basin formation include the thinning of underlying crust; depression of the crust by sedimentary, tectonic or volcanic loading; or changes in the thickness or density of underlying or adjacent lithosphere. Once the process of basin formation has begun, the weight of the sediments being deposited in the basin adds a further load on the underlying crust that accentuates subsidence and thus amplifies basin development as a result of isostasy.

The long-term preserved geologic record of a sedimentary basin is a large scale contiguous three-dimensional package of sedimentary rocks created during a particular period of geologic time, a &#x27;stratigraphic succession&#x27;, that geologists continue to refer to as a sedimentary basin even if it is no longer a bathymetric or topographic depression. The Williston Basin, Molasse basin and Magallanes Basin are examples of sedimentary basins that are no longer depressions. Basins formed in different tectonic regimes vary in their preservation potential. Intracratonic basins, which form on highly-stable continental interiors, have a high probability of preservation. In contrast, sedimentary basins formed on oceanic crust are likely to be destroyed by subduction. Continental margins formed when new ocean basins like the Atlantic are created as continents rift apart are likely to have lifespans of hundreds of millions of years, but may be only partially preserved when those ocean basins close as continents collide.

Sedimentary basins are of great economic importance. Almost all the world&#x27;s natural gas and petroleum and all of its coal are found in sedimentary rock. Many metal ores are found in sedimentary rocks formed in particular sedimentary environments. Sedimentary basins are also important from a purely scientific perspective because their sedimentary fill provides a record of Earth&#x27;s history during the time in which the basin was actively receiving sediment.

More than six hundred sedimentary basins have been identified worldwide. They range in areal size from tens of square kilometers to well over a million, and their sedimentary fills range from one to almost twenty kilometers in thickness.

== Classification == 
A dozen or so common types of sedimentary basins are widely recognized and several classification schemes are proposed, however no single classification scheme is recognized as the standard.

Most sedimentary basin classification schemes are based on one or more of these interrelated criteria: 
* &quot;Plate tectonic setting&quot; - the proximity to a divergent, convergent or transform plate tectonic boundary and the type and origin of the tectonically-induced forces that cause a basin to form, specifically those active at the time of active sedimentation in the basin.
* &quot;Nature of underlying crust&quot; - basins formed on continental crust are quite different from those formed on oceanic crust as the two types of lithosphere have very different mechanical characteristics (rheology) and different densities, which means they respond differently to isostasy. 
* &quot;Geodynamics of basin formation&quot; - the mechanical and thermal forces that cause lithosphere to subside to form a basin.
* &quot;Petroleum/economic potential&quot; - basin characteristics that influence the likelihood for the basin to have an accumulations of petroleum or the manner in which it formed.

== Widely-recognized types ==
Although no one basin classification scheme has been widely adopted, several common types of sedimentary basins are widely accepted and well understood as distinct types. Over its complete lifespan a single sedimentary basin can go through multiple phases and evolve from one of these types to another, such as a rift process going to completion to form a passive margin. In this case the sedimentary rocks of the rift basin phase are overlain by those rocks deposited during the passive margin phase. Hybrid basins where a single regional basin results from the processes that are characteristic of multiple of these types are also possible.

== Mechanics of formation ==
Sedimentary basins form as a result of regional subsidence of the lithosphere, mostly as a result of a few geodynamic processes.

=== Lithospheric stretching ===

If the lithosphere is caused to stretch horizontally, by mechanisms such as rifting (which is associated with divergent plate boundaries) or &quot;ridge-push&quot; or &quot;trench-pull&quot; (associated with convergent boundaries), the effect is believed to be twofold. The lower, hotter part of the lithosphere will &quot;flow&quot; slowly away from the main area being stretched, whilst the upper, cooler and more brittle crust will tend to fault (crack) and fracture. The combined effect of these two mechanisms is for Earth&#x27;s surface in the area of extension to subside, creating a geographical depression which is then often infilled with water and/or sediments. (An analogy is a piece of rubber, which thins in the middle when stretched.)

An example of a basin caused by lithospheric stretching is the North Sea – also an important location for significant hydrocarbon reserves. Another such feature is the Basin and Range Province which covers most of Nevada, forming a series of horst and graben structures.

Tectonic extension at divergent boundaries where continental rifting is occurring can create a nascent ocean basin leading to either an ocean or the failure of the rift zone. Another expression of lithospheric stretching results in the formation of ocean basins with central ridges. The Red Sea is in fact an incipient ocean, in a plate tectonic context. The mouth of the Red Sea is also a tectonic triple junction where the Indian Ocean Ridge, Red Sea Rift and East African Rift meet. This is the only place on the planet where such a triple junction in oceanic crust is exposed subaerially. This is due to a high thermal buoyancy (thermal subsidence) of the junction, and also to a local crumpled zone of seafloor crust acting as a dam against the Red Sea.

=== Lithospheric flexure === 

Lithospheric flexure is another geodynamic mechanism that can cause regional subsidence resulting in the creation of a sedimentary basin. If a load is placed on the lithosphere, it will tend to flex in the manner of an elastic plate. The magnitude of the lithospheric flexure is a function of the imposed load and the &quot;flexural rigidity&quot; of the lithosphere, and the wavelength of flexure is a function of flexural rigidity of the lithospheric plate. Flexural rigidity is in itself, a function of the lithospheric mineral composition, thermal regime, and effective elastic thickness of the lithosphere.

Plate tectonic processes that can create sufficient loads on the lithosphere to induce basin-forming processes include:
* formation of new mountain belts through orogeny create massive regional topographic highs that impose loads on the lithosphere and can result in foreland basins.
* growth of a volcanic arc as the result of subduction or even the formation of a hotspot volcanic chain.
* growth of an accretionary wedge and thrusting of it onto the overriding tectonic plate can contribute to the formation of forearc basins.

After any kind of sedimentary basin has begun to form, the load created by the water and sediments filling the basin creates additional load, thus causing additional lithospheric flexure and amplifying the original subsidence that created the basin, regardless of the original cause of basin inception.

=== Thermal subsidence ===
Cooling of a lithospheric plate, particularly young oceanic crust or recently stretched continental crust, causes thermal subsidence. As the plate cools it shrinks and becomes denser through thermal contraction. Analogous to a solid floating in a liquid, as the lithospheric plate gets denser it sinks because it displaces more of the underlying mantle through an equilibrium process known as isostasy.

Thermal subsidence is particularly measurable and observable with oceanic crust, as there is a well-established correlation between the age of the underlying crust and depth of the ocean. As newly-formed oceanic crust cools over a period of tens of millions of years. This is an important contribution to subsidence in rift basins, backarc basins and passive margins where they are underlain by newly-formed oceanic crust.

=== Strike-slip deformation ===

In strike-slip tectonic settings, deformation of the lithosphere occurs primarily in the plane of Earth as a result of near horizontal maximum and minimum principal stresses. Faults associated with these plate boundaries are primarily vertical. Wherever these vertical fault planes encounter bends, movement along the fault can create local areas of compression or tension.

When the curve in the fault plane moves apart, a region of &quot;transtension&quot; occurs and sometimes is large enough and long-lived enough to create a sedimentary basin often called a pull-apart basin or strike-slip basin. These basins are often roughly rhombohedral in shape and may be called a &quot;rhombochasm&quot;. A classic rhombochasm is illustrated by the Dead Sea rift, where northward movement of the Arabian Plate relative to the Anatolian Plate has created a strike slip basin.

The opposite effect is that of &quot;transpression&quot;, where converging movement of a curved fault plane causes collision of the opposing sides of the fault. An example is the San Bernardino Mountains north of Los Angeles, which result from convergence along a curve in the San Andreas Fault system. The Northridge earthquake was caused by vertical movement along local thrust and reverse faults &quot;bunching up&quot; against the bend in the otherwise strike-slip fault environment.

== Study of sedimentary basins ==
The study of sedimentary basins as entities unto themselves is often referred to as sedimentary basin analysis. Study involving quantitative modeling of the dynamic geologic processes by which they evolved is called basin modelling.

The sedimentary rocks comprising the fill of sedimentary basins hold the most complete historical record of the evolution of the earth&#x27;s surface over time. Regional study of these rocks can be used as the primary record for different kinds of scientific investigation aimed at understanding and reconstructing the earth&#x27;s past plate tectonics (paleotectonics), geography (paleogeography, climate (paleoclimatology), oceans (paleoceanography), habitats (paleoecology and paleobiogeography). Sedimentary basin analysis is thus an important area of study for purely scientific and academic reasons. There are however important economic incentives as well for understanding the processes of sedimentary basin formation and evolution because almost all of the world&#x27;s fossil fuel reserves were formed in sedimentary basins.
All of these perspectives on the history of a particular region are based on the study of a large three-dimensional body of sedimentary rocks that resulted from the fill of one or more sedimentary basins over time. The scientific studies of stratigraphy and in recent decades sequence stratigraphy are focused on understanding the three-dimensional architecture, packaging and layering of this body of sedimentary rocks as a record resulting from sedimentary processes acting over time, influenced by global sea level change and regional plate tectonics.

===Surface geologic study===
Where the sedimentary rocks comprising a sedimentary basin&#x27;s fill are exposed at the earth&#x27;s surface, traditional field geology and aerial photography techniques as well as satellite imagery can be used in the study of sedimentary basins.

===Subsurface geologic study===
Much of a sedimentary basin&#x27;s fill often remains buried below the surface, often submerged in the ocean, and thus cannot be studied directly. Acoustic imaging using seismic reflection acquired through seismic data acquisition and studied through the specific sub-discipline of seismic stratigraphy is the primary means of understanding the three-dimensional architecture of the basin&#x27;s fill through remote sensing.

Direct sampling of the rocks themselves is accomplished via the drilling of boreholes and the retrieval of rock samples in the form of both core samples and drill cuttings. These allow geologists to study small samples of the rocks directly and also very importantly allow paleontologists to study the microfossils they contain (micropaleontology).

At the time they are being drilled, boreholes are also surveyed by pulling electronic instruments along the length of the borehole in a process known as well logging. Well logging, which is sometimes appropriately called borehole geophysics, uses electromagnetic and radioactive properties of the rocks surrounding the borehole, as well as their interaction with the fluids used in the process of drilling the borehole, to create a continuous record of the rocks along the length of the borehole, displayed as of a family of curves. Comparison of well log curves between multiple boreholes can be used to understand the stratigraphy of a sedimentary basin, particularly if used in conjunction with seismic stratigraphy.

==See also==
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* Preliminary Catalog of the Sedimentary Basins of the United States United States Geological Survey
*Global sedimentary basin map
*Map/database of sedimentary basins of the World</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q785020" start="0" end="18" title="Sedimentary basin" label="Sedimentary basins"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="55" end="73" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="128" end="136" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="197" end="213" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="240" end="250" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603124" start="295" end="314" title="Accommodation (geology)" label="accommodation space"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="419" end="427" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="590" end="598" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414356" start="626" end="636" title="compaction (geology)" label="compaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191052" start="641" end="654" title="lithification" label="lithification"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="680" end="696" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="827" end="841" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83296" start="1119" end="1130" title="lithosphere" label="lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q188719" start="1360" end="1368" title="isostasy" label="isostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022146" start="1731" end="1746" title="Williston Basin" label="Williston Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943273" start="1748" end="1761" title="Molasse basin" label="Molasse basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729639" start="1766" end="1782" title="Magallanes Basin" label="Magallanes Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q596086" start="1908" end="1930" title="preservation potential" label="preservation potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="2132" end="2142" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="2482" end="2493" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="2498" end="2507" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="2523" end="2527" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q858571" start="3767" end="3784" title="continental crust" label="continental crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q238851" start="3826" end="3839" title="oceanic crust" label="oceanic crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q83296" start="3860" end="3871" title="lithosphere" label="lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q271707" start="3920" end="3928" title="rheology" label="rheology"/>
<link wikidata="Q152827" start="4014" end="4025" title="Geodynamics" label="Geodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83296" start="5195" end="5206" title="lithosphere" label="lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="5612" end="5617" title="Crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="6002" end="6011" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="6057" end="6068" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q810178" start="6107" end="6131" title="Basin and Range Province" label="Basin and Range Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q212136" start="6181" end="6186" title="Horst (geology)" label="horst"/>
<link wikidata="Q192810" start="6191" end="6197" title="graben" label="graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q771592" start="6360" end="6384" title="aulacogen" label="failure of the rift zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="6498" end="6505" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199041" start="6610" end="6625" title="triple junction" label="triple junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234397" start="6673" end="6690" title="East African Rift" label="East African Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361456" start="6791" end="6800" title="subaerial" label="subaerial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783073" start="6844" end="6862" title="thermal subsidence" label="thermal subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6648199" start="7002" end="7022" title="Lithospheric flexure" label="Lithospheric flexure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459050" start="7326" end="7343" title="flexural rigidity" label="flexural rigidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="7777" end="7784" title="orogeny" label="orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978695" start="7882" end="7896" title="foreland basin" label="foreland basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426043" start="7913" end="7925" title="volcanic arc" label="volcanic arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="7981" end="8003" title="Hotspot (geology)" label="hotspot volcanic chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q419990" start="8020" end="8038" title="accretionary wedge" label="accretionary wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783073" start="8591" end="8609" title="thermal subsidence" label="thermal subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q911348" start="8668" end="8687" title="Negative thermal expansion" label="thermal contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q188719" start="8870" end="8878" title="isostasy" label="isostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q87247788" start="9017" end="9067" title="Seafloor depth versus age" label="age of the underlying crust and depth of the ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q108696248" start="9341" end="9361" title="Strike-slip tectonics" label="strike-slip tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9493" end="9511" title="Stress (mechanics)#Principal stresses and stress invariants" label="principal stresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462148" start="9778" end="9790" title="transtension" label="transtension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259386" start="9901" end="9917" title="pull-apart basin" label="pull-apart basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="10082" end="10090" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q331093" start="10129" end="10142" title="Arabian Plate" label="Arabian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q259207" start="10159" end="10174" title="Anatolian Plate" label="Anatolian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835340" start="10246" end="10259" title="transpression" label="transpression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577959" start="10388" end="10412" title="San Bernardino Mountains" label="San Bernardino Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="10486" end="10503" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519015" start="10516" end="10537" title="Northridge earthquake" label="Northridge earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445308" start="10816" end="10842" title="sedimentary basin analysis" label="sedimentary basin analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867503" start="10948" end="10963" title="basin modelling" label="basin modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q52151" start="11348" end="11362" title="paleogeography" label="paleogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q191069" start="11373" end="11389" title="paleoclimatology" label="paleoclimatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839806" start="11400" end="11416" title="paleoceanography" label="paleoceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337995" start="11429" end="11441" title="paleoecology" label="paleoecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="11446" end="11463" title="Biogeography" label="paleobiogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="11744" end="11755" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="12041" end="12053" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732190" start="12076" end="12097" title="sequence stratigraphy" label="sequence stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191839" start="12527" end="12545" title="aerial photography" label="aerial photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500431" start="12837" end="12855" title="seismic reflection" label="seismic reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q97458192" start="12873" end="12897" title="seismic data acquisition" label="seismic data acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q110009192" start="12949" end="12969" title="seismic stratigraphy" label="seismic stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="13076" end="13090" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942237" start="13233" end="13244" title="core sample" label="core sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799076" start="13250" end="13264" title="drill cuttings" label="drill cuttings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761786" start="13395" end="13406" title="microfossil" label="microfossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142548" start="13422" end="13439" title="micropaleontology" label="micropaleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383566" start="13596" end="13608" title="well logging" label="well logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="13673" end="13683" title="geophysics" label="geophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="14287" end="14318" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182734" wikidata="Q1779048" url="?curid=182734" title="Magnetohydrodynamic drive">
<text>A magnetohydrodynamic drive or MHD accelerator is a method for propelling vehicles using only electric and magnetic fields with no moving parts, accelerating an electrically conductive propellant (liquid or gas) with magnetohydrodynamics. The fluid is directed to the rear and as a reaction, the vehicle accelerates forward.

Studies examining MHD in the field of marine propulsion began in the late 1950s. 

Few large-scale marine prototypes have been built, limited by the low electrical conductivity of seawater. Increasing current density is limited by Joule heating and water electrolysis in the vicinity of electrodes, and increasing the magnetic field strength is limited by the cost, size and weight (as well as technological limitations) of electromagnets and the power available to feed them. In 2023 DARPA launched the PUMP program to build a marine engine using superconducting magnets expected to reach a field strength of 20 Tesla.

Stronger technical limitations apply to air-breathing MHD propulsion (where ambient air is ionized) that is still limited to theoretical concepts and early experiments.

Plasma propulsion engines using magnetohydrodynamics for space exploration have also been actively studied as such electromagnetic propulsion offers high thrust and high specific impulse at the same time, and the propellant would last much longer than in chemical rockets.

== Principle ==


The working principle involves the acceleration of an electrically conductive fluid (which can be a liquid or an ionized gas called a plasma) by the Lorentz force, resulting from the cross product of an electric current (motion of charge carriers accelerated by an electric field applied between two electrodes) with a perpendicular magnetic field. The Lorentz force accelerates all charged particles, positive and negative species (in opposite directions). If either positive or negative species dominate the vehicle is put in motion in the opposite direction from the net charge.

This is the same working principle as an electric motor (more exactly a linear motor) except that in an MHD drive, the solid moving rotor is replaced by the fluid acting directly as the propellant. As with all electromagnetic devices, an MHD accelerator is reversible: if the ambient working fluid is moving relatively to the magnetic field, charge separation induces an electric potential difference that can be harnessed with electrodes: the device then acts as a power source with no moving parts, transforming the kinetic energy of the incoming fluid into electricity, called an MHD generator.

As the Lorentz force in an MHD converter does not act on a single isolated charged particle nor on electrons in a solid electrical wire, but on a continuous charge distribution in motion, it is a &quot;volumetric&quot; (body) force, a force per unit volume:

:formula_1

where f is the &quot;force density&quot; (force per unit volume), &quot;ρ&quot; the charge density (charge per unit volume), E the electric field, J the current density (current per unit area) and B the magnetic field.

==Typology==

MHD thrusters are classified in two categories according to the way the electromagnetic fields operate:
* Conduction devices when a direct current flows in the fluid due to an applied voltage between pairs of electrodes, the magnetic field being steady.
* Induction devices when alternating currents are induced by a rapidly varying magnetic field, as eddy currents. No electrodes are required in this case.

As induction MHD accelerators are electrodeless, they do not exhibit the common issues related to conduction systems (especially Joule heating, bubbles and redox from electrolysis) but need much more intense peak magnetic fields to operate. Since one of the biggest issues with such thrusters is the limited energy available on-board, induction MHD drives have not been developed out of the laboratory.

Both systems can put the working fluid in motion according to two main designs:
* Internal flow when the fluid is accelerated within and propelled back out of a nozzle of tubular or ring-shaped cross-section, the MHD interaction being concentrated within the pipe (similarly to rocket or jet engines).
* External flow when the fluid is accelerated around the whole wetted area of the vehicle, the electromagnetic fields extending around the body of the vehicle. The propulsion force results from the pressure distribution on the shell (as lift on a wing, or how ciliate microorganisms such as &quot;Paramecium&quot; move water around them).

Internal flow systems concentrate the MHD interaction in a limited volume, preserving stealth characteristics. External field systems on the contrary have the ability to act on a very large expanse of surrounding water volume with higher efficiency and the ability to decrease drag, increasing the efficiency even further.

===Marine propulsion===
MHD has no moving parts, which means that a good design might be silent, reliable, and efficient. Additionally, the MHD design eliminates many of the wear and friction pieces of the drivetrain with a directly driven propeller by an engine. Problems with current technologies include expense and slow speed compared to a propeller driven by an engine. The extra expense is from the large generator that must be driven by an engine. Such a large generator is not required when an engine directly drives a propeller.

The first prototype, a 3-meter (10-feet) long submarine called EMS-1, was designed and tested in 1966 by Stewart Way, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Way, on leave from his job at Westinghouse Electric, assigned his senior year undergraduate students to build the operational unit. This MHD submarine operated on batteries delivering power to electrodes and electromagnets, which produced a magnetic field of 0.015 tesla. The cruise speed was about 0.4 meter per second (15 inches per second) during the test in the bay of Santa Barbara, California, in accordance with theoretical predictions.

Later, a Japanese prototype, the 3.6-meter long &quot;ST-500&quot;, achieved speeds of up to 0.6 m/s in 1979.

In 1991, the world&#x27;s first full-size prototype &quot;Yamato 1&quot; was completed in Japan after six years of research and development (R&amp;D) by the Ship &amp; Ocean Foundation (later known as the Ocean Policy Research Foundation). The ship successfully carried a crew of ten plus passengers at speeds of up to in Kobe Harbour in June 1992.

Small-scale ship models were later built and studied extensively in the laboratory, leading to successful comparisons between the measurements and the theoretical prediction of ship terminal speeds.

Military research about underwater MHD propulsion included high-speed torpedoes, remotely operated underwater vehicles (ROV), autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV), up to larger ones such as submarines.

===Aircraft propulsion===
====Passive flow control====
First studies of the interaction of plasmas with hypersonic flows around vehicles date back to the late 1950s, with the concept of a new kind of thermal protection system for space capsules during high-speed reentry. As low-pressure air is naturally ionized at such very high velocities and altitude, it was thought to use the effect of a magnetic field produced by an electromagnet to replace thermal ablative shields by a &quot;magnetic shield&quot;. Hypersonic ionized flow interacts with the magnetic field, inducing eddy currents in the plasma. The current combines with the magnetic field to give Lorentz forces that oppose the flow and detach the bow shock wave further ahead of the vehicle, lowering the heat flux which is due to the brutal recompression of air behind the stagnation point. Such passive flow control studies are still ongoing, but a large-scale demonstrator has yet to be built.

====Active flow control====
Active flow control by MHD force fields on the contrary involves a direct and imperious action of forces to locally accelerate or slow down the airflow, modifying its velocity, direction, pressure, friction, heat flux parameters, in order to preserve materials and engines from stress, allowing hypersonic flight. It is a field of magnetohydrodynamics also called magnetogasdynamics, magnetoaerodynamics or magnetoplasma aerodynamics, as the working fluid is the air (a gas instead of a liquid) ionized to become electrically conductive (a plasma).

Air ionization is achieved at high altitude (electrical conductivity of air increases as atmospheric pressure reduces according to Paschen&#x27;s law) using various techniques: high voltage electric arc discharge, RF (microwaves) electromagnetic glow discharge, laser, e-beam or betatron, radioactive source… with or without seeding of low ionization potential alkali substances (like caesium) into the flow.

MHD studies applied to aeronautics try to extend the domain of hypersonic planes to higher Mach regimes: 
* Action on the boundary layer to prevent laminar flow from becoming turbulent.
* Shock wave mitigation for thermal control and reduction of the wave drag and form drag. Some theoretical studies suggest the flow velocity could be controlled everywhere on the wetted area of an aircraft, so shock waves could be totally cancelled when using enough power.
* Inlet flow control.
* Airflow velocity reduction upstream to feed a scramjet by the use of an MHD generator section combined with an MHD accelerator downstream at the exhaust nozzle, powered by the generator through an MHD bypass system.

The Russian project Ayaks (Ajax) is an example of MHD-controlled hypersonic aircraft concept. A US program also exists to design a hypersonic MHD bypass system, the Hypersonic Vehicle Electric Power System (HVEPS). A working prototype was completed in 2017 under development by General Atomics and the University of Tennessee Space Institute, sponsored by the US Air Force Research Laboratory. These projects aim to develop MHD generators feeding MHD accelerators for a new generation of high-speed vehicles. Such MHD bypass systems are often designed around a scramjet engine, but easier to design turbojets are also considered, as well as subsonic ramjets.

Such studies covers a field of resistive MHD with magnetic Reynolds number ≪ 1 using nonthermal weakly ionized gases, making the development of demonstrators much more difficult to realize than for MHD in liquids. &quot;Cold plasmas&quot; with magnetic fields are subject to the electrothermal instability occurring at a critical Hall parameter, which makes full-scale developments difficult.

==== Prospects ====
MHD propulsion has been considered as the main propulsion system for both marine and space ships since there is no need to produce lift to counter the gravity of Earth in water (due to buoyancy) nor in space (due to weightlessness), which is ruled out in the case of flight in the atmosphere.

Nonetheless, considering the current problem of the electric power source solved (for example with the availability of a still missing multi-megawatt compact fusion reactor), one could imagine future aircraft of a new kind silently powered by MHD accelerators, able to ionize and direct enough air downward to lift several tonnes. As external flow systems can control the flow over the whole wetted area, limiting thermal issues at high speeds, ambient air would be ionized and radially accelerated by Lorentz forces around an axisymmetric body (shaped as a cylinder, a cone, a sphere…), the entire airframe being the engine. Lift and thrust would arise as a consequence of a pressure difference between the upper and lower surfaces, induced by the Coandă effect. In order to maximize such pressure difference between the two opposite sides, and since the most efficient MHD converters (with a high Hall effect) are disk-shaped, such MHD aircraft would be preferably flattened to take the shape of a biconvex lens. Having no wings nor airbreathing jet engines, it would share no similarities with conventional aircraft, but it would behave like a helicopter whose rotor blades would have been replaced by a &quot;purely electromagnetic rotor&quot; with no moving part, sucking the air downward. Such concepts of flying MHD disks have been developed in the peer review literature from the mid 1970s mainly by physicists Leik Myrabo with the Lightcraft, and Subrata Roy with the Wingless Electromagnetic Air Vehicle (WEAV). 

These futuristic visions have been advertised in the media although they still remain beyond the reach of modern technology.

===Spacecraft propulsion===

A number of experimental methods of spacecraft propulsion are based on magnetohydrodynamics. As this kind of MHD propulsion involves compressible fluids in the form of plasmas (ionized gases) it is also referred to as magnetogasdynamics or magnetoplasmadynamics.

In such electromagnetic thrusters, the working fluid is most of the time ionized hydrazine, xenon or lithium. Depending on the propellant used, it can be seeded with alkali such as potassium or caesium to improve its electrical conductivity. All charged species within the plasma, from positive and negative ions to free electrons, as well as neutral atoms by the effect of collisions, are accelerated in the same direction by the Lorentz &quot;body&quot; force, which results from the combination of a magnetic field with an orthogonal electric field (hence the name of &quot;cross-field accelerator&quot;), these fields not being in the direction of the acceleration. This is a fundamental difference with ion thrusters which rely on electrostatics to accelerate only positive ions using the Coulomb force along a high voltage electric field.

First experimental studies involving cross-field plasma accelerators (square channels and rocket nozzles) date back to the late 1950s. Such systems provide greater thrust and higher specific impulse than conventional chemical rockets and even modern ion drives, at the cost of a higher required energy density.

Some devices also studied nowadays besides cross-field accelerators include the magnetoplasmadynamic thruster sometimes referred to as the Lorentz force accelerator (LFA), and the electrodeless pulsed inductive thruster (PIT).

Even today, these systems are not ready to be launched in space as they still lack a suitable compact power source offering enough energy density (such as hypothetical fusion reactors) to feed the power-greedy electromagnets, especially pulsed inductive ones. The rapid ablation of electrodes under the intense thermal flow is also a concern. For these reasons, studies remain largely theoretical and experiments are still conducted in the laboratory, although over 60 years have passed since the first research in this kind of thrusters.

== Fiction ==
&quot;Oregon,&quot; a ship in the &quot;Oregon Files&quot; series of books by author Clive Cussler, has a magnetohydrodynamic drive. This allows the ship to turn very sharply and brake instantly, instead of gliding for a few miles. In &quot;Valhalla Rising,&quot; Clive Cussler writes the same drive into the powering of Captain Nemo&#x27;s &quot;Nautilus.&quot;

The film adaptation of &quot;The Hunt for Red October&quot; popularized the magnetohydrodynamic drive as a &quot;caterpillar drive&quot; for submarines, a nearly undetectable &quot;silent drive&quot; intended to achieve stealth in submarine warfare. In reality, the current traveling through the water would create gases and noise, and the magnetic fields would induce a detectable magnetic signature. In the film, it was suggested that this sound could be confused with geological activity. In the novel from which the film was adapted, the caterpillar that &quot;Red October&quot; used was actually a pump-jet of the so-called &quot;tunnel drive&quot; type (the tunnels provided acoustic camouflage for the cavitation from the propellers).

In the Ben Bova novel &quot;The Precipice,&quot; the ship where some of the action took place, &quot;Starpower 1,&quot; built to prove that exploration and mining of the asteroid belt was feasible and potentially profitable, had a magnetohydrodynamic drive mated to a fusion power plant.

== See also ==
* Electrohydrodynamics
* Lorentz force, relates electric and magnetic fields to propulsion force

==References==


==External links==
* Demonstrate Magnetohydrodynamic Propulsion in a Minute</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1779048" start="2" end="27" title="Magnetohydrodynamic drive" label="magnetohydrodynamic drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779048" start="31" end="46" title="Magnetohydrodynamic drive" label="MHD accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="94" end="102" title="Electric field" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="107" end="121" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927151" start="131" end="143" title="moving parts" label="moving parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="161" end="184" title="Electrical resistivity and conductivity" label="electrically conductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="185" end="195" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="197" end="203" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="207" end="210" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549249" start="217" end="237" title="magnetohydrodynamics" label="magnetohydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q102205" start="243" end="248" title="fluid" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q343546" start="282" end="290" title="Reaction (physics)" label="reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11482290" start="364" end="381" title="marine propulsion" label="marine propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="479" end="502" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="506" end="514" title="seawater" label="seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q234072" start="527" end="542" title="current density" label="current density"/>
<link wikidata="Q21014200" start="557" end="570" title="Joule heating" label="Joule heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="581" end="593" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="613" end="622" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="750" end="763" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="811" end="816" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="939" end="944" title="Tesla (unit)" label="Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="1031" end="1034" title="Atmosphere of Earth" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q15237980" start="1117" end="1141" title="Plasma propulsion engine" label="Plasma propulsion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="1174" end="1191" title="space exploration" label="space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1232" end="1258" title="Electrically powered spacecraft propulsion#Electromagnetic" label="electromagnetic propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q533668" start="1271" end="1277" title="thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q51504" start="1287" end="1303" title="specific impulse" label="specific impulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="1372" end="1388" title="Rocket engine" label="chemical rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q102205" start="1487" end="1492" title="fluid" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="1509" end="1515" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="1522" end="1529" title="Ionization" label="ionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="1530" end="1533" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="1543" end="1549" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q172137" start="1558" end="1571" title="Lorentz force" label="Lorentz force"/>
<link wikidata="Q178192" start="1592" end="1605" title="cross product" label="cross product"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="1612" end="1628" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q865807" start="1640" end="1654" title="charge carrier" label="charge carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="1674" end="1688" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="1709" end="1718" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q205034" start="1728" end="1741" title="perpendicular" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="1742" end="1756" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q587553" start="1792" end="1809" title="charged particles" label="charged particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="2033" end="2047" title="electric motor" label="electric motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164566" start="2064" end="2076" title="linear motor" label="linear motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193466" start="2124" end="2129" title="Rotor (electric)" label="rotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="2178" end="2188" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="2202" end="2217" title="Electromagnetism" label="electromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217236" start="2276" end="2289" title="working fluid" label="working fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q735135" start="2334" end="2351" title="Electric dipole moment" label="charge separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="2363" end="2392" title="voltage" label="electric potential difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="2420" end="2429" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="2458" end="2470" title="Electric generator" label="power source"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="2510" end="2524" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="2552" end="2563" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q186092" start="2575" end="2588" title="Magnetohydrodynamic generator" label="MHD generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q192043" start="2711" end="2726" title="Electrical wiring" label="electrical wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q744771" start="2748" end="2767" title="Charge density" label="charge distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q744771" start="2946" end="2960" title="charge density" label="charge density"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="2993" end="3007" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q234072" start="3015" end="3030" title="current density" label="current density"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="3065" end="3079" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="3228" end="3242" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="3375" end="3394" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q988780" start="3400" end="3407" title="Electromagnetic induction" label="induced"/>
<link wikidata="Q208598" start="3448" end="3460" title="eddy current" label="eddy current"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="3661" end="3666" title="redox" label="redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250157" start="4070" end="4076" title="propelling nozzle" label="nozzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q845080" start="4103" end="4116" title="Cross section (geometry)" label="cross-section"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="4187" end="4193" title="Rocket engine" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="4197" end="4207" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505294" start="4274" end="4285" title="wetted area" label="wetted area"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="4448" end="4452" title="Lift (force)" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="4458" end="4462" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q106345" start="4471" end="4478" title="ciliate" label="ciliate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="4479" end="4492" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q199456" start="4508" end="4518" title="Paramecium" label="Paramecium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4637" end="4644" title="Stealth technology#Acoustics" label="stealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="4828" end="4832" title="Drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q609111" start="5081" end="5091" title="Powertrain" label="drivetrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q205451" start="5115" end="5124" title="propeller" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="5577" end="5616" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="5648" end="5669" title="Westinghouse Electric (1886)" label="Westinghouse Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="5991" end="6016" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500526" start="6232" end="6240" title="Yamato 1" label="Yamato 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6264" end="6269" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="6289" end="6313" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6331" end="6358" title="Ship &amp;amp; Ocean Foundation" label="Ship &amp;amp; Ocean Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6379" end="6411" title="Ocean Policy Research Foundation" label="Ocean Policy Research Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="6496" end="6500" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="6794" end="6801" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q618465" start="6805" end="6841" title="remotely operated underwater vehicle" label="remotely operated underwater vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q257406" start="6850" end="6879" title="autonomous underwater vehicle" label="autonomous underwater vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="6914" end="6923" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q830787" start="7031" end="7047" title="Hypersonic speed" label="hypersonic flows"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7127" end="7152" title="Atmospheric entry#Thermal protection systems" label="thermal protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q957055" start="7157" end="7170" title="space capsule" label="space capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="7190" end="7197" title="Atmospheric entry" label="reentry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7376" end="7400" title="Atmospheric entry#Ablative" label="thermal ablative shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950685" start="7636" end="7650" title="Bow shock (aerodynamics)" label="bow shock wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478382" start="7694" end="7703" title="heat flux" label="heat flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q651142" start="7763" end="7779" title="stagnation point" label="stagnation point"/>
<link wikidata="Q30753041" start="7794" end="7806" title="Flow control (fluid)" label="flow control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698686" start="8059" end="8066" title="airflow" label="airflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523908" start="8210" end="8227" title="hypersonic flight" label="hypersonic flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476020" start="8596" end="8614" title="Paschen&amp;#x27;s law" label="Paschen&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139740" start="8642" end="8654" title="high voltage" label="high voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="8655" end="8677" title="Electric arc" label="electric arc discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="8679" end="8681" title="Radio frequency" label="RF"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="8683" end="8692" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427934" start="8711" end="8725" title="glow discharge" label="glow discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="8727" end="8732" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q207340" start="8734" end="8740" title="Cathode ray" label="e-beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q306395" start="8744" end="8752" title="betatron" label="betatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115507" start="8754" end="8772" title="radioactive source" label="radioactive source"/>
<link wikidata="Q483769" start="8805" end="8825" title="ionization energy" label="ionization potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="8826" end="8832" title="alkali" label="alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="8850" end="8857" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421" start="8898" end="8909" title="aeronautics" label="aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="8949" end="8955" title="Fixed-wing aircraft" label="planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830859" start="9596" end="9601" title="Ayaks" label="Ayaks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9741" end="9781" title="Hypersonic Vehicle Electric Power System" label="Hypersonic Vehicle Electric Power System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501547" start="9854" end="9869" title="General Atomics" label="General Atomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896423" start="9878" end="9917" title="University of Tennessee Space Institute" label="University of Tennessee Space Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607176" start="9939" end="9968" title="Air Force Research Laboratory" label="Air Force Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q60591" start="10137" end="10145" title="scramjet" label="scramjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="10175" end="10183" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q60602" start="10226" end="10232" title="ramjet" label="ramjet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10267" end="10280" title="Magnetohydrodynamics#Ideal and resistive MHD" label="resistive MHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852720" start="10286" end="10310" title="magnetic Reynolds number" label="magnetic Reynolds number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10321" end="10331" title="Nonthermal plasma#Aerospace" label="nonthermal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10332" end="10346" title="Degree of ionization#Physics usage" label="weakly ionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151657" start="10515" end="10541" title="electrothermal instability" label="electrothermal instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q673166" start="10801" end="10817" title="gravity of Earth" label="gravity of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="10835" end="10843" title="buoyancy" label="buoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299309" start="10866" end="10880" title="weightlessness" label="weightlessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q206021" start="10917" end="10923" title="flight" label="flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="10931" end="10941" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="10996" end="11017" title="Electric power" label="electric power source"/>
<link wikidata="Q641442" start="11102" end="11116" title="Fusion power" label="fusion reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="11267" end="11272" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11471" end="11483" title="Rotational symmetry#Rotational symmetry with respect to any angle" label="axisymmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="11502" end="11510" title="cylinder" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42344" start="11514" end="11518" title="cone" label="cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="11522" end="11528" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q222946" start="11543" end="11551" title="airframe" label="airframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="11620" end="11628" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q605624" start="11693" end="11706" title="Coandă effect" label="Coandă effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q10656" start="11843" end="11854" title="Hall effect" label="Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11944" end="11957" title="Lens (optics)#Types of simple lenses" label="biconvex lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="11969" end="11973" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773032" start="11979" end="12002" title="airbreathing jet engine" label="airbreathing jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="12091" end="12101" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343028" start="12108" end="12120" title="Helicopter rotor" label="rotor blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="12300" end="12311" title="peer review" label="peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519813" start="12363" end="12374" title="Leik Myrabo" label="Leik Myrabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824681" start="12384" end="12394" title="Lightcraft" label="Lightcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897499" start="12400" end="12411" title="Subrata Roy (scientist)" label="Subrata Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025230" start="12421" end="12457" title="Wingless Electromagnetic Air Vehicle" label="Wingless Electromagnetic Air Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q609089" start="12659" end="12680" title="spacecraft propulsion" label="spacecraft propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12895" end="12920" title="Electrically powered spacecraft propulsion#Electromagnetic" label="electromagnetic thrusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q58447" start="12968" end="12977" title="hydrazine" label="hydrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106" start="12979" end="12984" title="xenon" label="xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="12988" end="12995" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="13053" end="13059" title="alkali" label="alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="13068" end="13077" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="13081" end="13088" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q205702" start="13595" end="13607" title="ion thruster" label="ion thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q26336" start="13623" end="13637" title="electrostatics" label="electrostatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83152" start="13681" end="13694" title="Coulomb force" label="Coulomb force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139740" start="13703" end="13715" title="high voltage" label="high voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q533668" start="13897" end="13903" title="thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q51504" start="13915" end="13931" title="specific impulse" label="specific impulse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13950" end="13966" title="Rocket engine#Terminology" label="chemical rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q17190065" start="14125" end="14154" title="magnetoplasmadynamic thruster" label="magnetoplasmadynamic thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924052" start="14239" end="14264" title="pulsed inductive thruster" label="pulsed inductive thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="14404" end="14418" title="energy density" label="energy density"/>
<link wikidata="Q641442" start="14441" end="14456" title="Fusion power" label="fusion reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="14483" end="14496" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060285" start="14867" end="14879" title="Oregon Files" label="Oregon Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q366266" start="14912" end="14925" title="Clive Cussler" label="Clive Cussler"/>
<link wikidata="Q366266" start="15068" end="15083" title="Valhalla Rising (novel)" label="Valhalla Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046049" start="15148" end="15160" title="Captain Nemo" label="Captain Nemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19967" start="15174" end="15182" title="Nautilus (Verne)" label="Nautilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q507994" start="15220" end="15244" title="The Hunt for Red October (film)" label="The Hunt for Red October"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="15332" end="15341" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15411" end="15418" title="Stealth technology#Acoustics" label="stealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757301" start="15422" end="15439" title="submarine warfare" label="submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255573" start="15686" end="15695" title="The Hunt for Red October" label="the novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356704" start="15794" end="15802" title="pump-jet" label="pump-jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q436664" start="15941" end="15949" title="Ben Bova" label="Ben Bova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758031" start="15962" end="15975" title="The Precipice (Bova novel)" label="The Precipice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="16104" end="16117" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q641442" start="16202" end="16214" title="fusion power" label="fusion power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326902" start="16240" end="16260" title="Electrohydrodynamics" label="Electrohydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q172137" start="16263" end="16276" title="Lorentz force" label="Lorentz force"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182735" wikidata="Q1191052" url="?curid=182735" title="Lithification">
<text>Lithification (from the Ancient Greek word &quot;lithos&quot; meaning &#x27;rock&#x27; and the Latin-derived suffix &quot;-ific&quot;) is the process in which sediments compact under pressure, expel connate fluids, and gradually become solid rock. Essentially, lithification is a process of porosity destruction through compaction and cementation. Lithification includes all the processes which convert unconsolidated sediments into sedimentary rocks. &quot;Petrifaction&quot;, though often used as a synonym, is more specifically used to describe the replacement of organic material by silica in the formation of fossils.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1191052" start="0" end="13" title="Lithification" label="Lithification"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="24" end="37" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="95" end="100" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="159" end="167" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="183" end="191" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048038" start="199" end="213" title="connate fluids" label="connate fluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="291" end="299" title="porosity" label="porosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414356" start="320" end="330" title="Compaction (geology)" label="compaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q189315" start="335" end="346" title="cementation (geology)" label="cementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="433" end="449" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572797" start="458" end="470" title="Petrifaction" label="Petrifaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="567" end="574" title="organic compound" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="587" end="593" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="614" end="620" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182737" wikidata="Q2541350" url="?curid=182737" title="To Sir, with Love">
<text>To Sir, with Love is a 1967 British drama film that deals with social and racial issues in a secondary school in the East End of London. It stars Sidney Poitier and features Christian Roberts, Judy Geeson, Suzy Kendall, Patricia Routledge and singer Lulu making her film debut. James Clavell directed from his own screenplay, which was based on E. R. Braithwaite&#x27;s 1959 autobiographical novel of the same title.

The film&#x27;s title song &quot;To Sir with Love&quot;, sung by Lulu, peaked at the top of the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart for five weeks in the autumn of 1967 and ultimately was the best-selling single in the US that year; meanwhile, Poitier, playing a charismatic schoolteacher to troubled youth, was the first black actor to win a Golden Globe Award. The film ranked number 27 on &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;″s list of the 50 Best High School Movies.

The film premiered and became a hit one month before another film about troubled schools, &quot;Up the Down Staircase&quot;, appeared. A made-for-television sequel, &quot;To Sir, with Love II&quot;, was released in 1996, with Poitier reprising his starring role.

== Plot ==
Mark Thackeray, an immigrant to Britain from British Guiana, has been unable to obtain an engineering position despite an 18-month job search. He accepts a teaching post for Class 12 at North Quay Secondary School in the East End of London, as an interim position, despite having no teaching experience.

The pupils there have been rejected from other schools, and Thackeray is a replacement for a teacher called Mr Hackman who left the school abruptly on the same day Thackeray arrived. According to another teacher, Mr Weston, Hackman left because the unruly behaviour of the pupils in his class. This class being the one that Thackery would shortly be the teacher of. The pupils in Mr Thackeray&#x27;s inherited class, led by Bert Denham and Pamela Dare, behave badly: their antics range from vandalism to distasteful pranks. Thackeray retains a calm demeanour through many disruptive classes but eventually loses his temper after discovering something being burned in the classroom stove, which turns out to be a girl&#x27;s sanitary towel. He orders the boys out of the classroom, then reprimands all the girls, either for being responsible or passively observing, for what he says is their &quot;slutty behaviour&quot;. Thackeray is angry with himself for allowing his pupils to incense him. Changing his approach, he informs the class that they will no longer study from textbooks. Until the end of term, he will treat them as adults and expects them to behave as such. He declares that they will address him as &quot;Sir&quot; or &quot;Mr. Thackeray&quot;; the girls will be addressed as &quot;Miss&quot; and boys by their surnames. They are also allowed to discuss any issue they wish. He gradually wins over the class, except for Denham who continually baits him.

Thackeray arranges a class trip to the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Natural History Museum in South Kensington which goes well. He later loses some support after defusing a potentially violent situation between his student Potter and the gym teacher, Mr. Bell. He demands that Potter apologise to Bell, even if he believes the latter was wrong. The group later refuses to invite Thackeray to the class dance. When mixed-race student Seales&#x27; white English mother dies, the class takes a collection for a wreath but refuses to accept Thackeray&#x27;s donation. The students decline to deliver the wreath in person to Seales&#x27; house, fearing neighbourhood gossip for visiting a &quot;coloured&quot; person&#x27;s house.

The headmaster tells Thackeray that the &quot;adult approach&quot; has failed, and future outings are cancelled. Thackeray is to teach the boys&#x27; gym classes until the headmaster can find a new permanent gym teacher. Meanwhile, Thackeray receives an engineering job offer in the post.

Pamela&#x27;s mother asks for Thackeray to talk to her daughter about her behaviour at home. However, this annoys Pamela, whom Thackeray believes is infatuated with him. During a gym class, Denham challenges Thackeray to a boxing match. Thackeray initially declines but then reluctantly agrees. Denham delivers harmless blows to Thackeray&#x27;s face, but the bout comes to an abrupt end after Thackeray’s lone punch is to Denham&#x27;s solar plexus, which doubles Denham over in pain. Thackeray attends to Denham and then exits the gym unhurt, to the amazement of the class. Thackeray compliments Denham&#x27;s ability and suggests he teach boxing to the younger pupils next year. Denham, impressed, expresses his admiration for Thackeray to his classmates. Thackeray regains their respect and is invited to the class dance. Later, while attending the funeral of Seales&#x27; mother, Thackeray is touched to find that his lectures on personal choice and responsibility have had an effect, and the entire class has attended.

At the dance, Pamela persuades Thackeray to be her partner for the &quot;Ladies Choice&quot; dance. Afterward, the class presents to Thackeray &quot;a little present to remember us by.&quot; Too moved to speak, Thackeray retires to his classroom.

A rowdy couple enters the classroom. They mock Thackeray&#x27;s gift, a silver tankard and card inscribed &quot;To Sir, with Love&quot; signed by the departing class, and goad Thackeray that they will be in his class next year. After they leave, Thackeray stands and rips up the engineering job offer, reconciled to the work he has ahead of him. He then takes a flower from the vase on his desk, places it in his lapel, and leaves.

== Cast ==

==Production==
Initially, Columbia was reluctant to hire Sidney Poitier or James Clavell, despite the interest which both expressed toward doing the film. (Clavell, aptly enough, had published &quot;The Children&#x27;s Story&quot; just a few years prior.) Poitier and Clavell agreed to make the movie for small fees, provided Poitier got 10% of the gross and Clavell got 30% of the profits. &quot;When we were ready to shoot, Columbia wanted either a rape or a big fight put in,&quot; said Martin Baum, Poitier&#x27;s agent. &quot;We held out, saying this was a gentle story, and we won.&quot;

The film was shot in Wapping (including the railway station) and Shadwell in the East End of London, in the Victoria and Albert Museum and at Pinewood Studios. The headmaster of the school where author Braithwaite taught, St George-in-the-East Central School (now the Mulberry House apartments) adjacent to the north side of St George in the East church in Wapping, would not let the production film at that school. The spire of the church is visible in the film, when Sir walks up Reardon Street, &quot;en route&quot; to the funeral for the mother of his student.

==Reception==
&quot;The Monthly Film Bulletin&quot; wrote: &quot;There is one shot in &quot;To Sir, With Love&quot; that shows Sidney Poitier staring into the sun through the window of his empty classroom with his arms spread out along the sill; in silhouette he looks for a second like Christ on the cross. The effect is almost certainly unintentional, but everything about James Clavell&#x27;s sententious script ... suggests that he sees his hero as a Saviour figure, nobly sacrificing his own chance of middle-class respectability in order to redeem younger unfortunates from their hereditary taint of bad grammar and colourful language. Buttoned inside his immaculate white collars, Thackeray bravely shoulders the black man&#x27;s burden, emitting a sanctimonious wince when confronted with any sign of moral weakness in others ... His comportment is infuriating, but no more so than the way in which the other characters respond to it. For if the film pretends to social realism by its frequent allusions to race prejudice, broken homes, ill-equipped classrooms and so on, its solutions have all the facile optimism of the most utopian folksongs. Thackeray&#x27;s students all have hearts of gold, all aspire to self-improvement, all want &quot;Sir&quot; to approve of them. With scarcely a pimple or a genuine adolescent problem between them (there are no wallflowers at this school dance) they are all swept along to respectability on a great tidal wave of saccharine sentiment. Even the staff are moved by Thackeray&#x27;s charismatic spell to a new sense of brotherhood.  ... Nonetheless, within the limits imposed by the pious script, unimaginative photography and wooden direction, Christian Roberts and Lulu provide two very engaging performances.&quot;

Upon its U.S. release, Bosley Crowther began his review by contrasting the film with Poitier&#x27;s role and performance in the 1955 film &quot;Blackboard Jungle&quot;; unlike that earlier film, Crowther says &quot;a nice air of gentility suffuses this pretty color film, and Mr. Poitier gives a quaint example of being proper and turning the other cheek. Although he controls himself with difficulty in some of his confrontations with his class, and even flares up on one occasion, he never acts like a boor, the way one of his fellow teachers (played by Geoffrey Bayldon) does. Except for a few barbed comments by the latter, there is little intrusion of or discussion about the issue of race: It is as discreetly played down as are many other probable tensions in this school. &quot;To Sir, with Love&quot; comes off as a cozy, good-humored and unbelievable little tale.&quot;

&quot;Halliwell&#x27;s Film and Video Guide&quot; describes it as &quot;sentimental non-realism&quot; and quotes a &quot;Monthly Film Bulletin&quot; review (possibly contemporary with its British release), which claims that &quot;the sententious script sounds as if it has been written by a zealous Sunday school teacher after a particularly exhilarating boycott of South African oranges&quot;.

The &quot;Time Out Film Guide&quot; says that it &quot;bears no resemblance to school life as we know it&quot; and the &quot;hoodlums&#x27; miraculous reformation a week before the end of term (thanks to teacher Poitier) is laughable&quot;. Although agreeing with the claims about the film&#x27;s sentimentality, and giving it a mediocre rating, the &quot;Virgin Film Guide&quot; asserts: &quot;What makes [this] such an enjoyable film is the mythic nature of Poitier&#x27;s character. He manages to come across as a real person, while simultaneously embodying everything there is to know about morality, respect and integrity.&quot;

The novel&#x27;s author, E.R. Braithwaite, loathed the film, particularly because of its omission of the novel&#x27;s interracial relationship, although it provided Braithwaite with some financial security from royalties. 

&quot;To Sir, with Love&quot; holds an 89% &quot;Fresh&quot; rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes based on 28 reviews. The film grossed $42,432,803 at the box office in the United States, yielding $19,100,000 in rentals, on a $640,000 budget, making it the sixth highest grossing picture of 1967 in the US. Poitier especially benefited from the film&#x27;s success, for he had agreed to a mere $30,000 fee in exchange for 10% of the gross box office receipts, thus arranging one of the most impressive payoffs in film history. In fact, although Columbia insisted on an annual cap to Poitier of $25,000 to fulfill the percentage term, the studio was forced to revise the deal with Poitier when they calculated that they would be committed to 80 years of payments to him.

Despite the character of Mark Thackeray being a leading role, the film has been criticised in modern times for Poitier&#x27;s portrayal of the Magical Negro trope. Specific criticism of the portrayal was directed at the character&#x27;s service as the sounding board and voice of reason for white antagonists.

== Soundtrack ==

The soundtrack album features music by Lulu, The Mindbenders, and incidental music by Ron Grainer. The original album was released on Fontana Records. It was re-released onto CD in 1995. &quot;AllMusic&quot; rated it three stars out of five.

The title song was a Cash Box Top 100 number-one single for three weeks.

# &quot;To Sir With Love&quot; (lyrics: Don Black; music: Mark London) – Lulu
# School Break Dancing &quot;Stealing My Love from Me&quot; (lyrics &amp; music: Mark London) – Lulu
# Thackeray meets Faculty, Then Alone
# Music from Lunch Break &quot;Off and Running&quot; (lyric: Toni Wine; music: Carole Bayer) – The Mindbenders
# Thackeray Loses Temper, Gets an Idea
# Museum Outings Montage &quot;To Sir, with Love&quot; - Lulu
# A Classical Lesson
# Perhaps I Could Tidy Your Desk
# Potter&#x27;s loss of temper in gym
# Thackeray reads letter about job
# Thackeray and Denham box in gym
# The funeral
# End of Term Dance &quot;It&#x27;s Getting Harder all the Time&quot; (lyrics: Ben Raleigh; music: Charles Abertine) – The Mindbenders
# To Sir With Love – Lulu

James Clavell and Lulu&#x27;s manager Marion Massey were angered and disappointed when the title song was not included in the nominations for the Academy Award for Best Original Song at the 40th Academy Awards in 1968. Clavell and Massey raised a formal objection to the exclusion, but to no avail.

== Awards and honours ==
=== Other honours ===
The film is recognised by American Film Institute in these lists:
* 2004: AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Songs:
** &quot;To Sir With Love&quot; – Nominated

== See also ==

* The Hindi film &quot;Imtihan&quot; (1974) starring Vinod Khanna as the teacher, and Tanuja as his love interest, was inspired by the film
* The Egyptian comedy &quot;Madrast Al-Mushaghebeen&quot; was inspired by the film.
* &quot;Up the Down Staircase&quot;, also released in 1967
* List of teachers portrayed in films
* List of hood films
== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;To Sir, with Love&quot; at AllMovie
* Christian Roberts and Judy Geeson discuss making &quot;To Sir, with Love&quot; on its 50th anniversary, &quot;The Spectrum&quot;, Accessed June 7, 2017.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="36" end="46" title="drama film" label="drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="93" end="109" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="117" end="135" title="East End of London" label="East End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q104049" start="146" end="160" title="Sidney Poitier" label="Sidney Poitier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110081" start="174" end="191" title="Christian Roberts (actor)" label="Christian Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181858" start="193" end="204" title="Judy Geeson" label="Judy Geeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q460699" start="206" end="218" title="Suzy Kendall" label="Suzy Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320305" start="220" end="238" title="Patricia Routledge" label="Patricia Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q229716" start="250" end="254" title="Lulu (singer)" label="Lulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q316802" start="278" end="291" title="James Clavell" label="James Clavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273562" start="345" end="362" title="E. R. Braithwaite" label="E. R. Braithwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056541" start="375" end="397" title="autobiographical novel" label="autobiographical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437572" start="398" end="415" title="To Sir, With Love (novel)" label="of the same title"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916924" start="451" end="467" title="To Sir with Love (song)" label="To Sir with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="514" end="543" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="761" end="779" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="816" end="836" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440054" start="982" end="1003" title="Up the Down Staircase (film)" label="Up the Down Staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811121" start="1057" end="1077" title="To Sir, with Love II" label="To Sir, with Love II"/>
<link wikidata="Q918126" start="1206" end="1220" title="British Guiana" label="British Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="1382" end="1400" title="East End of London" label="East End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q235693" start="2190" end="2204" title="sanitary towel" label="sanitary towel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="2975" end="3001" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="3010" end="3032" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045096" start="3036" end="3052" title="South Kensington" label="South Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q612258" start="4396" end="4408" title="solar plexus" label="solar plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446398" start="5312" end="5319" title="tankard" label="tankard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722487" start="5877" end="5902" title="The Children&amp;#x27;s Story" label="The Children&amp;#x27;s Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774957" start="6168" end="6179" title="Martin Baum (agent)" label="Martin Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q124046" start="6294" end="6301" title="Wapping" label="Wapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q801580" start="6317" end="6332" title="Wapping railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q122584" start="6338" end="6346" title="Shadwell" label="Shadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="6354" end="6372" title="East End of London" label="East End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="6381" end="6407" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q661896" start="6415" end="6431" title="Pinewood Studios" label="Pinewood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593238" start="6598" end="6619" title="St George in the East" label="St George in the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107374" start="6859" end="6884" title="The Monthly Film Bulletin" label="The Monthly Film Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q894444" start="8631" end="8646" title="Bosley Crowther" label="Bosley Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215931" start="8752" end="8769" title="Blackboard Jungle" label="Blackboard Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q563232" start="9164" end="9180" title="Geoffrey Bayldon" label="Geoffrey Bayldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820792" start="9495" end="9532" title="Halliwell&amp;#x27;s Film and Video Guide" label="Halliwell&amp;#x27;s Film and Video Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107374" start="9610" end="9631" title="Monthly Film Bulletin" label="Monthly Film Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="9895" end="9914" title="Time Out Film Guide" label="Time Out Film Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="10819" end="10835" title="Review aggregator" label="review aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="10844" end="10859" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10935" end="10948" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q615531" start="11019" end="11067" title="1967 in film" label="sixth highest grossing picture of 1967 in the US"/>
<link wikidata="Q738600" start="11676" end="11689" title="Magical Negro" label="Magical Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q229716" start="11901" end="11905" title="Lulu (singer)" label="Lulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261428" start="11907" end="11922" title="The Mindbenders" label="The Mindbenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q320816" start="11948" end="11959" title="Ron Grainer" label="Ron Grainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q729590" start="11996" end="12011" title="Fontana Records" label="Fontana Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="12055" end="12063" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848613" start="12126" end="12160" title="List of Cash Box Top 100 number-one singles of 1967" label="Cash Box Top 100 number-one single"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916924" start="12187" end="12203" title="To Sir With Love (song)" label="To Sir With Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238931" start="12219" end="12228" title="Don Black (lyricist)" label="Don Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768632" start="12237" end="12248" title="Mark London" label="Mark London"/>
<link wikidata="Q229716" start="12252" end="12256" title="Lulu (singer)" label="Lulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821357" start="12457" end="12466" title="Toni Wine" label="Toni Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q292399" start="12475" end="12487" title="Carole Bayer Sager" label="Carole Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261428" start="12491" end="12506" title="The Mindbenders" label="The Mindbenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886326" start="12862" end="12873" title="Ben Raleigh" label="Ben Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765296" start="12983" end="12996" title="Marion Massey" label="Marion Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="13091" end="13127" title="Academy Award for Best Original Song" label="Academy Award for Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065291" start="13135" end="13154" title="40th Academy Awards" label="40th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="13318" end="13341" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763822" start="13366" end="13398" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Songs" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916924" start="13409" end="13425" title="To Sir With Love (song)" label="To Sir With Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981522" start="13484" end="13491" title="Imtihan" label="Imtihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038656" start="13514" end="13526" title="Vinod Khanna" label="Vinod Khanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q146724" start="13547" end="13553" title="Tanuja" label="Tanuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166566" start="13629" end="13652" title="Madrast Al-Mushaghebeen" label="Madrast Al-Mushaghebeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440054" start="13693" end="13714" title="Up the Down Staircase (film)" label="Up the Down Staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599149" start="13746" end="13781" title="List of teachers portrayed in films" label="List of teachers portrayed in films"/>
<link wikidata="Q96389475" start="13784" end="13802" title="List of hood films" label="List of hood films"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182738" wikidata="Q233255" url="?curid=182738" title="Stadium (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[stadium]] is a large venue for hosting and viewing sports, concerts, and other events.

Stadium may also refer to:
==Art and entertainment==
* &quot;Stadium&quot; (album), a 2018 album by Eli Keszler
* &quot;Stadium&quot; (film), a 1934 Italian film
* &quot;Stadium&quot; (rock opera), a 1985 composition by Alexander Gradsky
* &quot;The Stadium&quot; (&quot;Black Summer&quot;), a television episode
* Stadium (sports network), a streaming and broadcast service

==Mathematics and technology==
* Stadium (geometry), a geometric shape
* Stadium (software), an engineering application for determining the service life of concrete

==Places==
* The Stadium (cirque), on Elephant Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica
* Stadium MRT station, Singapore
* Stadium (UTA station), Salt Lake City, US
* Stadium High School, Tacoma, Washington, US
* Stadium Road or 107 Avenue, Edmonton, Canada

== See also ==
* Stadia (disambiguation)
* Stadion (disambiguation)
* Stadium Arena (disambiguation)
* Stadium station (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233255" start="2" end="13" title="Stadium (disambiguation)" label="[[stadium]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q233255" start="92" end="99" title="Stadium (disambiguation)" label="Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769833" start="147" end="174" title="Stadium (album)" label="&amp;quot;Stadium&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967728" start="206" end="232" title="Stadium (film)" label="&amp;quot;Stadium&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964661" start="256" end="288" title="Stadium (rock opera)" label="&amp;quot;Stadium&amp;quot; (rock opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56235675" start="332" end="382" title="The Stadium (Black Summer)" label="&amp;quot;The Stadium&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Black Summer&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612306" start="407" end="431" title="Stadium (sports network)" label="Stadium (sports network)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596467" start="501" end="519" title="Stadium (geometry)" label="Stadium (geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596468" start="541" end="559" title="Stadium (software)" label="Stadium (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209496" start="647" end="667" title="The Stadium (cirque)" label="The Stadium (cirque)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089469" start="726" end="745" title="Stadium MRT station" label="Stadium MRT station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596466" start="759" end="780" title="Stadium (UTA station)" label="Stadium (UTA station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596482" start="803" end="822" title="Stadium High School" label="Stadium High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546715" start="849" end="861" title="Stadium Road" label="Stadium Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596261" start="912" end="935" title="Stadia (disambiguation)" label="Stadia (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198317" start="938" end="962" title="Stadion (disambiguation)" label="Stadion (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15946284" start="965" end="995" title="Stadium Arena (disambiguation)" label="Stadium Arena (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596499" start="998" end="1030" title="Stadium station (disambiguation)" label="Stadium station (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182740" wikidata="Q1346126" url="?curid=182740" title="John Shirley">
<text>John Shirley (born February 10, 1953) is an American writer, primarily of horror, fantasy, science fiction, dark street fiction, westerns, and songwriting. He has also written one historical novel, a western about Wyatt Earp, &quot;Wyatt in Wichita&quot;, and one non-fiction book, &quot;Gurdjieff: An Introduction to His Life and Ideas.&quot; Shirley has written novels, short stories, TV scripts and screenplays—including &quot;The Crow&quot;—and has published over 84 books including 10 short-story collections. As a musician, Shirley has fronted his own bands and written lyrics for Blue Öyster Cult and others. Shirley won the Bram Stoker Award for his story collection &quot;Black Butterflies: A Flock on the Dark Side&quot;. His newest novels are &quot;Stormland&quot;, &quot;Suborbital 7&quot;, &quot;Axle Bust Creek&quot;, the Spur Award winning novel &quot;Gunmetal Mountain&quot;, and &quot;Blood in Sweet River&quot;.

==Biography==
John Shirley was born in Houston, Texas and grew up largely in the vicinity of Portland, Oregon. His earliest novels were &quot;Transmaniacon&quot; and &quot;Dracula in Love&quot; for Zebra Books, and &quot;City Come A-Walkin&quot;, a proto-cyberpunk novel, for Delacorte. He also wrote the &quot;A Song Called Youth&quot; cyberpunk trilogy for Warner Books, re-released as an omnibus in 2012 by Prime Books. 2012 saw his noir-flavored novel of apocalypse, &quot;Everything Is Broken&quot; released by Prime Books. In 2013 PM Press released Shirley&#x27;s&quot; New Taboos&quot;. In October 2013 HarperCollins/Witness released his novel about Conan Doyle in the afterlife, &quot; Doyle After Death&quot;; Skyhorse Publications brought out his historical novel about Wyatt Earp, &quot;Wyatt in Wichita&quot;, in August 2014. Shirley&#x27;s collaboration with rock musician Mark Tremonti, an adaptation of Tremonti&#x27;s rock opera A DYING MACHINE, was completed in June 2018. Shirley&#x27;s novel &quot;Stormland&quot; came out in 2021 from Blackstone. His novel &quot;Gunmetal Mountain&quot; came out in 2023 and in 2024 won the Spur Award from the WWA. His novel &quot;Suborbital 7&quot; came out in 2023 from Titan. 

Besides having written numerous books Shirley was lead singer of the punk band Sado-Nation, in 1978-79; he was lead singer of the post-punk funk-rock band Obsession, on Celluloid Records, while living in New York City and Paris, France, in the 1980s, and was later in the band the Panther Moderns. He is currently performing with The Screaming Geezers. Shirley has also written 23 song lyrics recorded by Blue Öyster Cult.

Shirley&#x27;s one nonfiction book is &quot;Gurdjieff: An Introduction to His Life and Ideas&quot; (Penguin/Tarcher). He currently lives in the Vancouver Washington area with his wife, Micky Shirley. They have three adult sons.

==Career==

Shirley is known for his cyberpunk science fiction novels, such as the &quot;A Song Called Youth&quot; trilogy, &quot;City Come A-Walkin″&quot; and &quot;Black Glass&quot;, as well as his suspense (as in his novels &quot;Spider Moon&quot; and &quot;The Brigade&quot;), horror novels and stories (e.g., &quot;Demons&quot; and &quot;Crawlers&quot; and the story collection &quot;Black Butterflies&quot;) and horror film work. The &quot;A Song Called Youth&quot; cyberpunk trilogy, &quot;Eclipse&quot;, &quot;Eclipse Penumbra&quot;, and &quot;Eclipse Corona&quot;, has been slated for a new edition by Dover Books in 2017. His tie-in novels include the best-seller &quot;&quot;. His best known script work is the film &quot;The Crow&quot;, for which he was the initial writer, before David Schow reworked the script. He also wrote scripts for &quot;Deep Space Nine&quot; and &quot;&quot;. He was nominated for an Emmy in the Prime Time Animation category for an episode of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles. He received the Spur Award from The Western Writers of America, for his novel &quot;Gunmetal Mountain&quot;.

Authors David Agranoff and Nancy Collins and editor/critic Paula Guran cite his intense, expressionistic early horror novels, such as &quot;Dracula in Love&quot; and &quot;Cellars&quot; as an influence on the splatterpunk movement in horror, and the subsequent &quot;bizarro&quot; movement. Appreciation of John Shirley as an author of dark fiction was amplified by a January 2008 &quot;The New York Times&quot; review, by critic Terrence Rafferty, of Shirley&#x27;s story-collection &quot;Living Shadows&quot; which said in part:
Shirley&#x27;s cyberpunk novels are &quot;City Come A-Walkin&quot;, the &quot;A Song Called Youth&quot; trilogy and &quot;Stormland&quot;. Avant-slipstream critic Larry McCaffery called him &quot;a postmodern Edgar Allan Poe.&quot; Bruce Sterling has cited Shirley&#x27;s early story collection &quot;Heatseeker&quot; as being a seminal cyberpunk work in itself. Several stories in &quot;Heatseeker&quot; were particularly seminal, including &quot;Sleepwalkers&quot;, which, in just one example, probably provided the inspiration for William Gibson&#x27;s &quot;meat puppets&quot; in &quot;Neuromancer&quot;. Gibson acknowledged Shirley&#x27;s influence in an introduction to Shirley&#x27;s &quot;City Come A-Walkin&quot;. Shirley&#x27;s story collection, made up of increasingly bizarre stories, the whimsically titled &quot;Really, Really, Really, Really Weird Stories&quot; has developed a cult status.

William Gibson, the author of &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, collaborated with Shirley on short stories—as did fellow cyberpunks Bruce Sterling and Rudy Rucker. Shirley&#x27;s lyricism, wealth of ideas and imagination, crossover pioneering, and street-level honesty have been praised by other writers including Clive Barker, Peter Straub, Roger Zelazny, Marc Laidlaw, and A. A. Attanasio. His more surreal work, as in &quot;A Splendid Chaos&quot;, showed how it was possible to describe the indescribable with a paradoxical believability and impeccable internal logic no matter how bizarre the subject matter. Shirley&#x27;s personal experiences as a recovering drug addict and punk rocker brought verisimilitude to his darker, urban-tinctured writing.

In recent years Shirley has written a number of &quot;tie-in novels&quot; and novelizations, including &quot;Constantine&quot;, based on the Keanu Reaves movie, the best-seller &quot;BioShock: Rapture&quot; (Tor, 2011), a novel providing a prequel to the &quot;BioShock&quot; video game story, and &quot;Halo: Broken Circle&quot;. He also wrote the apocalyptic, politically charged novel, &quot;The Other End&quot; which, according to the author&#x27;s website, takes the apocalypse away from the Christian Right and gives Judgment Day to Liberals to do with as they please. This reflects Shirley&#x27;s tendency to create fantasy entertainment which is also political satire, or spiritual allegory. E.g., &quot;Demons&quot;, in which it is discovered that industry has deliberately caused deaths by cancer as part of a vast secret program of human sacrifice.

2007 saw the release of a new story collection, &quot;Living Shadows&quot;, from Prime Books. His novel of dark urban fantasy set in a slightly futuristic New York, &quot;Bleak History&quot;, was published by Simon &amp; Schuster/Pocket Books in 2009. In August 2011 Underland Press published &quot;In Extremis: The Most Extreme Stories of John Shirley&quot; and in January 2012 Prime Books published his near future apocalyptic political allegory, the novel &quot;Everything Is Broken&quot;. His novel about Arthur Conan Doyle in the afterlife, &quot;Doyle After Death&quot;, was released by HarperCollins/Witness in October 2013. Shirley&#x27;s apocalyptic and surreal novel &quot;High&quot;, based on his early novel &quot;Three-Ring Psychus&quot;, has been re-released by Start Books as an e-book; His newest story collection is &quot;Feverish Stars&quot; (March 2020). In June 2020 his fantasy novel &quot;Sorcerer of Atlantis&quot; will be released by Hippocampus.

Shirley&#x27;s work ranges in tone from the surreal to the grittily naturalistic to the nightmarish. He is also a songwriter and singer, having fronted numerous punk bands, including the New York City band Obsession, who were recorded by Celluloid Records. He has written lyrics for Blue Öyster Cult, such as several songs on the album &quot;Heaven Forbid&quot;.

In 2013 Black October Records released a two-CD compilation of John Shirley&#x27;s own recordings, &quot;Broken Mirror Glass: The John Shirley Anthology – 1978–2012&quot; ...In 2020 Reprehensible Records released the rock album&quot;The Screaming Geezers&quot;; vocals and lyrics by John Shirley. Shirley performs regularly in the Portland, Oregon rock scene.

2014 saw the release of Shirley&#x27;s first historical novel, &quot;Wyatt in Wichita&quot;, a novel of the young Wyatt Earp.

Other recent novels are &quot;Halo: Broken Circle&quot;, &quot;Doyle After Death&quot; and a novelization of Mark Tremonti&#x27;s science-fiction rock opera, &quot;A Dying Machine&quot;.

His newest novels are &quot;Stormland&quot;, &quot;Suborbital 7&quot;, &quot;Axle Bust Creek&quot;, the Spur Award winning novel &quot;Gunmetal Mountain&quot;, and &quot;Blood in Sweet River&quot;.

==Awards==
John Shirley received several nominations and won the following awards.

*Bram Stoker Awards – for horror works, voted by Horror Writers Association professional membership (2 nominations; 1 win)
** 1999: &quot;What Would You Do For Love?&quot; (&quot;Black Butterflies: A Flock on the Dark Side&quot;) – long fiction – nomination
** 1999: &quot;Black Butterflies: A Flock on the Dark Side&quot; (Mark V. Ziesing) – collection – winner
*Locus Awards – for science fiction, fantasy and horror works, polled by readers of &quot;Locus Magazine&quot; (5 nominations)
** 1990: &quot;Heatseeker&quot; (Scream/Press) – collection – 10th place
**2000: &quot;Really, Really, Really, Weird Stories&quot; (Night Shade Books) – collection – 17th place
*International Horror Guild Awards – for horror works, juried (6 nominations; 2 wins)
* 1998: &quot;Cram&quot; (&quot;Wetbones&quot; #2) – short story – winner
* 1999: &quot;Black Butterflies: A Flock on the Dark Side&quot; (Mark V. Ziesing) – collection —winner
** 1999: &quot;What Would You Do For Love?&quot; (&quot;Black Butterflies: A Flock on the Dark Side&quot;) – long fiction – nomination
**2001: &quot;Demons&quot; (Cemetery Dance) – long story – nomination
** 2002: &quot;Her Hunger&quot; (&quot;Night Visions 10&quot;) – long fiction – nomination
** 2004: &quot;Crawlers&quot; (Del Rey) – novel – nomination
*Interzone Readers Poll – for stories published in &quot;Interzone&quot; magazine, polled by readers (1 nomination)
**2014 : &quot;The Kindest Man in Stormland&quot; (&quot;Interzone&quot; #249) – story – 8th place
**2024:Spur Award Gunmetal Mountain (Kensington/Pinnacle)

== Bibliography ==
===Novels===
* &quot;Transmaniacon&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Dracula in Love&quot; (1979)
* &quot;City Come A-Walkin&#x27;&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Three-Ring Psychus&quot; (1980)
* &quot;The Brigade&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Cellars&quot; (1982)
* Several books in the Traveler series of post-apocalyptic men&#x27;s adventure novels (as D. B. Drumm)
* Several books in the Specialist series of mercenary/adventure men&#x27;s adventure novels (as John Cutter)
* &quot;A Song Called Youth&quot; Series (also known as &quot;Eclipse Trilogy&quot;):
** &quot;Eclipse&quot; (1985)
** &quot;Eclipse Penumbra&quot; (1988)
** &quot;Eclipse Corona&quot; (1990)
* &quot;In Darkness Waiting&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Kamus of Kadizar: The Black Hole of Carcosa&quot; (1988)
* &quot;A Splendid Chaos&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Wetbones&quot; (1991). A supernatural serial killer novel featuring creatures called the Akishra who take over human minds and bodies.
* &quot;Silicon Embrace&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Demons&quot; (2000, novella)
* &quot;...And the Angel with Television Eyes&quot; (2001, novella)
* &quot;The View From Hell&quot; (2001, novella)
* &quot;Her Hunger&quot; (2001, novella)
* &quot;Spider Moon&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Demons&quot;, a new version with sequel novel &quot;Undercurrents&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Crawlers&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Doom&quot; (2005, novelization of the film version of the Id Software computer game)
* &quot;Constantine&quot; (2005, novelisation of the film featuring the DC/Vertigo comicbook character)
* &quot;John Constantine, Hellblazer: War Lord&quot; (2006, based on the comic book character, not the movie version)
* &quot;Predator: Forever Midnight&quot; (2006, Predator series tie-in)
* &quot;Batman: Dead White&quot; (2006)
* &quot;John Constantine, Hellblazer: Subterranean&quot; (2006)
* &quot;The Other End&quot; (2007)
* &quot;&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Black Glass&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Bleak History&quot; (2009)
* &quot;&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Borderlands: The Fallen&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Everything Is Broken&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Borderlands: Unconquered&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Resident Evil: Retribution&quot; (2012, novelisation of the film version of the Capcom video game)
* &quot;Doyle After Death&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Borderlands: Gunsight&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Wyatt in Wichita&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Grimm: The Icy Touch&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Watch Dogs //n/Dark Clouds&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Halo: Broken Circle&quot; (2014)
* &quot;A Dying Machine&quot; (2018, a collaboration with Mark Tremonti of the Tremonti, incorporating ideas found in album of the same name. The novel is co-written by Mark Tremonti)
* &quot;Stormland&quot; (2021), a science fiction climate-change thriller.
* &quot;A Sorcerer of Atlantis&quot; (2021), a heroic fantasy novel.

=== Short fiction ===
;Collections
*&quot;Heatseeker&quot; (1989)
*&quot;New Noir&quot; (1993)
*&quot;The Exploded Heart&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Black Butterflies&quot; (1998) (winner of the Bram Stoker Award)
*&quot;Really, Really, Really, Really Weird Stories&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Darkness Divided&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Living Shadows&quot; (2007)
*&quot;In Extremis: The Most Extreme Short Stories of John Shirley&quot; (2011)
* &quot;The Feverish Stars&quot; (2021)
===Nonfiction===
*&quot;Gurdjieff – An Introduction to his Life and Ideas&quot; (2004) 
;Bibliography notes
==Screenwriting credits==
===Television===
*&quot;Defenders of the Earth&quot; (1986)
*&quot;The Real Ghostbusters&quot; (1987)
*&quot;BraveStarr&quot; (1987-1988)
*&quot;RoboCop&quot; (1988)
*&quot;Star Trek: Deep Space Nine&quot; (1995) 
*&quot;VR.5&quot; (1995)
*&quot;&quot; (1996)
*&quot;The Adventures of Sinbad&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Todd McFarlane’s Spawn&quot; (1998)
*&quot;The Night of the Headless Horseman&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Batman Beyond&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Profit&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Iron Man: Armored Adventures&quot; (2012)
*&quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&quot; (2014-2016)

===Films===
* &quot;The Crow&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Twists of Terror&quot; (1997)
* &quot;The Crow&quot; (2024) (additional literary material)

==Music==
John Shirley wrote most of the lyrics for Blue Öyster Cult albums &quot;Heaven Forbid&quot; and &quot;Curse of the Hidden Mirror&quot; as well as the songs &quot;Demon&#x27;s Kiss&quot; and &quot;The Horsemen Arrive&quot; from their soundtrack &quot;Bad Channels&quot;, and five songs from their 2020 album &quot;The Symbol Remains&quot;. Their 1972 song &quot;Transmaniacon MC&quot; was the inspiration for Shirley&#x27;s first novel, &quot;Transmaniacon&quot;.

John Shirley&#x27;s current band, which performs in and around Portland, Oregon, is called The Screaming Geezers.

==See also==
*List of horror fiction authors
*Splatterpunk

==References==
== Further reading ==
*&quot;BioShock: Rapture&quot;, by John Shirley (2011) 
* R.F. Paul. &quot;The Head Underneath: An Interview with John Shirley&quot;. &quot;Esoterra: The Journal of Extreme Culture&quot; No 4 (Winter/Spring 1994), 3–6.

==External links==
* &quot;Piper at the Gates of Hell: An Interview with Cyberpunk Legend John Shirley&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1346126" start="0" end="12" title="John Shirley" label="John Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q250912" start="430" end="438" title="The Crow (1994 film)" label="The Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q331016" start="587" end="603" title="Blue Öyster Cult" label="Blue Öyster Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="970" end="977" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="1024" end="1040" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44616" start="1711" end="1721" title="Wyatt Earp" label="Wyatt Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q547366" start="1817" end="1830" title="Mark Tremonti" label="Mark Tremonti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2245" end="2256" title="Sado-Nation" label="Sado-Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q331016" start="2571" end="2587" title="Blue Öyster Cult" label="Blue Öyster Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="2856" end="2865" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333036" start="2902" end="2941" title="Eclipse Trilogy" label="&amp;quot;A Song Called Youth&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="3237" end="3243" title="horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q250912" start="3552" end="3560" title="The Crow (1994 film)" label="The Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239553" start="3612" end="3623" title="David Schow" label="David Schow"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3677" end="3692" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" label="Deep Space Nine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3915" end="3932" title="Gunmetal Mountain" label="Gunmetal Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q447284" start="3968" end="3981" title="Nancy A. Collins" label="Nancy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q105043837" start="4113" end="4120" title="Cellars (novel)" label="Cellars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517440" start="4150" end="4162" title="splatterpunk" label="splatterpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640599" start="4208" end="4215" title="Bizarro fiction" label="bizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4328" end="4346" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703508" start="4371" end="4388" title="Terrence Rafferty" label="Terrence Rafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="4487" end="4496" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490764" start="4635" end="4650" title="Larry McCaffery" label="Larry McCaffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q312995" start="4704" end="4718" title="Bruce Sterling" label="Bruce Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="5006" end="5020" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="5415" end="5426" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312995" start="5502" end="5516" title="Bruce Sterling" label="Bruce Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q92849" start="5521" end="5532" title="Rudy Rucker" label="Rudy Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q298761" start="5684" end="5696" title="Clive Barker" label="Clive Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q364189" start="5698" end="5710" title="Peter Straub" label="Peter Straub"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="5712" end="5725" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521946" start="5727" end="5739" title="Marc Laidlaw" label="Marc Laidlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q278510" start="5745" end="5760" title="A. A. Attanasio" label="A. A. Attanasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q43416" start="6268" end="6280" title="Keanu Reaves" label="Keanu Reaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q57270" start="6388" end="6396" title="BioShock" label="BioShock"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="7497" end="7515" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="7782" end="7788" title="e-book" label="e-book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944115" start="8198" end="8215" title="Celluloid Records" label="Celluloid Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q331016" start="8243" end="8259" title="Blue Öyster Cult" label="Blue Öyster Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302929" start="8302" end="8315" title="Heaven Forbid" label="Heaven Forbid"/>
<link wikidata="Q547366" start="8921" end="8934" title="Mark Tremonti" label="Mark Tremonti"/>
<link wikidata="Q848963" start="9284" end="9302" title="Bram Stoker Awards" label="Bram Stoker Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905197" start="9332" end="9358" title="Horror Writers Association" label="Horror Writers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q754655" start="9647" end="9659" title="Locus Awards" label="Locus Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050945" start="9951" end="9983" title="International Horror Guild Award" label="International Horror Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314500" start="10792" end="10802" title="Spur Award" label="Spur Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10956" end="10980" title="City Come A-Walkin&amp;#x27;" label="City Come A-Walkin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q105043837" start="11075" end="11082" title="Cellars (novel)" label="Cellars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11119" end="11127" title="Traveler (novel series)" label="Traveler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816137" start="11155" end="11175" title="men&amp;#x27;s adventure" label="men&amp;#x27;s adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346126" start="11187" end="11198" title="D. B. Drumm" label="D. B. Drumm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816137" start="11264" end="11284" title="men&amp;#x27;s adventure" label="men&amp;#x27;s adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333036" start="11371" end="11386" title="Eclipse Trilogy" label="Eclipse Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514949" start="11796" end="11811" title="Silicon Embrace" label="Silicon Embrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q755523" start="12216" end="12228" title="Doom (film)" label="film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q204474" start="12236" end="12247" title="Id Software" label="Id Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q219150" start="12271" end="12282" title="Constantine (film)" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663841" start="12375" end="12391" title="John Constantine" label="John Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910068" start="12493" end="12519" title="Predator (novel series)" label="Predator: Forever Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663841" start="12605" end="12621" title="John Constantine" label="John Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12726" end="12737" title="Black Glass" label="Black Glass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12759" end="12772" title="Bleak History" label="Bleak History"/>
<link wikidata="Q893423" start="12816" end="12827" title="Borderlands (video game)" label="Borderlands"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13009" end="13021" title="Resident Evil: Retribution" label="film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q14428" start="13029" end="13035" title="Capcom" label="Capcom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13218" end="13244" title="Watch Dogs#Novel" label="Watch Dogs //n/Dark Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13266" end="13285" title="Halo (series)#Books" label="Halo: Broken Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19979275" start="13378" end="13386" title="Tremonti (band)" label="Tremonti"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831702" start="13417" end="13439" title="A Dying Machine" label="album of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q547366" start="13468" end="13481" title="Mark Tremonti" label="Mark Tremonti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182601" start="14249" end="14271" title="Defenders of the Earth" label="Defenders of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q733938" start="14292" end="14313" title="The Real Ghostbusters" label="The Real Ghostbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q902626" start="14334" end="14344" title="BraveStarr" label="BraveStarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548315" start="14370" end="14377" title="RoboCop (animated TV series)" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14398" end="14424" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" label="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552995" start="14446" end="14450" title="VR.5" label="VR.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q770105" start="14492" end="14516" title="The Adventures of Sinbad" label="The Adventures of Sinbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106852" start="14537" end="14559" title="Todd McFarlane&amp;#x27;s Spawn" label="Todd McFarlane’s Spawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339570" start="14635" end="14648" title="Batman Beyond" label="Batman Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920660" start="14669" end="14675" title="Profit (TV series)" label="Profit"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14696" end="14724" title="Iron Man: Armored Adventures" label="Iron Man: Armored Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q501338" start="14745" end="14773" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2012 TV series)" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q250912" start="14813" end="14821" title="The Crow (1994 film)" label="The Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858595" start="14843" end="14859" title="Twists of Terror" label="Twists of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q113300899" start="14881" end="14889" title="The Crow (2024 film)" label="The Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q331016" start="14987" end="15003" title="Blue Öyster Cult" label="Blue Öyster Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302929" start="15017" end="15030" title="Heaven Forbid" label="Heaven Forbid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550290" start="15047" end="15073" title="Curse of the Hidden Mirror" label="Curse of the Hidden Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281993" start="15101" end="15130" title="Bad Channels" label="&amp;quot;Demon&amp;#x27;s Kiss&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281993" start="15135" end="15166" title="Bad Channels" label="&amp;quot;The Horsemen Arrive&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281993" start="15195" end="15207" title="Bad Channels" label="Bad Channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q98593849" start="15258" end="15276" title="The Symbol Remains" label="The Symbol Remains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627991" start="15300" end="15328" title="Blue Öyster Cult (album)" label="&amp;quot;Transmaniacon MC&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q287925" start="15538" end="15568" title="List of horror fiction authors" label="List of horror fiction authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517440" start="15570" end="15582" title="Splatterpunk" label="Splatterpunk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182741" wikidata="Q320816" url="?curid=182741" title="Ron Grainer">
<text>Ronald Erle Grainer (11 August 1922 – 21 February 1981) was an Australian composer who worked for most of his professional career in the United Kingdom. He is mostly remembered for his television and film score music, especially the theme music for &quot;Doctor Who&quot;, &quot;The Prisoner&quot;, &quot;Steptoe and Son&quot; and &quot;Tales of the Unexpected&quot;.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Ronald Grainer was born on 11 August 1922 in Atherton, Queensland, Australia, the first child of Margaret Clark, an amateur pianist, and Ronald Albert Grainer, a storekeeper and postmaster.

For the first eight years of Ron&#x27;s life the Grainer family lived in Mount Mulligan, a small town built around the extraction of coal from three seams which lay beneath a 400-metre-high sandstone monolith, located 100 km west of Cairns. Apart from the industrial noise and dust, the family sometimes had to contend with the after effects of a high consumption of alcohol by the shift miners. On one such occasion a stray bullet flew through the roof of their home and almost hit the 11-week-old Ron as he lay on his bed.

Because of Mt Mulligan&#x27;s physical isolation, encouraging a sense of community was vital. This was achieved by regularly holding dance and social functions. These public entertainments became very important for bolstering local morale, especially after a massive explosion on 19 September 1921 killed 75 resident mine workersone third of Mt Mulligan&#x27;s adult population.

Concerts in the years following the disaster included performances by a very young Ron Erle Grainer, taught piano-playing from the age of four by his mother and encouraged to learn the violin by an elderly Welsh miner. As Grainer&#x27;s music skills developed, he started demonstrating an ability to reconstruct tunes he had heard at school or on gramophone records. Mary Wardle, a classical music singer, historian, and former resident of Mt Mulligan, remembers Grainer performing on keyboard instruments &quot;when he could barely reach the pedals.&quot;

===Education===
The Grainer family left Mt Mulligan in 1930. By April 1932 they were living in Aloomba, a sugar-growing rural community on the Far North Queensland coast. Aloomba is situated on the eastern side of another rock monolith, the 922-metre-high Walsh&#x27;s Pyramid. At the age of 9, as part of the Aloomba school team, Grainer won second prize for solo violin at the inaugural Cairns and District School Eisteddfod. This is the first newspaper mention of him giving a music performance in public. In early 1933, Grainer&#x27;s family moved to Cairns where, apart from school work at Edge Hill State (1933–1934) and Cairns High (1935–1936), he commenced a serious study of music theory and interpretation. His family relocated south to Brisbane in 1937 where Grainer completed his secondary school education at St Joseph&#x27;s College, Nudgee, matriculating in 1938. He enrolled at the University of Queensland in 1939 to study civil engineering and music, a course which included harmony, counterpoint, and composition as taught by classical musician Percy Brier, a traditionalist educator who encouraged his more talented students to think for themselves. Grainer gained his Associate of Trinity College London Diploma (ATCL) on piano.

===RAAF===
After the outbreak of World War II, Grainer joined the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) in December 1940 and was sent to Amberley, Queensland, posted to 73 Signals, given a course at Point Cook and assigned to Radar Station No. 58, Townsville. While stationed there, and in subsequent similar postings, he contributed to barracks recreation activities by scoring and organising numerous servicemen shows. On March 22 1944 he was transferred to the RAAF entertainment unit. In the official report on his audition performance the only music piece mentioned by title was Ravel&#x27;s &quot;Bolero,&quot; a seemingly simple instrumental riff which holds the listeners&#x27; attention in a similar manner to Grainer&#x27;s later themes and signature tunes. Grainer had only a few months performing for his fellow airmen, for in July 1944, a 44-gallon drum fell on his leg while he was travelling in a truck; he sustained a severe injury and was admitted to the 3 RAAF Hospital, seriously ill. For a while, the air force medical team considered amputation, but Grainer eventually recovered. He was discharged from the RAAF as permanently medically unfit in September 1945. A rehabilitation course took him to the New South Wales State Conservatorium of Music, where he studied under Eugene Goossens.

===Early musical education and career===
Grainer received his teaching and performing diploma for pianoforte in December 1949. During 1950 and 1951 he began appearing in a series of solo artist radio shows for the Australian Broadcasting Commission. In August 1951 a presentation of Delius, Faure, and Milhaud compositions by Grainer on piano and Don Scott on violin was ridiculed in a newspaper review for the duo&#x27;s &quot;uncompromising disregard of mob appeal&quot;, &quot;lack of practical concert sense&quot;, and &quot;unrelievedly pastel colouring&quot; set list that was &quot;in need of a more impulsive and heartfelt spirit on the well tendered surface&quot; having earlier said &quot;by the time the programme ended the recital badly needed blood transfusion&quot;. By the mid-1950s Grainer had abandoned his classical repertoire and live concert work with such a determined change of attitude that he claimed in a 1964 magazine interview that he had &quot;always loathed performing&quot;.

===London===
In 1952 Grainer left Australia for London with his wife Margot and 10-year-old stepdaughter Rel. He managed to find a three-month engagement playing piano in a nightclub along with other occasional jobs, the worst of which became a twelve-month stint with a touring Australian comedy act called &quot;The Allen Brothers and June.&quot; This required the classically trained Grainer to be hit on the head nightly by a falling grand piano lid and then to topple over into the orchestra pit, an experience he later said was even harder to do than a day&#x27;s fencing in the Australian outback.

At one stage, to pay the rent on their room, Grainer and his wife had to work as caretakers of a large block of London flats where he stoked two large boilers, morning and night, whilst Margot washed stairs and cleaned rooms.

To increase his public profile Grainer had two attempts at song contests: &quot;England&#x27;s Made of Us&quot; (1956), an entry with lyricist David Dearlove for the First British Festival of Popular Song, which received the score of no points from the judges and, the following year, &quot;Don&#x27;t Cry Little Doll&quot; (1957) (also written with David Dearlove), which reached fourth place in the British Eurovision entry decider heats.

Grainer&#x27;s most dramatic pre-success music involvement was with &quot;Before The Sun Goes Down,&quot; a TV play which caused audience panic and questions to be raised in the British Parliament when it was shown on 20 February 1959. Taking inspiration from Orson Welles&#x27; 1938 radio drama of &quot;The War of the Worlds,&quot; the production used a similar format in which a regular programme broadcast was interrupted by a fake public service announcement. In this instance it was about a mysterious and &quot;terrifying&quot; satellite seen hovering over the city of London.

===&quot;Maigret&quot; and after===
In 1960 Grainer achieved public recognition with his theme and incidental music for the TV series &quot;Maigret.&quot; When &quot;Maigret&quot; was given the Ivor Novello &quot;Outstanding Composition for Film, TV or Radio&quot; award in 1961, commissions from a wide range of genres poured in: &quot;Goon Show&quot; silliness (&quot;It&#x27;s a Square World&quot;, 1961), one-off pilots (&quot;Comedy Playhouse&quot;), documentaries (&quot;Terminus&quot;, 1961), kitchen sink drama (&quot;A Kind of Loving&quot;), quirky domestic sitcoms (&quot;Steptoe and Son&quot; 1962), classic serials (&quot;Oliver Twist&quot; 1962), teen films (&quot;Some People&quot; 1962), late night satire (&quot;That Was The Week That Was&quot;, 1962), outpost angst (&quot;Station Six Sahara&quot;, 1962), ballet (&quot;The King&#x27;s Breakfast&quot;, 1963), science fiction (&quot;Doctor Who&quot;, 1963), psycho killers (&quot;Night Must Fall&quot;, 1964), children&#x27;s adventure stories (&quot;The Moon Spinners&quot;, 1964), patriotic biography (&quot;The Finest Hours&quot;, 1964), big-budget musicals (&quot;Robert and Elizabeth&quot;, 1964), unusual love stories (&quot;Boy Meets Girl&quot;, 1967), acclaimed dramas &quot;To Sir, with Love&quot; (1967), allegorical social commentary (&quot;The Prisoner&quot;, 1967) and crime-caper movies (&quot;Only When I Larf&quot;, 1968). 

Grainer also worked with the instrumental group The Eagles, who recorded a number of his themes.

Most of these projects required considerable research, group discussion, and creative team effort. They are only a small sample of work completed by Grainer from 1960 to 1968. He once indicated he felt a &quot;trifle wistful&quot; that so many people just associated him with the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; theme, the only tune in his extensive portfolio that had its sound dynamics realised by someone elseDelia Derbyshire of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop.

The time-consuming work commitments eventually contributed to the breakdown of Grainer&#x27;s relationship with his wife; he and Margot divorced in 1966. Later that year, he married Jennifer Dodd (1944–2024), a member of the cast of &quot;Robert and Elizabeth.&quot; Their son Damian was born shortly afterwards.

===Portugal===
In September 1968, tired of London traffic jams and worried about his intensifying eyesight problems, Grainer moved permanently to his former retreat property in southern Portugal. He and Jenny started a farm growing organic fruit and vegetables, undertaking the planting and maintaining of 1,000 peach trees.

From 1969 to 1975, Grainer composed themes and soundtracks for an average of around one TV series and one film each year.

===Return===
In April 1974, the Carnation Revolution in Portugal prompted Grainer and his family to leave the country and return to England until the political climate cleared. Damian went first to boarding and then to day school. Grainer was being offered work again so he set up house in Keymer, West Sussex. In 1976, he and Jenny went through an amicable divorce as she had gone back to Portugal while he&#x27;d decided to remain in London. Over the next five years, Grainer had a second round of creativity, scoring the Emmy- and BAFTA-winning miniseries &quot;Edward &amp; Mrs Simpson&quot; as well as &quot;Tales of the Unexpected&quot; (1979) and &quot;Rebecca&quot; (1979).

===Final year and death===
Grainer had one notable incidental music score and two TV signature tunes debut the year of his sudden illness and death from cancer on 21 February 1981.

&quot;Sunday Night Thriller,&quot; with its funeral music theme and separation of bodies credits sequence, was broadcast on 18 January 1981.

On 17 May 1981, his &quot;All Things Bright And Beautiful&quot; influenced ambient music for &quot;The Sound Machine&quot; episode of &quot;Tales of the Unexpected,&quot; accompanied a central character obsessed with &quot;Sounds I long to hear – Songs beyond the planets.&quot;

The last of Grainer&#x27;s TV themes, &quot;It Takes A Worried Man,&quot; was broadcast on 21 October 1981, and featured a closing credits film clip of the series hero gradually losing pieces of his torso and face until all that is left are his eyes.

Grainer died from a spinal tumour on 21 February 1981.

==Compilations==
Only three compilations of Grainer&#x27;s output have been released commercially. 1969&#x27;s &quot;Themes Like —&quot; (RCA) was a collection of his better known 1960s compositions. This was followed by &quot;Exciting Television Music of Ron Grainer&quot; (RCA, 1980), which covered the 1970s. In 1994 a career-spanning thirty-track CD was released as part of the &quot;A to Z of British TV Themes&quot; project on the Play it Again record label.

==Awards and nominations==

===Awards===
* &quot;Maigret&quot;, 1961 Ivor Novello Award Outstanding Composition for Film, TV or Radio 
* &quot;Steptoe and Son&quot;, 1962 Ivor Novello Award Outstanding Composition for Film, TV or Radio
* &quot;The Home Made Car&quot; 1963 Silver Bear Award, Short Film, Berlin International Film Festival

===Nominations===
* &quot;The Home Made Car&quot; (1963) Oscar, Best Short Subject, Academy Awards USA 1964
* &quot;Flickers&quot; (1980), BAFTA Best Television Music Award 1981
* &quot;Shelley&quot; (1979), BAFTA Best Television Music Award 1981
* &quot;Tales of the Unexpected&quot; (1979), BAFTA Best Television Music Award 1981

== Partial filmography ==
* &quot;Terminus&quot; (1961)
* &quot;A Kind of Loving&quot; (1962)
* &quot;Some People&quot; (1962)
* &quot;The Dock Brief&quot; (1962)
* &quot;Station Six-Sahara&quot; (1962)
* &quot;The King&#x27;s Breakfast&quot; (1963)
* &quot;The Mouse on the Moon&quot; (1963) 
* &quot;The Caretaker&quot; (1963)
* &quot;Nothing But the Best&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Night Must Fall&quot; (1964)
* &quot;The Moon-Spinners&quot; (1964)
* &quot;To Sir, with Love&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Only When I Larf&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Before Winter Comes&quot; (1969)
* &quot;The Assassination Bureau&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Lock Up Your Daughters&quot; (1969)
* &quot;In Search of Gregory&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Hoffman&quot; (1970)
* &quot;The Omega Man&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Mutiny on the Buses&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Yellow Dog&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Mousey&quot; (1974)
* &quot;I Don&#x27;t Want to Be Born&quot; (1975)
* &quot;One Away&quot; (1976)
* &quot;The Bawdy Adventures of Tom Jones&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Never Never Land&quot; (1980)

==Television [selection]==
* &quot;The Widow of Bath&quot; (1959)
* &quot;Maigret&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Comedy Playhouse&quot; (1961)
* &quot;That Was the Week That Was&quot; (1962)
* &quot;Steptoe and Son&quot; (1962)
* &quot;Giants of Steam&quot; (1963)
* &quot;The Home-Made Car&quot; (1963)
* &quot;Doctor Who&quot; (1963)
* &quot;Man in a Suitcase&quot; (1967)
* &quot;The Prisoner&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Paul Temple&quot; (1969)
* &quot;For the Love of Ada&quot; (1970)
* &quot;The Train Now Standing&quot; (1972)
* &quot;South Riding&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Edward &amp; Mrs. Simpson&quot; (1978)
* &quot;Malice Aforethought&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Tales of the Unexpected&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Rebecca&quot; (1979 miniseries)
* &quot;Shelley&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Flickers&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Saturday Night Thriller&quot; (1981)
* &quot;It Takes A Worried Man&quot; (1981)

== Musicals ==
*1962 – &quot;Cindy-Ella&quot;, pasticcio
*1963 – &quot;The King&#x27;s Breakfast&quot;
*1964 – &quot;Robert and Elizabeth&quot;
*1966 – &quot;Take A Sapphire&quot;
*1966 – &quot;On the Level&quot;
*1970 – &quot;Sing A Rude Song&quot;
*1975 – &quot;Nickleby And Me&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*Ron Grainer website
*Ron Grainer The Australian Years - The European Years blog
*All Music Guide to compilation CD with music samples </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q320816" start="0" end="19" title="Ron Grainer" label="Ronald Erle Grainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287470" start="255" end="265" title="Doctor Who theme music" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q714753" start="279" end="291" title="The Prisoner" label="The Prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248747" start="305" end="320" title="Steptoe and Son" label="Steptoe and Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q176027" start="337" end="360" title="Tales of the Unexpected (TV series)" label="Tales of the Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q755507" start="445" end="465" title="Atherton, Queensland" label="Atherton, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922312" start="664" end="678" title="Mount Mulligan, Queensland" label="Mount Mulligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922313" start="1376" end="1414" title="Mount Mulligan mine disaster" label="massive explosion on 19 September 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734597" start="2150" end="2157" title="Aloomba, Queensland" label="Aloomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593832" start="2877" end="2909" title="St Joseph&amp;#x27;s College, Nudgee" label="St Joseph&amp;#x27;s College, Nudgee"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="2953" end="2977" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="3372" end="3398" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741354" start="3439" end="3459" title="Amberley, Queensland" label="Amberley, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207994" start="3501" end="3511" title="Point Cook, Victoria" label="Point Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q190021" start="3550" end="3560" title="Townsville" label="Townsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="3886" end="3891" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510091" start="4525" end="4570" title="Sydney Conservatorium of Music" label="New South Wales State Conservatorium of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q945833" start="4595" end="4610" title="Eugene Aynsley Goossens" label="Eugene Goossens"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="4827" end="4861" title="Australian Broadcasting Commission" label="Australian Broadcasting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893407" start="6106" end="6119" title="orchestra pit" label="orchestra pit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6595" end="6609" title="David Dearlove" label="David Dearlove"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="6861" end="6871" title="Eurovision" label="Eurovision"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="7154" end="7166" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q24958" start="7199" end="7220" title="The War of the Worlds (1938 radio drama)" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436377" start="7619" end="7626" title="Maigret (1960 TV series)" label="Maigret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6091312" start="7849" end="7873" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Square World" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Square World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151469" start="7910" end="7926" title="Comedy Playhouse" label="Comedy Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702857" start="7956" end="7964" title="Terminus (1961 film)" label="Terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q477371" start="7979" end="7997" title="kitchen sink realism" label="kitchen sink drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477112" start="8005" end="8021" title="A Kind of Loving (film)" label="A Kind of Loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248747" start="8061" end="8076" title="Steptoe and Son" label="Steptoe and Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q106179591" start="8113" end="8125" title="Oliver Twist (1962 TV serial)" label="Oliver Twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559472" start="8157" end="8168" title="Some People (film)" label="Some People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302237" start="8207" end="8233" title="That Was The Week That Was" label="That Was The Week That Was"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021837" start="8269" end="8287" title="Station Six Sahara" label="Station Six Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744429" start="8316" end="8341" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Breakfast (film)" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="8379" end="8389" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423723" start="8426" end="8441" title="Night Must Fall (1964 film)" label="Night Must Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195822" start="8497" end="8514" title="The Moon Spinners" label="The Moon Spinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411333" start="8556" end="8572" title="The Finest Hours (1964 film)" label="The Finest Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351360" start="8614" end="8634" title="Robert and Elizabeth" label="Robert and Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541350" start="8729" end="8746" title="To Sir, with Love" label="To Sir, with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q714753" start="8798" end="8810" title="The Prisoner" label="The Prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388237" start="8854" end="8870" title="Only When I Larf (film)" label="Only When I Larf"/>
<link wikidata="Q106598041" start="8935" end="8945" title="The Eagles (UK band)" label="The Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q29544" start="9388" end="9404" title="Delia Derbyshire" label="Delia Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778799" start="9412" end="9436" title="BBC Radiophonic Workshop" label="BBC Radiophonic Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351360" start="9678" end="9698" title="Robert and Elizabeth" label="Robert and Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="10234" end="10254" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="10400" end="10408" title="boarding school" label="boarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493752" start="10421" end="10431" title="day school" label="day school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303675" start="10492" end="10498" title="Keymer" label="Keymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="10726" end="10730" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="10736" end="10741" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="10750" end="10760" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048730" start="10767" end="10791" title="Edward &amp;amp; Mrs Simpson" label="Edward &amp;amp; Mrs Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q176027" start="10815" end="10838" title="Tales of the Unexpected (TV series)" label="Tales of the Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931217" start="10862" end="10869" title="Rebecca (1979 TV series)" label="Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577474" start="11761" end="11774" title="spinal tumour" label="spinal tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017901" start="12234" end="12247" title="Play It Again (record label)" label="Play it Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436377" start="12312" end="12319" title="Maigret (1960 TV series)" label="Maigret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248747" start="12406" end="12421" title="Steptoe and Son" label="Steptoe and Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740069" start="12507" end="12524" title="The Home Made Car" label="The Home Made Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740069" start="12629" end="12646" title="The Home Made Car" label="The Home Made Car"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12719" end="12727" title="Flickers (TV serial)" label="Flickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493757" start="12789" end="12796" title="Shelley (TV series)" label="Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q176027" start="12858" end="12881" title="Tales of the Unexpected (TV series)" label="Tales of the Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702857" start="12970" end="12978" title="Terminus (1961 film)" label="Terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477112" start="13000" end="13016" title="A Kind of Loving (film)" label="A Kind of Loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559472" start="13038" end="13049" title="Some People (film)" label="Some People"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730463" start="13071" end="13085" title="The Dock Brief" label="The Dock Brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021837" start="13107" end="13125" title="Station Six-Sahara" label="Station Six-Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744429" start="13147" end="13172" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Breakfast (film)" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q383814" start="13194" end="13215" title="The Mouse on the Moon" label="The Mouse on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721364" start="13238" end="13251" title="The Caretaker (film)" label="The Caretaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062727" start="13273" end="13293" title="Nothing But the Best (film)" label="Nothing But the Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423723" start="13315" end="13330" title="Night Must Fall (1964 film)" label="Night Must Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195822" start="13352" end="13369" title="The Moon-Spinners" label="The Moon-Spinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541350" start="13391" end="13408" title="To Sir, with Love" label="To Sir, with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388237" start="13430" end="13446" title="Only When I Larf (film)" label="Only When I Larf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880313" start="13468" end="13487" title="Before Winter Comes" label="Before Winter Comes"/>
<link wikidata="Q841776" start="13509" end="13533" title="The Assassination Bureau" label="The Assassination Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665253" start="13555" end="13577" title="Lock Up Your Daughters (1969 film)" label="Lock Up Your Daughters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605078" start="13599" end="13619" title="In Search of Gregory" label="In Search of Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4500480" start="13641" end="13648" title="Hoffman (film)" label="Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q784610" start="13670" end="13683" title="The Omega Man" label="The Omega Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943957" start="13705" end="13724" title="Mutiny on the Buses" label="Mutiny on the Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q60737500" start="13778" end="13784" title="Mousey" label="Mousey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959206" start="13806" end="13834" title="I Don&amp;#x27;t Want to Be Born" label="I Don&amp;#x27;t Want to Be Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092462" start="13856" end="13864" title="One Away (film)" label="One Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715922" start="13886" end="13919" title="The Bawdy Adventures of Tom Jones" label="The Bawdy Adventures of Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004175" start="13941" end="13957" title="Never Never Land (film)" label="Never Never Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q97278218" start="14007" end="14024" title="The Widow of Bath (TV series)" label="The Widow of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436377" start="14046" end="14053" title="Maigret (1960 TV series)" label="Maigret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151469" start="14075" end="14091" title="Comedy Playhouse" label="Comedy Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302237" start="14113" end="14139" title="That Was the Week That Was" label="That Was the Week That Was"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248747" start="14161" end="14176" title="Steptoe and Son" label="Steptoe and Son"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14198" end="14213" title="Giants of Steam" label="Giants of Steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740069" start="14235" end="14252" title="The Home-Made Car" label="The Home-Made Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="14274" end="14284" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195616" start="14306" end="14323" title="Man in a Suitcase" label="Man in a Suitcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q714753" start="14345" end="14357" title="The Prisoner" label="The Prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153955" start="14379" end="14390" title="Paul Temple (TV series)" label="Paul Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467077" start="14412" end="14431" title="For the Love of Ada" label="For the Love of Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022908" start="14453" end="14475" title="The Train Now Standing" label="The Train Now Standing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14497" end="14509" title="South Riding (novel)#Adaptations" label="South Riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048730" start="14531" end="14556" title="Edward &amp;amp; Mrs. Simpson" label="Edward &amp;amp; Mrs. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q111912506" start="14578" end="14597" title="Malice Aforethought (TV series)" label="Malice Aforethought"/>
<link wikidata="Q176027" start="14619" end="14642" title="Tales of the Unexpected (TV series)" label="Tales of the Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931217" start="14664" end="14671" title="Rebecca (1979 miniseries)" label="Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493757" start="14704" end="14711" title="Shelley (TV series)" label="Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q105704635" start="14733" end="14741" title="Flickers (TV series)" label="Flickers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14763" end="14786" title="Saturday Night Thriller" label="Saturday Night Thriller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14808" end="14830" title="It Takes A Worried Man" label="It Takes A Worried Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744429" start="14916" end="14941" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Breakfast (film)" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351360" start="14962" end="14982" title="Robert and Elizabeth" label="Robert and Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15003" end="15018" title="Take A Sapphire" label="Take A Sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15039" end="15051" title="On the Level (play)" label="On the Level"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15072" end="15088" title="Sing A Rude Song" label="Sing A Rude Song"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15109" end="15124" title="Nickleby And Me" label="Nickleby And Me"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182742" wikidata="Q179863" url="?curid=182742" title="Greater flamingo">
<text>The greater flamingo (Phoenicopterus roseus) is the most widespread and largest species of the flamingo family. Common in the Old World, they are found in Northern (coastal) and Sub-Saharan Africa, the Indian Subcontinent (south of the Himalayas), the Middle East, the Levant, the Persian Gulf, the Gulf of Aden, the Red Sea, and the Mediterranean countries of Southern Europe.

== Taxonomy ==
The greater flamingo was described by Peter Simon Pallas in 1811. It was previously thought to be the same species as the American flamingo (&quot;Phoenicopterus ruber&quot;), but because of coloring differences of its head, neck, body, and bill, the two flamingos are now most commonly considered separate species. The greater flamingo has no subspecies and is therefore monotypic.

==Description==
The greater flamingo is the largest living species of flamingo, averaging tall and weighing . The largest male flamingos have been recorded to be up to tall and to weigh .

Most of the plumage is pinkish-white, but the wing coverts are red and the primary and secondary flight feathers are black. The bill is pink with a restricted black tip, and the legs are entirely pink. The call is a goose-like honking.

Chicks are covered in gray fluffy down. Subadult flamingos are paler with dark legs. Adults feeding chicks also become paler, but retain the bright pink legs. The coloration comes from the carotenoid pigments in the organisms that live in their feeding grounds. 
Secretions of the uropygial gland also contain carotenoids. During the breeding season, greater flamingos increase the frequency of their spreading uropygial secretions over their feathers and thereby enhance their color. This cosmetic use of uropygial secretions has been described as applying &quot;make-up&quot;.

==Distribution==

It is found in parts of Northern Africa (including coastal areas of northern Algeria, Egypt further inland along the Nile River, Libya, Morocco, and Tunisia), portions of Sub-Saharan Africa (Kenya, Madagascar, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda), Southern Asia (coastal Bangladesh, Pakistan, India, and Sri Lanka), the Middle East (Bahrain, Cyprus, Iraq, Iran, Oman, Palestine, Kuwait, Lebanon, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates) and Southern Europe (including Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, France in the Camargue and Corsica, Greece, Italy, Slovenia, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Portugal, Spain and the Balearic Islands, and Turkey). 

The most northern breeding spot is the Zwillbrocker Venn in western Germany, close to the border with the Netherlands. They have been recorded breeding in the United Arab Emirates at three different locations in the Abu Dhabi Emirate.
In Gujarat, a coastal state in the west of India, flamingos can be observed at the Nal Sarovar Bird Sanctuary, Khijadiya Bird Sanctuary, Flamingo City, and in the Thol Bird Sanctuary. They remain there during the entire winter season.

== Ecology ==
The greater flamingo resides in mudflats and shallow coastal lagoons with salt water. Using its feet, the bird stirs up the mud, then sucks water through its bill and filters out small shrimp, brine shrimp, other crustaceans, seeds (such as rice), blue-green algae, microscopic organisms (such as diatoms), insect larvae (such as chironomids), and mollusks. The greater flamingo feeds with its head down, its upper jaw movable and not rigidly fixed to its skull.

Like all flamingos, this species lays a single chalky-white egg on a mud mound.

==Lifespan==
The typical lifespan in captivity, according to Basel Zoo, is over 60 years. In the wild, the average lifespan is 30–40 years.

==Threats and predators==
===Natural===
Adult greater flamingos have few natural predators. Eggs and chicks may be eaten by raptors, crows, gulls, and the marabou stork (&quot;Leptoptilos crumenifer&quot;); an estimated half of the predation of greater flamingo eggs and chicks is from the yellow-legged gull (&quot;Larus michahellis&quot;).

===Human===
The primary threats to flamingo populations are bacteria, toxins, and pollution in water supplies, which is usually run-off from manufacturing companies, and encroachment on their habitat.

==In human captivity==
The first recorded zoo hatch was in 1959 at Zoo Basel. In Zoo Basel&#x27;s breeding program, over 400 birds have been hatched with between 20 and 27 per year since 2000. The oldest known greater flamingo was a bird at the Adelaide Zoo in Australia that died at the age of at least 83 years. The bird&#x27;s exact age is not known; it was already a mature adult when it arrived in Adelaide in 1933. It was euthanized in January 2014 due to complications of old age.

== See also ==

* Tallest extant birds

==References==
==External links==
* Performing greater flamingos in open field 
* Greater flamingo - Species text - &quot;The Atlas of Southern African Birds&quot;
* Article with video about Greater Flamingo at avibirds.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179863" start="4" end="20" title="Greater flamingo" label="greater flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="80" end="87" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901583" start="95" end="103" title="flamingo" label="flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="126" end="135" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="155" end="163" title="North Africa" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="178" end="196" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="202" end="221" title="Indian Subcontinent" label="Indian Subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="236" end="245" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="252" end="263" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="269" end="275" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="281" end="293" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q41837" start="299" end="311" title="Gulf of Aden" label="Gulf of Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="317" end="324" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="334" end="347" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="361" end="376" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q155914" start="432" end="450" title="Peter Simon Pallas" label="Peter Simon Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208004" start="516" end="533" title="American flamingo" label="American flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="766" end="775" title="Monotypic taxon" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="979" end="986" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="1071" end="1078" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="1095" end="1099" title="beak" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q191907" start="1393" end="1412" title="Carotenoid" label="carotenoid pigments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021740" start="1485" end="1500" title="uropygial gland" label="uropygial gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="1879" end="1886" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1888" end="1893" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="1919" end="1929" title="Nile River" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="1931" end="1936" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1938" end="1945" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="1951" end="1958" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="1993" end="1998" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="2000" end="2010" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="2012" end="2018" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="2020" end="2028" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="2030" end="2036" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="2062" end="2072" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="2074" end="2082" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="2095" end="2104" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="2133" end="2139" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="2141" end="2145" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="2147" end="2151" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="2153" end="2157" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="2170" end="2176" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="2178" end="2185" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="2187" end="2192" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="2202" end="2222" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="2255" end="2262" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="2264" end="2272" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="2274" end="2281" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2283" end="2289" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q218151" start="2297" end="2305" title="Camargue" label="Camargue"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="2310" end="2317" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2319" end="2325" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2327" end="2332" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="2334" end="2342" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="2344" end="2349" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="2351" end="2357" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="2359" end="2369" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="2371" end="2386" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="2388" end="2396" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2398" end="2403" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="2412" end="2428" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2434" end="2440" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q200528" start="2484" end="2501" title="Vreden" label="Zwillbrocker Venn"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2513" end="2520" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2551" end="2562" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="2683" end="2690" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723560" start="2763" end="2789" title="Nal Sarovar Bird Sanctuary" label="Nal Sarovar Bird Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2730580" start="2791" end="2815" title="Khijadiya Bird Sanctuary" label="Khijadiya Bird Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2817" end="2830" title="Kutch Desert Wildlife Sanctuary#Flamingo City" label="Flamingo City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786671" start="2843" end="2862" title="Thol Bird Sanctuary" label="Thol Bird Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="2962" end="2969" title="mudflat" label="mudflat"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="2991" end="2997" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="3115" end="3121" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135229" start="3123" end="3135" title="Artemia salina" label="brine shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q161426" start="3171" end="3175" title="Oryza sativa" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="3178" end="3194" title="blue-green algae" label="blue-green algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="3227" end="3234" title="diatoms" label="diatoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q228145" start="3260" end="3270" title="Chironomidae" label="chironomid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="3278" end="3285" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q659503" start="3454" end="3457" title="bird egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q220009" start="3536" end="3545" title="Basel Zoo" label="Basel Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q512737" start="3771" end="3784" title="marabou stork" label="marabou stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q704982" start="3906" end="3924" title="yellow-legged gull" label="yellow-legged gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960290" start="4242" end="4275" title="Breeding programs at Zoo Basel" label="Zoo Basel&amp;#x27;s breeding program"/>
<link wikidata="Q15691892" start="4358" end="4387" title="Greater (flamingo)" label="oldest known greater flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244627" start="4406" end="4418" title="Adelaide Zoo" label="Adelaide Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55634649" start="4668" end="4688" title="Tallest extant birds" label="Tallest extant birds"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182745" wikidata="Q1337490" url="?curid=182745" title="Johnson–Nyquist noise">
<text>Johnson–Nyquist noise (thermal noise, Johnson noise, or Nyquist noise) is the electronic noise generated by the thermal agitation of the charge carriers (usually the electrons) inside an electrical conductor at equilibrium, which happens regardless of any applied voltage. Thermal noise is present in all electrical circuits, and in sensitive electronic equipment (such as radio receivers) can drown out weak signals, and can be the limiting factor on sensitivity of electrical measuring instruments. Thermal noise is proportional to absolute temperature, so some sensitive electronic equipment such as radio telescope receivers are cooled to cryogenic temperatures to improve their signal-to-noise ratio. The generic, statistical physical derivation of this noise is called the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, where generalized impedance or generalized susceptibility is used to characterize the medium.

Thermal noise in an ideal resistor is approximately white, meaning that its power spectral density is nearly constant throughout the frequency spectrum (Figure 2). When limited to a finite bandwidth and viewed in the time domain (as sketched in Figure 1), thermal noise has a nearly Gaussian amplitude distribution. 

For the general case, this definition applies to charge carriers in any type of conducting medium (e.g. ions in an electrolyte), not just resistors. Thermal noise is distinct from shot noise, which consists of additional current fluctuations that occur when a voltage is applied and a macroscopic current starts to flow.

== History of thermal noise ==
In 1905, in one of Albert Einstein&#x27;s &quot;Annus mirabilis&quot; papers the theory of Brownian motion was first solved in terms of thermal fluctuations. The following year, in a second paper about Brownian motion, Einstein suggested that the same phenomena could be applied to derive thermally-agitated currents, but did not carry out the calculation as he considered it to be untestable.

Geertruida de Haas-Lorentz, daughter of Hendrik Lorentz, in her doctoral thesis of 1912, expanded on Einstein stochastic theory and first applied it to the study of electrons, deriving a formula for the mean-squared value of the thermal current.

Walter H. Schottky studied the problem in 1918, while studying thermal noise using Einstein&#x27;s theories, experimentally discovered another kind of noise, the shot noise.

Frits Zernike working in electrical metrology, found unusual random deflections while working with high-sensitive galvanometers. He rejected the idea that the noise was mechanical, and concluded that it was of thermal nature. In 1927, he introduced the idea of autocorrelations to electrical measurements and calculated the time detection limit. His work coincided with de Haas-Lorentz&#x27; prediction.

The same year, working independently without any knowledge of Zernike&#x27;s work, John B. Johnson working in Bell Labs found the same kind of noise in communication systems, but described it in terms of frequencies. He described his findings to Harry Nyquist, also at Bell Labs, who used principles of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics to explain the results, published in 1928.

== Noise of ideal resistors for moderate frequencies ==

Johnson&#x27;s experiment (Figure 1) found that the thermal noise from a resistance formula_1 at kelvin temperature formula_2 and bandlimited to a frequency band of bandwidth formula_3 (Figure 3) has a mean square voltage of:

: formula_4

where formula_5 is the Boltzmann constant ( joules per kelvin). While this equation applies to &quot;ideal resistors&quot; (i.e. pure resistances without any frequency-dependence) at non-extreme frequency and temperatures, a more accurate general form accounts for complex impedances and quantum effects. Conventional electronics generally operate over a more limited bandwidth, so Johnson&#x27;s equation is often satisfactory.

=== Power spectral density ===
The mean square voltage per hertz of bandwidth is formula_6 and may be called the power spectral density (Figure 2). Its square root at room temperature (around 300 K) approximates to 0.13 formula_7 in units of . A 10 kΩ resistor, for example, would have approximately 13  at room temperature.

=== RMS noise voltage ===
The square root of the mean square voltage yields the root mean square (RMS) voltage observed over the bandwidth formula_3:

: formula_9

A resistor with thermal noise can be represented by its Thévenin equivalent circuit (Figure 4B) consisting of a noiseless resistor in series with a gaussian noise voltage source with the above RMS voltage.

Around room temperature, 3 kΩ provides almost one microvolt of RMS noise over 20 kHz (the human hearing range) and 60 Ω·Hz for formula_10 corresponds to almost one nanovolt of RMS noise.

=== RMS noise current ===
A resistor with thermal noise can also be converted into its Norton equivalent circuit (Figure 4C) consisting of a noise-free resistor in parallel with a gaussian noise current source with the following RMS current:

: formula_11 in dBm. At room temperature (300 K), the available noise power can be easily approximated as formula_12 in dBm for a bandwidth in hertz. Some example available noise power in dBm are tabulated below:
== Nyquist&#x27;s derivation of ideal resistor noise ==

Nyquist&#x27;s 1928 paper &quot;Thermal Agitation of Electric Charge in Conductors&quot; used concepts about potential energy and harmonic oscillators from the equipartition law of Boltzmann and Maxwell to explain Johnson&#x27;s experimental result. Nyquist&#x27;s thought experiment summed the energy contribution of each standing wave mode of oscillation on a long lossless transmission line between two equal resistors (formula_13). According to the conclusion of Figure 5, the total average power transferred over bandwidth formula_3 from formula_15 and absorbed by formula_16 was determined to be:

: formula_17

Simple application of Ohm&#x27;s law says the current from formula_18 (the thermal voltage noise of only formula_15) through the combined resistance is formula_20, so the power transferred from formula_15 to formula_16 is the square of this current multiplied by formula_16, which simplifies to:

: formula_24

Setting this formula_25 equal to the earlier average power expression formula_26 allows solving for the average of formula_27 over that bandwidth:

: formula_28

Nyquist used similar reasoning to provide a generalized expression that applies to non-equal and complex impedances too. And while Nyquist above used formula_29 according to classical theory, Nyquist concluded his paper by attempting to use a more involved expression that incorporated the Planck constant formula_30 (from the new theory of quantum mechanics).

== Generalized forms ==
The formula_6 voltage noise described above is a special case for a purely resistive component for low to moderate frequencies. In general, the thermal electrical noise continues to be related to resistive response in many more generalized electrical cases, as a consequence of the fluctuation-dissipation theorem. Below a variety of generalizations are noted. All of these generalizations share a common limitation, that they only apply in cases where the electrical component under consideration is purely passive and linear.

=== Complex impedances ===
Nyquist&#x27;s original paper also provided the generalized noise for components having partly reactive response, e.g., sources that contain capacitors or inductors. Such a component can be described by a frequency-dependent complex electrical impedance formula_32. The formula for the power spectral density of the series noise voltage is
:formula_33
The function formula_34 is approximately 1, except at very high frequencies or near absolute zero (see below).

The real part of impedance, formula_35, is in general frequency dependent and so the Johnson–Nyquist noise is not white noise. The RMS noise voltage over a span of frequencies formula_36 to formula_37 can be found by taking the square root of integration of the power spectral density:
:formula_38.

Alternatively, a parallel noise current can be used to describe Johnson noise, its power spectral density being
:formula_39
where formula_40 is the electrical admittance; note that formula_41

=== Quantum effects at high frequencies or low temperatures ===
With proper consideration of quantum effects (which are relevant for very high frequencies or very low temperatures near absolute zero), the multiplying factor formula_34 mentioned earlier is in general given by:
:formula_43
At very high frequencies (formula_44), the function formula_34 starts to exponentially decrease to zero. At room temperature this transition occurs in the terahertz, far beyond the capabilities of conventional electronics, and so it is valid to set formula_46 for conventional electronics work.

==== Relation to Planck&#x27;s law ====
Nyquist&#x27;s formula is essentially the same as that derived by Planck in 1901 for electromagnetic radiation of a blackbody in one dimension—i.e., it is the one-dimensional version of Planck&#x27;s law of blackbody radiation. In other words, a hot resistor will create electromagnetic waves on a transmission line just as a hot object will create electromagnetic waves in free space.

In 1946, Robert H. Dicke elaborated on the relationship, and further connected it to properties of antennas, particularly the fact that the average antenna aperture over all different directions cannot be larger than formula_47, where λ is wavelength. This comes from the different frequency dependence of 3D versus 1D Planck&#x27;s law.

=== Multiport electrical networks ===
Richard Q. Twiss extended Nyquist&#x27;s formulas to multi-port passive electrical networks, including non-reciprocal devices such as circulators and isolators. 
Thermal noise appears at every port, and can be described as random series voltage sources in series with each port. The random voltages at different ports may be correlated, and their amplitudes and correlations are fully described by a set of cross-spectral density functions relating the different noise voltages,
: formula_48
where the formula_49 are the elements of the impedance matrix formula_50.
Again, an alternative description of the noise is instead in terms of parallel current sources applied at each port. Their cross-spectral density is given by
: formula_51
where formula_52 is the admittance matrix.

== Notes ==
== See also ==
* Fluctuation-dissipation theorem
* Shot noise
* Pink noise
* Langevin equation
* Rise over thermal

== References ==

== External links ==
* Amplifier noise in RF systems 
* Thermal noise (undergraduate) with detailed math</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="0" end="21" title="Johnson–Nyquist noise" label="Johnson–Nyquist noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="23" end="36" title="Johnson–Nyquist noise" label="thermal noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="38" end="51" title="Johnson–Nyquist noise" label="Johnson noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="56" end="69" title="Johnson–Nyquist noise" label="Nyquist noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306265" start="78" end="94" title="electronic noise" label="electronic noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q209233" start="112" end="129" title="Thermal energy" label="thermal agitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q865807" start="137" end="151" title="charge carrier" label="charge carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="166" end="174" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="187" end="207" title="electrical conductor" label="electrical conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="264" end="271" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="305" end="323" title="electrical circuit" label="electrical circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="373" end="387" title="radio receiver" label="radio receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q264647" start="534" end="554" title="absolute temperature" label="absolute temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="603" end="618" title="radio telescope" label="radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="643" end="652" title="cryogenic" label="cryogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q738628" start="683" end="704" title="signal-to-noise ratio" label="signal-to-noise ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434158" start="779" end="810" title="fluctuation-dissipation theorem" label="fluctuation-dissipation theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="830" end="839" title="Electrical impedance" label="impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q598305" start="855" end="869" title="Electric susceptibility" label="susceptibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="927" end="941" title="ideal resistor" label="ideal resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q381287" start="959" end="964" title="white noise" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331626" start="989" end="1005" title="spectral density" label="spectral density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331626" start="1040" end="1058" title="frequency spectrum" label="frequency spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q185889" start="1124" end="1135" title="time domain" label="time domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="1190" end="1221" title="Normal distribution" label="Gaussian amplitude distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q865807" start="1274" end="1289" title="charge carriers" label="charge carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q334265" start="1316" end="1322" title="Transmission medium" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="1329" end="1332" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="1340" end="1351" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="1363" end="1371" title="resistor" label="resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503574" start="1405" end="1415" title="shot noise" label="shot noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="1597" end="1612" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q51497" start="1620" end="1654" title="Annus mirabilis papers" label="&amp;quot;Annus mirabilis&amp;quot; papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178036" start="1669" end="1684" title="Brownian motion" label="Brownian motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508823" start="1973" end="1999" title="Geertruida de Haas-Lorentz" label="Geertruida de Haas-Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41688" start="2013" end="2028" title="Hendrik Lorentz" label="Hendrik Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q60347" start="2220" end="2238" title="Walter H. Schottky" label="Walter H. Schottky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503574" start="2382" end="2392" title="shot noise" label="shot noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q188293" start="2395" end="2408" title="Frits Zernike" label="Frits Zernike"/>
<link wikidata="Q179472" start="2509" end="2522" title="Galvanometer" label="galvanometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q202881" start="2883" end="2898" title="John Bertrand Johnson" label="John B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="2910" end="2919" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q316022" start="3046" end="3059" title="Harry Nyquist" label="Harry Nyquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="3103" end="3117" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="3122" end="3143" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q264647" start="3342" end="3360" title="kelvin temperature" label="kelvin temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q806263" start="3375" end="3386" title="bandlimited" label="bandlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882278" start="3392" end="3406" title="frequency band" label="frequency band"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="3410" end="3419" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q85784623" start="3447" end="3458" title="mean square" label="mean square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="3508" end="3526" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="3529" end="3535" title="joules" label="joules"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="3540" end="3546" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3724" end="3736" title="Johnson–Nyquist noise#general form" label="general form"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="3750" end="3768" title="Complex Impedance" label="complex impedances"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="3853" end="3862" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="3974" end="3979" title="hertz" label="hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="3983" end="3992" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331626" start="4028" end="4050" title="power spectral density" label="power spectral density"/>
<link wikidata="Q223323" start="4321" end="4337" title="root mean square" label="root mean square"/>
<link wikidata="Q241868" start="4461" end="4480" title="Thévenin equivalent" label="Thévenin equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161128" start="4568" end="4582" title="voltage source" label="voltage source"/>
<link wikidata="Q351087" start="4702" end="4721" title="human hearing range" label="human hearing range"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4868" end="4877" title="Thévenin&amp;#x27;s theorem#Conversion to a Norton equivalent" label="converted"/>
<link wikidata="Q651593" start="4887" end="4904" title="Norton equivalent" label="Norton equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163768" start="4995" end="5009" title="current source" label="current source"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5422" end="5490" title="Equipartition theorem#Potential energy and harmonic oscillators" label="potential energy and harmonic oscillators from the equipartition law"/>
<link wikidata="Q84296" start="5494" end="5503" title="Ludwig Boltzmann" label="Boltzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="5508" end="5515" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="5578" end="5596" title="thought experiment" label="thought experiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5636" end="5669" title="Normal mode#Standing waves" label="standing wave mode of oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q693004" start="5689" end="5706" title="transmission line" label="transmission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591" start="5953" end="5967" title="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6501" end="6519" title="Johnson–Nyquist noise#Complex impedances" label="complex impedances"/>
<link wikidata="Q81745" start="6578" end="6587" title="Classical physics" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="6694" end="6709" title="Planck constant" label="Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="6745" end="6762" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434158" start="7072" end="7103" title="fluctuation-dissipation theorem" label="fluctuation-dissipation theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045736" start="7298" end="7305" title="Passivity (engineering)" label="passive"/>
<link wikidata="Q193972" start="7441" end="7449" title="electrical reactance" label="reactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="7579" end="7599" title="electrical impedance" label="electrical impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331626" start="7632" end="7654" title="power spectral density" label="power spectral density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331626" start="8193" end="8215" title="power spectral density" label="power spectral density"/>
<link wikidata="Q214518" start="8258" end="8279" title="electrical admittance" label="electrical admittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="8488" end="8501" title="absolute zero" label="absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q212986" start="9114" end="9154" title="Planck&amp;#x27;s law" label="Planck&amp;#x27;s law of blackbody radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q693004" start="9226" end="9243" title="transmission line" label="transmission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q504473" start="9324" end="9339" title="Robert H. Dicke" label="Robert H. Dicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q571946" start="9463" end="9479" title="antenna aperture" label="antenna aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150778" start="9692" end="9708" title="Richard Q. Twiss" label="Richard Q. Twiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443617" start="9751" end="9755" title="Port (circuit theory)" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q162869" start="9826" end="9836" title="circulator" label="circulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q962002" start="9842" end="9850" title="Isolator (microwave)" label="isolator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331626" start="10099" end="10121" title="cross-spectral density" label="cross-spectral density"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424600" start="10229" end="10245" title="impedance matrix" label="impedance matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001847" start="10453" end="10470" title="Admittance parameters" label="admittance matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434158" start="10502" end="10533" title="Fluctuation-dissipation theorem" label="Fluctuation-dissipation theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503574" start="10536" end="10546" title="Shot noise" label="Shot noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q974572" start="10549" end="10559" title="Pink noise" label="Pink noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q584537" start="10562" end="10579" title="Langevin equation" label="Langevin equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433130" start="10582" end="10599" title="Rise over thermal" label="Rise over thermal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182746" wikidata="Q1356808" url="?curid=182746" title="Ernesto Nazareth">
<text>Ernesto Júlio de Nazareth (March 20, 1863 – February 1, 1934) was a Brazilian composer and pianist, especially noted for his creative maxixe and choro compositions. Influenced by a diverse set of dance rhythms including the polka, the habanera and the lundu, he combined these elements with his classical training to create compositions that he called “Brazilian tangos&quot;. These would be the precursors for what is known today as Choro. His piano repertoire is now part of the teaching programs of both classical and popular styles, as Nazareth once served at the boundary between these two worlds.

==Biography==
Nazareth was born in Rio de Janeiro, one of five children. His mother, Carolina da Cunha, gave him his first piano lessons. At the age of ten, after his mother&#x27;s death, he continued his piano studies with Eduardo Madeira and Charles Lucien Lambert.
Strongly influenced by Chopin, Nazareth published his first composition &quot;Você Bem Sabe&quot; (which means &quot;You know it well&quot;) in 1877, at age 14. At that time, he had begun his professional career playing in cafes, balls, society parties and in the waiting rooms of movie theaters. In 1893, Casa Vieira Machado published his famous tango &quot;Brejeiro&quot;.

In 1879, he wrote his first tango, &quot;Cruz perigo&quot;. In 1880, at age 17, he made his first public appearance at the Mozart Club. The following year, he composed the tango &quot;Não caio n&#x27;outra&quot;, his first great success, with several reprints. In 1885, he performed in concerts in different clubs of the court. In 1893, Casa Vieira Machado launched a new catalogue of his compositions, including the tango &quot;Brejeiro&quot;, which achieved national and even international success; the Republican Guard band of Paris included it in their repertoire and recorded it.

His first concert as a pianist took place in 1898. The following year he prepared the first edition of the tango &quot;Turuna&quot;. In 1905, he had his first work, &quot;Brejeiro&quot;, recorded by singer Mario Pinheiro with the title &quot;O sertanejo enamorado&quot; with lyrics by . Meanwhile, the &quot;Casa Édison&quot; marching band recorded his tango &quot;Brushed&quot;, which became quite successful. In 1907 Nazareth was appointed third book-keeper of the National Treasury, a position that he did not occupy for not mastering the English language. In 1908, he began working as a pianist at the Mozart Club.

The following year, he participated in a concert held at the National Institute of Music, playing his gavotte &quot;Corbeille de fleurs&quot; and tango &quot;Batuque&quot;. He began giving private piano lessons, and worked as a pianist for Casa Gomes in 1921, and the Odeon Cinema from 1920 until 1924. In São Paulo and Campinas he performed several shows in the Municipal Theater and the Conservatory. He was given a grand piano as a gift from his admirers. He was one of the first artists to play for the Society Radio of Rio de Janeiro. In 1932 he presented, for the first time, a recital in which he performed only his compositions.

In 1933, after a period of mental instability following the deaths of his wife and daughter, and diagnosed with syphilis and worsening hearing problems caused by a fall during childhood, Nazareth was hospitalized at the Juliano Moreira Asylum in Jacarepaguá. He fled the asylum February 1, 1934 and was found dead three days later in the adjacent forest near a waterfall, where he had drowned.

==Catalog of works==

Nazareth was noted for creatively combining diverse influences into his music, not only of Brazilian music but also from the music of Europe, Africa and ragtime. Many of his compositions remain part of the repertory today. He composed 88 tangos, 41 waltzes, 28 polkas and numerous sambas, galops, quadrilles, Schottisches, fox-trots, romances and other types of scores, totaling 211 complete compositions.

*&quot;1922&quot;
*&quot;A bella Melusina&quot;
*&quot;A flor de meus sonhos&quot;
*&quot;A florista&quot;
*&quot;A fonte do lambari&quot;
*&quot;A fonte do suspiro&quot;
*&quot;Adieu&quot;
*&quot;Adorável&quot;
*&quot;Ai rica prima&quot;
*&quot;Albíngia&quot;
*&quot;Alerta!&quot;
*&quot;Ameno resedá&quot;
*&quot;Andante expressivo&quot;
*&quot;Apanhei-te cavaquinho&quot;
*&quot;Arreliado&quot;
*&quot;Arrojado&quot;
*&quot;Arrufos&quot;
*&quot;As gracinhas de Nhô-nhô&quot;
*&quot;Até que enfim!&quot;
*&quot;Atlântico&quot;
*&quot;Atrevidinha&quot;
*&quot;Atrevido&quot;
*&quot;Bambino&quot;
*&quot;Bambino – você não me dá!&quot; – words by 
*&quot;Batuque&quot;
*&quot;Beija-Flor&quot;
*&quot;Beijinho de moça&quot;
*&quot;Bom-Bom&quot;
*&quot;Brejeira&quot;
*&quot;Brejeiro&quot;
*&quot;Bicyclette-club&quot;
*&quot;Caçadora&quot;
*&quot;Cacique&quot;
*&quot;Capricho&quot;
*&quot;Cardosina&quot;
*&quot;Carioca&quot;
*&quot;Catrapuz&quot;
*&quot;Cavaquinho, por que choras?&quot;
*&quot;Celestial&quot;
*&quot;Chave de ouro&quot;
*&quot;Chile-Brazil&quot;
*&quot;Comigo é na madeira&quot;
*&quot;Confidências&quot;
*&quot;Coração que sente&quot;
*&quot;Corbeille de Fleurs&quot;
*&quot;Correcta&quot;
*&quot;Crê e espera&quot;
*&quot;Crises em penca&quot;
*&quot;Cruz, perigo!!&quot;
*&quot;Cruzeiro&quot;
*&quot;Cubanos&quot;
*&quot;Cuéra&quot;
*&quot;Cutuba&quot;
*&quot;Cuyubinha&quot;
*&quot;De tarde&quot;
*&quot;Delightfulness&quot;
*&quot;Dengoso&quot;
*&quot;Desengonçado&quot;
*&quot;Digo&quot;
*&quot;Dirce&quot;
*&quot;Divina&quot;
*&quot;Dor secreta&quot;
*&quot;Dora&quot;
*&quot;Duvidoso&quot;
*&quot;Elegantíssima&quot;
*&quot;Elegia para piano&quot; (left hand)
*&quot;Elétrica&quot;
*&quot;Elite-club&quot;
*&quot;Encantada&quot;
*&quot;Encantador&quot;
*&quot;Ensimesmado&quot;
*&quot;Eponina&quot;
*&quot;Escorregando&quot;
*&quot;Escovado&quot;
*&quot;Espalhafatoso&quot;
*&quot;Espanholita&quot;
*&quot;Está chumbado&quot;
*&quot;Eulina&quot;
*&quot;Expansiva&quot;
*&quot;Êxtase&quot; (voice, piano and violin)
*&quot;Êxtase&quot; (piano)
*&quot;Exuberante&quot;
*&quot;Faceira&quot;
*&quot;Famoso&quot;
*&quot;Fantástica&quot;
*&quot;Favorito&quot;
*&quot;Feitiço&quot;
*&quot;Ferramenta&quot;
*&quot;Fetiço não mata&quot;
*&quot;Fidalga&quot;
*&quot;Floraux&quot;
*&quot;Fon-fon&quot;
*&quot;Fora dos eixos&quot;
*&quot;Furinga&quot;
*&quot;Garoto&quot;
*&quot;Gaúcho&quot;
*&quot;Gemendo, rindo e pulando&quot;
*&quot;Genial&quot;
*&quot;Gente, o imposto pegou?&quot;
*&quot;Gentil&quot;
*&quot;Gotas de ouro&quot;
*&quot;Gracietta&quot;
*&quot;Guerreiro&quot;
*&quot;Helena&quot;
*&quot;Henriette&quot;
*&quot;Hino a Alaor Prata&quot;
*&quot;Hino a Carneiro Leão&quot;
*&quot;Hino a Pereira Passos&quot;
*&quot;Hino da Escola Ester Pedreira de Mello&quot;
*&quot;Hino da Escola Floriano Peixoto&quot;
*&quot;Hino da Escola Pedro II&quot;
*&quot;Ideal&quot;
*&quot;If I Am Not Mistaken&quot;
*&quot;Improviso&quot; (Concert Study)
*&quot;Insuperável&quot;
*&quot;Ipanema&quot;
*&quot;Iris&quot;
*&quot;Jacaré&quot;
*&quot;Jangadeiro&quot;
*&quot;Janota&quot;
*&quot;Julieta&quot; (&#x27;quadrilha&#x27;, popular Brazilian dance)
*&quot;Julieta&quot; (valse)
*&quot;Julita&quot;
*&quot;Labirinto&quot;
*&quot;Laço Azul&quot;
*&quot;Lamentos&quot;
*&quot;Magnífico&quot;
*&quot;Mágoas&quot;
*&quot;Maly&quot;
*&quot;Mandinga&quot;
*&quot;Marcha Fúnebre&quot;
*&quot;Marcha Heróica aos Dezoito do Forte&quot;
*&quot;Mariazinha sentada na pedra&quot;
*&quot;Marietta&quot;
*&quot;Matuto&quot;
*&quot;Meigo&quot;
*&quot;Menino de ouro&quot;
*&quot;Mercedes&quot;
*&quot;Mesquitinha&quot;
*&quot;Myosótis&quot;
*&quot;Não caio n&#x27;outra!&quot;
*&quot;Não me fujas assim&quot;
*&quot;Nazareth&quot;
*&quot;Nenê&quot;
*&quot;Nenê&quot; – words by Catulo da Paixão Cearense
*&quot;No jardim&quot;
*&quot;Noêmia&quot;
*&quot;Noturno&quot;
*&quot;Nove de Julho&quot;
*&quot;Nove de Maio&quot;
*&quot;O Alvorecer&quot;
*&quot;O Futurista&quot;
*&quot;O nome dela&quot; (polca)
*&quot;O Nome dela&quot; (valse)
*&quot;O que há&quot;
*&quot;Os teus olhos cativam&quot;
*&quot;Odeon&quot;
*&quot;Onze de Maio&quot;
*&quot;Orminda&quot;
*&quot;Ouro sobre azul&quot;
*&quot;Pairando&quot;
*&quot;Paraíso&quot;
*&quot;Pássaros em festa&quot;
*&quot;Paulicéa como és formosa!&quot;
*&quot;Perigoso&quot;
*&quot;Pierrot&quot;
*&quot;Pingüim&quot;
*&quot;Pipoca&quot;
*&quot;Pirilampo&quot;
*&quot;Plangente&quot;
*&quot;Plus Ultra&quot;
*&quot;Podia ser pior&quot;
*&quot;Polca para a mão esquerda&quot; (left hand)
*&quot;Polonaise&quot;
*&quot;Por que sofre?&quot;
*&quot;Primorosa&quot;
*&quot;Proeminente&quot;
*&quot;Quebra-Cabeças&quot;
*&quot;Quebradinha&quot;
*&quot;Ramirinho&quot;
*&quot;Ranzinza&quot;
*&quot;Rayon d&#x27;Or&quot;
*&quot;Reboliço&quot;
*&quot;Recordações do passado&quot;
*&quot;Remando&quot;
*&quot;Resignação&quot;
*&quot;Respingando&quot;
*&quot;Ressaca&quot;
*&quot;Retumbante&quot;
*&quot;Rosa Maria&quot;
*&quot;Sagaz&quot;
*&quot;Salve, Salve, Nações Unidas&quot;
*&quot;Sarambeque&quot;
*&quot;Saudade&quot;
*&quot;Saudade dos Pagos&quot;
*&quot;Saudades e Saudades!&quot;
*&quot;Segredo&quot;
*&quot;Segredos da infância&quot;
*&quot;Sentimentos d&#x27;Alma&quot;
*&quot;Soberano&quot;
*&quot;Suculento&quot;
*&quot;Sustenta a ...nota...&quot;
*&quot;Sutil&quot;
*&quot;Tango Habenera&quot;
*&quot;Talismã&quot;
*&quot;Tenebroso&quot;
*&quot;Thierry&quot;
*&quot;Topázio líquido&quot;
*&quot;Travesso&quot;
*&quot;Tudo Sobe...&quot;
*&quot;Tupinambá&quot;
*&quot;Turbilhão de beijos&quot;
*&quot;Turuna&quot;
*&quot;Vem cá, Branquinha&quot;
*&quot;Vésper&quot;
*&quot;Victória&quot;
*&quot;Vitorioso&quot;
*&quot;Você bem sabe&quot;
*&quot;Xangô&quot;
*&quot;Yolanda&quot;
*&quot;Zênite&quot; (authored by Maestro Gaó)
*&quot;Zica&quot;
*&quot;Zizinha&quot;
==Media==

&#x27;Escovado&#x27; is a common slang which means &#x27;smart&#x27;. Ary Vasconcelos tells us in his book &quot;Panorama da Musica Popular Brasileira&quot; that Nazareth was a &quot;devoted family man who often gave the songs he composed titles in honor of his son, sometimes his wife, or another relative&quot;. &quot;Travesso&quot; was dedicated to his son Ernesto, &quot;Marieta&quot; and &quot;Eulina&quot; to his two daughters, &quot;Dora&quot; to his wife Theodora, &quot;Brejeiro&quot; to his nephew Gilbert, etc.

&quot;Escovado&quot; was first published by Casa Vieira Machado &amp; Co. and dedicated to Fernando Nazareth, the composer&#x27;s younger brother. It became one of Nazareth&#x27;s greatest success, having the main theme been later tapped by the French composer Darius Milhaud in his &quot;Le bœuf sur le toit&quot; (1919). In September 1930, accepting an invitation made by Eduardo Souto, then artistic director of Odeon-Parlophone, Nazareth recorded this piece.

&quot;Brejeiro&quot; is one of the ambient songs in the game Civilization VI, when playing with Brazil. The version used in the game was composed and directed by Geoff Knorr.

==References==
==External links==
*Ernesto Nazareth 150 Anos, website containing original sheet music and arrangements, complete discography with more than 2000 recordings, hundreds of photos, timeline, documents, texts and blog 
*Free scores by Ernesto Nazareth at Musica Brasilis website
*Free complete scores in PDF format at the official catalog
*Free recordings in MP3 format by various pianists at PianoSociety.com
*Beatriz Kauffmann&#x27;s Web Site – Músicas de Ernesto Nazareth em arquivos MIDI 
*Rare Music of Ernesto Nazareth (music, text, images) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1356808" start="0" end="25" title="Ernesto Nazareth" label="Ernesto Júlio de Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q430075" start="134" end="140" title="Maxixe (dance)" label="maxixe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076539" start="145" end="150" title="choro" label="choro"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="224" end="229" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775526" start="235" end="243" title="Contradanza" label="habanera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499839" start="252" end="257" title="Lundu_(dance)" label="lundu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076539" start="434" end="439" title="Choro" label="Choro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="639" end="653" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="828" end="843" title="Eduardo Madeira" label="Eduardo Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065373" start="848" end="870" title="Charles Lucien Lambert" label="Charles Lucien Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="895" end="901" title="Chopin" label="Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917775" start="1585" end="1604" title="Music publisher (sheet music)" label="Casa Vieira Machado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494057" start="1753" end="1769" title="Republican Guard (France)" label="Republican Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426710" start="2160" end="2173" title="marching band" label="marching band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="2282" end="2293" title="book-keeper" label="book-keeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q10756188" start="2301" end="2318" title="National Treasury" label="National Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q215742" start="2556" end="2563" title="gavotte" label="gavotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="3204" end="3212" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3643" end="3649" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="3651" end="3657" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q185652" start="3662" end="3669" title="ragtime" label="ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="3758" end="3763" title="waltz" label="waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="3770" end="3775" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11403" start="3790" end="3795" title="samba" label="samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q698092" start="3798" end="3803" title="galop" label="galop"/>
<link wikidata="Q394084" start="3806" end="3815" title="quadrille" label="quadrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q329385" start="3818" end="3829" title="Schottische" label="Schottische"/>
<link wikidata="Q245418" start="3832" end="3840" title="fox-trot" label="fox-trot"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="10523" end="10537" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810320" start="10551" end="10570" title="Le bœuf sur le toit" label="Le bœuf sur le toit"/>
<link wikidata="Q706013" start="10677" end="10682" title="Odeon Records" label="Odeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="10683" end="10693" title="Parlophone" label="Parlophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q26844769" start="10888" end="10899" title="Geoff Knorr" label="Geoff Knorr"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182752" wikidata="Q350951" url="?curid=182752" title="Macintosh IIfx">
<text>The Macintosh IIfx is a personal computer designed, manufactured and sold by Apple Computer from March 1990 to April 1992. At introduction it cost from to , depending on configuration, and it was the fastest Macintosh available at the time.

The IIfx is the most powerful of the 68030-based Macintosh II family and was replaced at the top of Apple&#x27;s lineup by the Macintosh Quadra in 1991. It is the last Apple computer released that was designed using the Snow White design language.

==Overview==
Dubbed &quot;Wicked Fast&quot; by its Product Manager, Frank Casanova – who came to Apple from Apollo Computer in Boston, Massachusetts, where the Boston term &quot;wicked&quot; is commonly used to denote anything extreme – the IIfx runs at a clock rate of 40 megahertz, has 32 KB of Level 2 cache, six NuBus slots, and includes a number of proprietary ASICs and coprocessors. Designed to speed up the machine even further, these chips require system-specific drivers. The 40 MHz speed refers to the main logic board clock (the bus), the Motorola 68030 CPU, and the computer&#x27;s Motorola 68882 FPU. The machine has eight RAM slots, for a maximum of 128 MB RAM, an enormous amount at the time.

The IIfx features specialized high-speed (80 ns) RAM using 64-pin dual-ported SIMMs, while all other contemporary Macintosh models use 30-pin SIMMs. The extra pins are a separate path to allow latched read and write operations. It is also possible to use parity memory modules; the IIfx is the only stock 68K Macintosh to support them along with special versions of the Macintosh IIci. The logic board has a total of 8 RAM slots; these must be populated four at a time with 1, 4, or 16 MB chips; this results in a maximum memory amount of 128 MB.

The IIfx includes two special dedicated processors for floppy disk operations, sound, ADB, and serial communications. These I/O chips feature a pair of 10 MHz embedded 6502 CPUs, which is the same CPU family used in Apple II machines.

The IIfx uses SCSI as its hard disk interface, as had all previous Macintosh models since the Macintosh Plus. The IIfx requires a special black-colored SCSI terminator for external drives.

Industrial Light &amp; Magic upgraded their image processing hardware to the IIfx by the time &quot;Terminator 2: Judgment Day&quot; entered post-production.

== Models ==
When first introduced, the IIfx was offered in the following configurations:

* Macintosh IIfx: 4 MB memory, 1.44 MB SuperDrive. US$8,969.
* Macintosh IIfx 4/80: 4 MB memory, 80 MB HDD. US$9,869.
* Macintosh IIfx 4/160: 4 MB memory, 160 MB HDD. US$10,969.
* Macintosh IIfx 4/80 with Parity Support: 4 MB of parity error-checking RAM, 80 MB HDD.

Introduced May 15, 1990:
* Macintosh IIfx 4/80 with A/UX: 4 MB memory, 160 MB HDD, A/UX 2.0 preinstalled. US$10,469. Shipments began in June.

== Timeline ==
==References==
==External links==
* Macintosh IIfx profile on Low End Mac
* Apple-History: Macintosh IIfx
* EveryMac: Macintosh IIfx
* Apple Technical Note DV15 (Mirror)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q350951" start="4" end="18" title="Macintosh IIfx" label="Macintosh IIfx"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="24" end="41" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="77" end="91" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="208" end="217" title="Mac (computer)" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q378761" start="279" end="284" title="Motorola 68030" label="68030"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052592" start="291" end="310" title="Macintosh II family" label="Macintosh II family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882844" start="369" end="385" title="Macintosh Quadra" label="Macintosh Quadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548361" start="462" end="488" title="Snow White design language" label="Snow White design language"/>
<link wikidata="Q619107" start="599" end="614" title="Apollo Computer" label="Apollo Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="618" end="624" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="626" end="639" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="651" end="662" title="Eastern New England English#Overview of vocabulary and grammatical features" label="Boston term"/>
<link wikidata="Q911691" start="747" end="757" title="clock rate" label="clock rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="764" end="773" title="Hertz" label="megahertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q79726" start="782" end="784" title="Kilobyte" label="KB"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="796" end="801" title="CPU cache" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928621" start="807" end="812" title="NuBus" label="NuBus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="857" end="862" title="Application-specific integrated circuit" label="ASICs"/>
<link wikidata="Q378761" start="1042" end="1056" title="Motorola 68030" label="Motorola 68030"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="1057" end="1060" title="Central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153410" start="1086" end="1100" title="Motorola 68882" label="Motorola 68882"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="1101" end="1104" title="Floating-point unit" label="FPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="1160" end="1162" title="Megabyte" label="MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q838801" start="1246" end="1248" title="nanosecond" label="ns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="1250" end="1253" title="Random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1267" end="1284" title="SIMM#Apple 64-pin" label="dual-ported SIMMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052870" start="1571" end="1585" title="Macintosh IIci" label="Macintosh IIci"/>
<link wikidata="Q518280" start="1844" end="1864" title="serial communication" label="serial communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="1908" end="1916" title="embedded system" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="1917" end="1921" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="1965" end="1973" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="1999" end="2003" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="2011" end="2020" title="hard disk drive" label="hard disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255728" start="2079" end="2093" title="Macintosh Plus" label="Macintosh Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="2175" end="2203" title="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic" label="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2275" end="2301" title="Terminator 2: Judgment Day" label="Terminator 2: Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193976" start="2464" end="2474" title="SuperDrive" label="SuperDrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q625502" start="2654" end="2675" title="Parity bit" label="parity error-checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140097" start="2776" end="2780" title="A/UX" label="A/UX"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182756" wikidata="Q4867503" url="?curid=182756" title="Basin modelling">
<text>Basin modelling is the term broadly applied to a group of geological disciplines that can be used to analyse the formation and evolution of sedimentary basins, often but not exclusively to aid evaluation of potential hydrocarbon reserves.

At its most basic, a basin modelling exercise must assess:

# The burial history of the basin (see back-stripping).
# The thermal history of the basin (see thermal history modelling).
# The maturity history of the source rocks.
# The expulsion, migration and trapping of hydrocarbons.

By doing so, valuable inferences can be made about such matters as hydrocarbon generation and timing, maturity of potential source rocks and migration paths of expelled hydrocarbons.

==Basin modelling software==
Software packages have been designed for 1D/2D/3D basin modelling purposes to simulate the burial and thermal history of a basin as well as petroleum migration modelling.
Basin Modeling software programs:
Permedia (Halliburton), 
PBM-Pars Basin Modeler(Research Institute of Petroleum Industry), 
PetroMod (Schlumberger),
BasinMod (Platte River Associates, Inc.),
Genex, Temis 2D, 3D (Beicip/IFP),
Migri, MigriX (Migris),
Sigma2D (JNOC/TRC),
Novva (Sirius Exploration Geochemistry Inc.), 
Genesis-Trinity(Zetaware), and
WinBury software.

==Basin modelling publications==
* Basin Modeling Publications

==References==
* Duppenbecker S. J. and Eliffe J. E., Basin Modelling: Practice and Progress, Geological Society Special Publication, (1998). 
* Lerche I., Basin Analysis: Quantitative Methods v.2, Academic Press (1990). 
* Hantschel, T. and Kauerauf, A.I., Fundamentals of Basin and Petroleum Systems Modeling, Springer (2009). 
* Lee, E.Y., Novotny, J., Wagreich, M., Subsidence analysis and visualization - for sedimentary basin analysis and modelling. Springer (2019). https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783319764238</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4867503" start="0" end="15" title="Basin modelling" label="Basin modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="58" end="68" title="geology" label="geological"/>
<link wikidata="Q785020" start="140" end="157" title="sedimentary basin" label="sedimentary basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="217" end="228" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839013" start="339" end="353" title="back-stripping" label="back-stripping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783051" start="396" end="421" title="thermal history modelling" label="thermal history modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988844" start="454" end="465" title="source rock" label="source rock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182758" wikidata="Q157179" url="?curid=182758" title="Conrad IV of Germany">
<text>Conrad (25 April 1228 – 21 May 1254), a member of the Hohenstaufen dynasty, was the only son of Emperor Frederick II from his second marriage with Queen Isabella II of Jerusalem. He inherited the title of King of Jerusalem (as Conrad II) upon the death of his mother in childbed. Appointed Duke of Swabia in 1235, his father had him elected King of Germany (King of the Romans) and crowned King of Italy (as Conrad IV) in 1237. After the emperor was deposed and died in 1250, he ruled as King of Sicily (Conrad I) until his death.

==Early years==
He was the second child, but only surviving son of Emperor Frederick II and Isabella II (Yolanda), the queen regnant of Jerusalem. Born in Andria, in the South Italian Kingdom of Sicily, his mother died shortly after giving birth to him and he succeeded her as monarch of the Crusader state of Jerusalem. By his father, Conrad was the grandson of the Hohenstaufen emperor Henry VI and great-grandson of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. He lived in Southern Italy until 1235, when he first visited the Kingdom of Germany. During this period his kingdom of Jerusalem, ruled by his father as regent through proxies, was racked by civil war until Conrad declared his majority and his father&#x27;s regency lost its validity.

In 1235, Conrad was betrothed to a daughter of Duke Otto II of Bavaria. She died before the marriage could take place, but Conrad later married her sister.

==Rise to power==
When Emperor Frederick II deposed his eldest son, Conrad&#x27;s rebellious half-brother King Henry (VII), Conrad succeeded him as duke of Swabia in 1235. However, the emperor was not able to have him elected King of the Romans until the 1237 Imperial Diet in Vienna. The electors were &quot;the archbishops of Mentz [Mainz], of Treves [Trier], and of Cologne, the bishops of &quot;Bamberg&quot;, of &quot;Ratisbon&quot; [Regensburg], of &quot;Frisingen&quot; [Freising], and of &quot;Padua&quot;, the count palatine of the Rhine, &quot;the duke of Bavaria&quot;, the king of Bohemia, the &quot;landgrave of Thuringia&quot;, and the &quot;duke of Carinthia&quot;&quot;. This title, though not acknowledged by Pope Gregory IX, presumed his future as a Holy Roman emperor. Prince-Archbishop Siegfried III of Mainz, in his capacity as German archchancellor, acted as regent for the minor until 1242, when Frederick chose Landgrave Henry Raspe of Thuringia, and King Wenceslaus I of Bohemia to assume this function. Conrad intervened directly in German politics from around 1240. He led the short-lived anti-Mongol crusade of 1241.

However, when Pope Innocent IV excommunicated Frederick in 1245 and declared Conrad deposed, Henry Raspe supported the pope and was in turn elected as a rival king of Germany on 22 May 1246. Henry Raspe defeated Conrad in the battle of Nidda in August 1246. Nevertheless, Henry Raspe’s wider support in Germany was weak and he died several months later. He was succeeded as a rival king by William of Holland.

Also in 1246, Conrad married Elisabeth, a daughter of Otto II of Bavaria. They had a son Conradin, in 1252. In 1250 Conrad temporarily settled the situation in Germany by defeating William of Holland and his Rhenish allies.

== Italian Campaign==
When Frederick II died in 1250, he passed Sicily and Germany, as well as the title of King of Jerusalem, to Conrad, but the struggle with the pope continued. After reverses in Germany in 1251, Conrad decided to invade Italy, hoping to regain the rich dominions of his father, and where his half-brother Manfred was acting as regent. In January 1252 he invaded Apulia with a Venetian fleet, successfully managing to restrain Manfred and exercise control of the country. That same year Conrad issued constitutions during the hoftag in Foggia, which were based on the well-known examples from Norman and early Staufer times. After the death of Frederick II, riots began in parts of the kingdom of Sicily and several cities attempted to escape the royal control, forcing Conrad to take military action in order to suppress the revolts. In October 1253 his troops conquered Naples. Steadily, Conrad consolidated his position in the kingdom and the formidable centralized government fashioned by his father continued to function effectively. New historical sources have shown, Conrad tried to reconcile with the pope, but no agreement was reached. 

The pope offered Sicily to Edmund Crouchback, son of Henry III of England, in 1253. Conrad was excommunicated on April 9, 1254. Nevertheless, Innocent’s support in central Italy was waning. Conrad mustered an army for a decisive assault on Rome but he died of malaria May 21, 1254 at his army camp in Lavello, Basilicata. Manfred continued the struggle with the Papacy, but after achieving success, he was killed at the Battle of Benevento by Charles I of Anjou. Conrad’s son, Conradin, attempted to reclaim the kingdom of Sicily but was also defeated by Charles of Anjou at the Battle of Tagliocozzo and executed soon after.

Conrad&#x27;s widow Elisabeth remarried to Meinhard II, Count of Tirol, who in 1286 became Duke of Carinthia.

Conrad&#x27;s death in 1254 began the Interregnum, during which no single ruler managed to gain undisputed control of Germany. Notably, many princes took this opportunity to gain more influence with their vast wealth and relative stability as opposed to the fractured monarchy which had proven to be somewhat unreliable. Similarly, many nobles accumulated greater autonomy without the guidance of a king. The Interregnum ended in 1273, with the election of Rudolph of Habsburg as King of the Romans.

==See also==
*Kings of Germany family tree. He was related to every other king of Germany.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="0" end="6" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="54" end="66" title="Hohenstaufen" label="Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="104" end="116" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q233809" start="153" end="177" title="Isabella II of Jerusalem" label="Isabella II of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q693614" start="205" end="222" title="King of Jerusalem" label="King of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="227" end="236" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399669" start="290" end="304" title="Duke of Swabia" label="Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883514" start="341" end="356" title="List of German monarchs" label="King of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="358" end="376" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="390" end="403" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="408" end="417" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q842151" start="488" end="502" title="King of Sicily" label="King of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="504" end="512" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="607" end="619" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q233809" start="624" end="645" title="Isabella II of Jerusalem" label="Isabella II (Yolanda)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19643" start="651" end="664" title="queen regnant" label="queen regnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="668" end="677" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q13486" start="687" end="693" title="Andria" label="Andria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="716" end="733" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="824" end="838" title="Crusader states" label="Crusader state"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="920" end="928" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="959" end="979" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="1046" end="1064" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Kingdom of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q510588" start="1162" end="1181" title="War of the Lombards" label="racked by civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q697412" start="1319" end="1337" title="Otto II of Bavaria" label="Otto II of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q163102" start="1535" end="1546" title="Henry (VII) of Germany" label="Henry (VII)"/>
<link wikidata="Q693980" start="1580" end="1586" title="Duchy of Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="1650" end="1668" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="1684" end="1697" title="Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Imperial Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1701" end="1707" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q70940" start="1749" end="1757" title="Siegfried III (archbishop of Mainz)" label="of Mentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417137" start="1767" end="1776" title="Theoderich von Wied" label="of Treves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597734" start="1790" end="1800" title="Heinrich I von Müllenark" label="of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1823" end="1830" title="List of bishops and archbishops of Bamberg#Bishops, 1007–1245" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1847" end="1855" title="List of the prince-bishops and bishops of Regensburg#Prince-Bishops of Regensburg" label="Ratisbon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1885" end="1894" title="List of bishops of Freising and archbishops of Munich and Freising#Prince-bishops of Freising" label="Frisingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q697412" start="1939" end="2003" title="Otto II, Duke of Bavaria" label="the count palatine of the Rhine, &amp;quot;the duke of Bavaria&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q175833" start="2005" end="2024" title="Wenceslaus I of Bohemia" label="the king of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61367" start="2036" end="2058" title="Henry Raspe" label="landgrave of Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q558946" start="2080" end="2097" title="Bernhard von Spanheim" label="duke of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="2150" end="2165" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Pope Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="2192" end="2210" title="Holy Roman emperor" label="Holy Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q70940" start="2230" end="2252" title="Siegfried III (archbishop of Mainz)" label="Siegfried III of Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q479702" start="2280" end="2294" title="archchancellor" label="archchancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="2305" end="2311" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q61367" start="2369" end="2380" title="Henry Raspe" label="Henry Raspe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311389" start="2384" end="2393" title="Duchy of Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q175833" start="2404" end="2427" title="Wenceslaus I, King of Bohemia" label="Wenceslaus I of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001520" start="2540" end="2567" title="anti-Mongol crusade of 1241" label="anti-Mongol crusade of 1241"/>
<link wikidata="Q160609" start="2584" end="2600" title="Pope Innocent IV" label="Pope Innocent IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q569625" start="2806" end="2811" title="Nidda, city" label="Nidda"/>
<link wikidata="Q77255" start="2960" end="2978" title="William II of Holland" label="William of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q261237" start="3010" end="3019" title="Elisabeth of Bavaria, Queen of Germany" label="Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q158246" start="3070" end="3078" title="Conradin" label="Conradin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77255" start="3162" end="3180" title="William, King of the Romans" label="William of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q693614" start="3314" end="3331" title="King of Jerusalem" label="King of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3446" end="3451" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164889" start="3514" end="3538" title="Manfred of Sicily" label="his half-brother Manfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="3588" end="3594" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="3602" end="3610" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q118335" start="3751" end="3757" title="hoftag" label="hoftag"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="3761" end="3767" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="4097" end="4103" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q447802" start="4399" end="4416" title="Edmund Crouchback" label="Edmund Crouchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="4425" end="4445" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="4467" end="4481" title="excommunication" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="4632" end="4639" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q52593" start="4673" end="4680" title="Lavello" label="Lavello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="4682" end="4692" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q283062" start="4792" end="4811" title="Battle of Benevento" label="Battle of Benevento"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="4815" end="4833" title="Charles I of Anjou" label="Charles I of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4951" end="4972" title="Battle of Tagliocozzo" label="Battle of Tagliocozzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q697204" start="5042" end="5069" title="Meinhard II, Count of Tirol" label="Meinhard II, Count of Tirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="5090" end="5107" title="Duke of Carinthia" label="Duke of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884356" start="5148" end="5159" title="Interregnum (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="5567" end="5586" title="Rudolph I of Germany" label="Rudolph of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433410" start="5625" end="5653" title="Kings of Germany family tree" label="Kings of Germany family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182759" wikidata="Q1121819" url="?curid=182759" title="Emirate of Transjordan">
<text>The Emirate of Transjordan (), officially known as the Amirate of Trans-Jordan, was a British protectorate established on 11 April 1921, which remained as such until achieving formal independence as the Kingdom of Transjordan in 1946.

After the Ottoman defeat in World War I, the Transjordan region was administered within OETA East; after the British withdrawal in 1919, this region gained de facto recognition as part of the Hashemite-ruled Arab Kingdom of Syria, administering an area broadly comprising the areas of the modern countries of Syria and Jordan. Transjordan became a no man&#x27;s land following the July 1920 Battle of Maysalun, during which period the British in neighbouring Mandatory Palestine chose to avoid &quot;any definite connection between it and Palestine&quot;. Abdullah entered the region in November 1920, moving to Amman on 2 March 1921; later in the month a conference was held with the British during which it was agreed that Abdullah bin Hussein would administer the territory under the auspices of the British Mandate for Palestine with a fully autonomous governing system.

The Hashemite dynasty ruled the protectorate, as well as the neighbouring Mandatory Iraq and, until 1925, the Kingdom of Hejaz to the south. On 25 May 1946, the emirate became the &quot;Hashemite Kingdom of Transjordan&quot;, achieving full independence on 17 June 1946 when in accordance with the Treaty of London ratifications were exchanged in Amman.

In 1949, after annexing the West Bank in Palestine, and &quot;uniting&quot; both banks of the Jordan river, it was constitutionally renamed the &quot;Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan&quot;, commonly referred to as Jordan.

==Background==
===Relevant British agreements===
From July 1915 to March 1916, a series of ten letters were exchanged between Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca, and Lieutenant Colonel Sir Henry McMahon, British High Commissioner to Egypt. In the letters – particularly that of 24 October 1915 – the British government agreed to recognize Arab independence after the war in exchange for the Sharif of Mecca launching the Arab Revolt against the Ottoman Empire. The area of Arab independence was defined to be &quot;in the limits and boundaries proposed by the Sherif of Mecca&quot;, with the exception of &quot;portions of Syria&quot; lying to the west of &quot;the districts of Damascus, Homs, Hama and Aleppo&quot;; conflicting interpretations of this description was to cause great controversy in subsequent years.

Around the same time, another secret treaty was negotiated between the United Kingdom and France, with assent from the Russian Empire and Italy, to define their mutually agreed spheres of influence and control in an eventual partition of the Ottoman Empire. The primary negotiations leading to the agreement occurred between 23 November 1915 and 3 January 1916, on which date the British and French diplomats, Mark Sykes and François Georges-Picot, initialled an agreed memorandum. The agreement was ratified by their respective governments on 9 and 16 May 1916. The agreement allocated to Britain control of what is today southern Israel and Palestine, Jordan and southern Iraq, and an additional small area that included the ports of Haifa and Acre to allow access to the Mediterranean. The Palestine region, with smaller boundaries than the later Mandatory Palestine, was to fall under an &quot;international administration&quot;. The agreement was initially used directly as the basis for the 1918 Anglo–French Modus Vivendi which agreed on a framework for the Occupied Enemy Territory Administration in the Levant. Shortly after the war, the French ceded Palestine and Mosul to the British. The geographical area that was later to become Transjordan was allocated to Britain.

===Late Ottoman rule===

Under the Ottoman Empire, most of Transjordan was part of the Syria Vilayet, primarily the sanjaks of Hauran and Ma&#x27;an. The inhabitants of northern Transjordan had traditionally associated with Syria, and those of southern Transjordan with the Arabian Peninsula. There was no Ottoman district known as Transjordan, there were the districts Ajlun, al-Balqa, al-Karak and Ma&#x27;an.
In the second half of the nineteenth century, The Tanzimat laid the foundation for state formation in the area. 
The Hejaz railway was completed in 1908 and greatly facilitated the Hajj pilgrimage along the Syrian route from Damascus as well as extending the Ottoman military and administrative reach southwards.

==Establishment of the Emirate==


===Arab Revolt and Kingdom of Syria===
During World War I, Transjordan saw much of the fighting of the Arab Revolt against Ottoman rule. Assisted by the British army officer T. E. Lawrence, the Sharif of Mecca Hussein bin Ali led the successful revolt which contributed to the Ottoman defeat and breaking up of its empire. Ottoman forces were forced to withdraw from Aqaba in 1917 after the Battle of Aqaba. In 1918 the British Foreign Office noted the Arab position East of the Jordan, Biger wrote: &quot;At the beginning of 1918, soon after the southern part of Palestine was conquered, the Foreign Office determined that Faisal’s authority over the area that he controls on the Eastern side of the Jordan river should be recognized. We can confirm this recognition of ours even if our forces do not currently control major parts of Transjordan.’&quot;
In March 1920, the Hashemite Kingdom of Syria was declared by Faisal bin Hussein in Damascus which encompassed most of what later became Transjordan. At this point, the sparsely inhabited southern part of Transjordan was claimed by both Faisal&#x27;s Syria and his father&#x27;s Kingdom of Hejaz. Following the provision of mandate to France and Britain at the San Remo conference in April, the British appointed Sir Herbert Samuel High Commissioner in Palestine from 1 July 1920 with a remit over the area west of the Jordan.

===The path to an Emirate===

After the French ended the Kingdom of Syria at the battle of Maysalun, Transjordan became, for a short time, a no man&#x27;s land or, as Samuel put it, &quot;..left politically derelict&quot;.
In August 1920, Sir Herbert Samuel&#x27;s request to extend the frontier of British territory beyond the River Jordan and to bring Transjordan under his administrative control was rejected. The British Foreign Secretary, Lord Curzon, proposed instead that British influence in Transjordan should be advanced by sending a few political officers, without military escort, to encourage self-government and give advice to local leaders in the territory. Following Curzon&#x27;s instruction Samuel set up a meeting with Transjordanian leaders where he presented British plans for the territory. The local leaders were reassured that Transjordan would not come under Palestinian administration and that there would be no disarmament or conscription. Samuel&#x27;s terms were accepted, he returned to Jerusalem, leaving Captain Alec Kirkbride as the British representative east of the Jordan until the arrival on 21 November 1920 of Abdullah, the brother of recently deposed king Faisal, marched into Ma&#x27;an at the head of an army of 300 men from the Hejazi tribe of &#x27;Utaybah. Without facing opposition Abdullah and his army had effectively occupied most of Transjordan by March 1921.

===Relationship with Palestine===

In early 1921, prior to the convening of the Cairo Conference, the Middle East Department of the Colonial Office set out the situation as follows:
Distinction to be drawn between Palestine and Trans-Jordan under the Mandate. His Majesty&#x27;s Government are responsible under the terms of the Mandate for establishing in Palestine a national home for the Jewish people. They are also pledged by the assurances given to the Sherif of Mecca in 1915 to recognise and support the independence of the Arabs in those portions of the (Turkish) vilayet of Damascus in which they are free to act without detriment to French interests. The western boundary of the Turkish vilayet of Damascus before the war was the River Jordan. Palestine and Trans-Jordan do not, therefore, stand upon quite the same footing. At the same time, the two areas are economically interdependent, and their development must be considered as a single problem. Further, His Majesty&#x27;s Government have been entrusted with the Mandate for &quot;Palestine&quot;. If they wish to assert their claim to Trans-Jordan and to avoid raising with other Powers the legal status of that area, they can only do so by proceeding upon the assumption that Trans-Jordan forms part of the area covered by the Palestine Mandate. In default of this assumption Trans-Jordan would be left, under article 132 of the Treaty of Sèvres, to the disposal of the principal Allied Powers. Some means must be found of giving effect in Trans-Jordan to the terms of the Mandate consistently with &quot;recognition and support of the independence of the Arabs&quot;.

The Cairo Conference of March 1921 was convened by Winston Churchill, then Britain&#x27;s Colonial Secretary. With the mandates of Palestine and Iraq awarded to Britain, Churchill wished to consult with Middle East experts. At his request, Gertrude Bell, Sir Percy Cox, T. E. Lawrence, Sir Kinahan Cornwallis, Sir Arnold T. Wilson, Iraqi minister of war Jaʿfar alAskari, Iraqi minister of finance Sasun Effendi (Sasson Heskayl), and others gathered in Cairo, Egypt. An additional outstanding question was the policy to be adopted in Transjordan to prevent anti-French military actions from being launched within the allied British zone of influence. The Hashemites were Associated Powers during the war, and a peaceful solution was urgently needed. The two most significant decisions of the conference were to offer the throne of Iraq to emir Faisal ibn Hussein (who became Faisal I of Iraq) and an emirate of Transjordan (now Jordan) to his brother Abdullah ibn Hussein (who became Abdullah I of Jordan). The conference provided the political blueprint for British administration in both Iraq and Transjordan, and in offering these two regions to the sons of Hussein bin Ali, Churchill stated that the spirit, if not the letter, of Britain&#x27;s wartime promises to the Arabs might be fulfilled. After further discussions between Churchill and Abdullah in Jerusalem, it was mutually agreed that Transjordan was accepted into the Palestine mandatory area as an Arab country apart from Palestine with the proviso that it would be, initially for six months, under the nominal rule of the emir Abdullah and that it would not form part of the Jewish national home to be established west of the River Jordan. Abdullah was then appointed Emir of the Transjordania region in April 1921.

On 21 March 1921, the Foreign and Colonial office legal advisers decided to introduce Article 25 into the Mandate for Palestine, which brought Transjordan under the Palestine mandate and stated that in that territory, Britain could &#x27;postpone or withhold&#x27; those articles of the Mandate concerning a Jewish national home. It was approved by Curzon on 31 March 1921, and the revised final draft of the mandate (including Transjordan) was forwarded to the League of Nations on 22 July 1922. In August 1922, the British government presented a memorandum to the League of Nations stating that Transjordan would be excluded from all the provisions dealing with Jewish settlement, and this memorandum was communicated to the League on 12 August and approved by it on 16 September.

===Establishment===
Abdullah established his government on 11 April 1921. Britain administered the part west of the Jordan as Palestine, and the part east of the Jordan as Transjordan. Technically they remained one mandate, but most official documents referred to them as if they were two separate mandates. The Palestine Order in Council, 1922, which established the legal basis for the Mandatory Government in Palestine, explicitly excluded Transjordan from its application apart from giving the High Commissioner some discretionary power there. In April/May 1923 Transjordan was granted a degree of independence with Abdullah as ruler and St John Philby as chief representative.

The Hashemite emir Abdullah, elder son of Britain&#x27;s wartime Arab ally Hussein bin Ali, was placed on the throne of Transjordan. The applicable parts of the Mandate for Palestine were stated in a decision of 16 September 1922, which provided for the separate administration of Transjordan. The government of the territory was, subject to the mandate, formed by Abdullah, brother of King Faisal I of Iraq, who had been at Amman since February 1921. Britain recognized Transjordan as an independent government on 15 May 1923, and gradually relinquished control, limiting its oversight to financial, military and foreign policy matters. This affected the goals of Revisionist Zionism, which sought a state on both banks of the Jordan. The movement claimed that it effectively severed Transjordan from Palestine, and so reduced the area on which a future Jewish state in the region could be established.

===Borders===
The southern border between Transjordan and Arabia was considered strategic for Transjordan in order to avoid being landlocked, with intended access to the sea via the Port of Aqaba. The southern region of Ma&#x27;an-Aqaba, a large area with a small population of just 10,000, was administered by OETA East (later the Arab Kingdom of Syria, and then Mandatory Transjordan) and claimed by the Kingdom of Hejaz. In OETA East, Faisal had appointed a kaymakam (or sub-governor) at Ma&#x27;an, whereas the kaymakam at Aqaba, who &quot;disregarded both Husein in Mecca and Feisal in Damascus with impunity&quot; had been instructed by Hussein to extend his authority to Ma&#x27;an. This technical dispute did not rise to any form of open struggle, and the Kingdom of Hejaz was to take de facto control after Faisal&#x27;s administration was defeated by the French. Following the 1924–25 Saudi conquest of Hejaz, Hussein&#x27;s army fled to the Ma&#x27;an region, which was then formally announced as annexed by Abdullah&#x27;s Transjordan. Ibn Saud privately agreed to respect this position in an exchange of letters at the time of the 1927 Treaty of Jeddah.

The Negev region was added to Palestine on 10 July 1922, having been conceded by British representative John Philby &quot;in Trans-Jordan&#x27;s name&quot;. Abdullah made a request for the Negev to be added to Transjordan in late 1922, and again in 1925, but this was rejected.

The location of the Eastern border between Transjordan and Iraq was considered strategic with respect to the proposed construction of what became the Kirkuk–Haifa oil pipeline. It was first set out on 2 December 1922, in a treaty to which Transjordan was not party to – the Uqair Protocol between Iraq and Nejd. It described the western end of the Iraq-Nejd boundary as &quot;the Jebel Anazan situated in the neighbourhood of the intersection of latitude 32 degrees north longitude 39 degrees east where the Iraq-Najd boundary terminated&quot;, thereby implicitly confirming this as the point at which the Iraq-Nejd boundary became the Transjordan-Nejd boundary. This followed a proposal from Lawrence in January 1922 that Transjordan be extended to include Wadi Sirhan as far south as al-Jauf, in order to protect Britain&#x27;s route to India and contain Ibn Saud.

France transferred the District of Ramtha from Syria in 1921.

===Population===

With respect to the demographics, in 1924 the British stated: &quot;No census of the population has been taken, but the figure is thought to be in the neighbourhood of 200,000, of whom some 10,000 are Circassians and Chechen; there are about 15,000 Christians and the remainder, in the main, are Moslem Arabs.&quot; No census was taken throughout the British mandate period, but the population was estimated to have grown to 300,000 – 350,000 by the early 1940s.
===Defence===
The most serious threats to Abdullah&#x27;s position in Transjordan were repeated Wahhabi incursions by the Ikhwan tribesmen from Najd in modern Saudi Arabia into southern parts of his territory. The emir was powerless to repel those raids by himself, and had to appeal for help to the British who maintained a military base with a small air force at Marka, close to Amman. The British military force was the primary obstacle against the Ikhwan between 1922 and 1924, and was also utilized to help Abdullah with the suppression of local rebellions at Kura, and later by Sultan Adwan, in 1921 and 1923 respectively.

==Establishment of the kingdom==


Transfer of authority to an Arab government took place gradually in Transjordan, starting with Abdullah&#x27;s appointment as Emir of Transjordan on 1 April 1921, and the formation of his first government on 11 April 1921. The independent administration was recognised in a statement made public (the statement had been agreed in October 1922 following the approval of the revised Mandate on 16 September 1922 with publication made conditional on completion of a probationary period) in Amman on 25 May 1923: &quot;Subject to the approval of the League of Nations, His Britannic Majesty will recognise the existence of an independent Government in Trans-jordan under the rule of His Highness the Amir Abdullah, provided that such Government is constitutional and places His Britannic Majesty in a position to fulfil his international obligations in respect of the territory by means of an Agreement to be concluded with His Highness&quot;

During the eleventh session of the League of Nations&#x27; Permanent Mandates Commission in 1927, Sir John E. Shuckburgh summarised the status of Transjordan:
It is not part of Palestine but it is part of the area administered by the British Government under the authority of the Palestine Mandate. The special arrangements there really go back to the old controversy about our war time pledges to the Arabs which I have no wish to revive. The point is that on our own interpretation of those pledges the country East of the Jordan – though not the country West of the Jordan – falls within the area in respect of which we promised during the war to recognise and support the independence of the Arabs. Transjordan is in a wholly different position from Palestine and it was considered necessary that special arrangements should be made there

===1928 treaty===
Transfer of most administrative functions occurred in 1928, including the creation of the post of High Commissioner for Transjordan. The status of the mandate was not altered by the agreement between the United Kingdom and the Emirate concluded on 20 February 1928. It recognised the existence of an independent government in Transjordan and defined and limited its powers. The ratifications were exchanged on 31 October 1929.&quot;

Transjordan remained under British control until the first-Transjordanian treaty was concluded in 1928. Transjordan became nominally independent, although the British still maintained a military presence and control of foreign affairs and retained some financial control over the Emirate. This failed to respond to Transjordanian demands for a fully sovereign and independent state, a failure that led to widespread disaffection with the treaty among Transjordanians, prompting them to seek a national conference (25 July 1928), the first of its kind, to examine the articles of the treaty and adopt a plan of political action.

According to the U.S. State Department &quot;Digest of International Law&quot;, the status of the mandate was not altered by the agreement between the United Kingdom and the Emirate concluded on 20 February 1928 which recognized the existence of an independent government in Transjordan and defined and limited its powers. The ratifications were exchanged on 31 October 1929.&quot;

===1946 independence===

On 17 January 1946, Ernest Bevin, the British Foreign Secretary, announced in a speech at the General Assembly of the United Nations that the British Government intended to take steps in the near future to establish Transjordan as a fully independent and sovereign state. The Treaty of London was signed by the British Government and the Emir of Transjordan on 22 March 1946 as a mechanism to recognise the full independence of Transjordan upon ratification by both countries parliaments. Transjordan&#x27;s impending independence was recognized on 18 April 1946 by the League of Nations during the last meeting of that organization. On 25 May 1946 the Transjordan became the &quot;Hashemite Kingdom of Transjordan&quot; when the ruling &#x27;Amir&#x27; was re-designated as &#x27;King&#x27; by the parliament of Transjordan on the day it ratified the Treaty of London. 25 May is still celebrated as independence day in Jordan although officially the mandate for Transjordan ended on 17 June 1946 when in accordance with the Treaty of London the ratifications were exchanged in Amman and Transjordan gained full independence. In 1949 the country&#x27;s official name was changed to the &quot;Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan&quot;.

When King Abdullah applied for membership in the newly formed United Nations, his request was vetoed by the Soviet Union, citing that the nation was not &quot;fully independent&quot; of British control. This resulted in another treaty in March 1948 with Britain in which all restrictions on sovereignty were removed. Despite this, Jordan was not a full member of the United Nations until 14 December 1955.
The Anglo-American treaty, also known as the Palestine Mandate Convention, permitted the US to delay any unilateral British action to terminate the mandate. The earlier proclamation of the independence of Syria and Lebanon had said &quot;the independence and sovereignty of Syria and Lebanon will not affect the juridical situation as it results from the Mandate Act. Indeed, this situation could be changed only with the agreement of the Council of the League of Nations, with the consent of the Government of the United States, a signatory of the Franco-American Convention of 4 April 1924&quot;.

The U.S. adopted the policy that formal termination of the mandate with respect to Transjordan would follow the earlier precedent established by the French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon. That meant termination would generally be recognized upon the admission of Transjordan into the United Nations as a fully independent country. Members of the U.S. Congress introduced resolutions demanding that the U.S. Representative to the United Nations be instructed to seek postponement of any international determination of the status of Transjordan until the future status of Palestine as a whole was determined. The U.S. State Department also received a legal argument from Rabbis Wise and Silver objecting to the independence of Transjordan. At the 1947 Pentagon Conference, the U.S. advised Great Britain it was withholding recognition of Transjordan pending a decision on the Palestine question by the United Nations.

Transjordan applied for membership of the United Nations on 26 June 1946. The Polish representative said that he did not object to the independence of Transjordan, but requested that the application be postponed for a year on the grounds that legal procedures required by the Covenant of the League of Nations had not been carried out. The British representative responded that the League of Nations had already approved the termination of the mandate in Transjordan. When the issue was voted on, Transjordan&#x27;s application achieved the required total number of votes, but was vetoed by the Soviet Union which did not approve membership of any countries with which it did not have diplomatic relations. This problem and similar problems caused by vetoes of the memberships of Ireland, Portugal, Austria, Finland and Italy took several years and many votes to solve. Jordan was finally admitted to membership on 14 December 1955.

==See also==

* Oultrejordain
* Transjordan (region)

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
===Cited sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 


===General references===
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* Jordan – History: The making of Transjordan, King Hussein&#x27;s official page
* U.S. Library of Congress country study</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1121819" start="4" end="26" title="Emirate of Transjordan" label="Emirate of Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121819" start="55" end="78" title="Emirate of Transjordan" label="Amirate of Trans-Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479969" start="86" end="106" title="British protectorate" label="British protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834492" start="281" end="299" title="Transjordan (region)" label="Transjordan region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075820" start="324" end="333" title="Occupied Enemy Territory Administration" label="OETA East"/>
<link wikidata="Q146600" start="444" end="465" title="Arab Kingdom of Syria" label="Arab Kingdom of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="545" end="550" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="555" end="561" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65043490" start="575" end="602" title="Interregnum (Transjordan)" label="became a no man&amp;#x27;s land"/>
<link wikidata="Q994316" start="627" end="645" title="Battle of Maysalun" label="Battle of Maysalun"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="695" end="714" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q65043491" start="792" end="836" title="Abdullah&amp;#x27;s entry into Transjordan" label="Abdullah entered the region in November 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017751" start="892" end="902" title="Cairo Conference (1921)" label="conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q192780" start="961" end="981" title="Abdullah I of Jordan" label="Abdullah bin Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970316" start="1039" end="1068" title="Mandate for Palestine" label="British Mandate for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774915" start="1116" end="1125" title="Hashemite" label="Hashemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q146720" start="1186" end="1200" title="Mandatory Iraq" label="Mandatory Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q956357" start="1222" end="1238" title="Kingdom of Hejaz" label="Kingdom of Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q189898" start="1273" end="1280" title="emirate" label="emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q541293" start="1410" end="1426" title="Treaty of London (1946)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893000" start="1482" end="1504" title="Jordanian annexation of the West Bank" label="annexing the West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="1676" end="1682" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128906" start="1811" end="1843" title="Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca" label="Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368198" start="1849" end="1867" title="Lieutenant Colonel (British Army)" label="Lieutenant Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27118" start="1868" end="1885" title="Henry McMahon (diplomat)" label="Sir Henry McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854654" start="1887" end="1921" title="List of diplomats of the United Kingdom to Egypt" label="British High Commissioner to Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q284868" start="2054" end="2069" title="quid pro quo" label="in exchange for"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109402" start="2074" end="2089" title="Sharif of Mecca" label="Sharif of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q239060" start="2104" end="2115" title="Arab Revolt" label="Arab Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2128" end="2142" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109402" start="2243" end="2258" title="Sherif of Mecca" label="Sherif of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="2306" end="2311" title="Syria (region)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="2362" end="2370" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="2372" end="2376" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q173545" start="2378" end="2382" title="Hama" label="Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="2387" end="2393" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498487" start="2532" end="2545" title="secret treaty" label="secret treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2621" end="2635" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="2679" end="2699" title="Sphere of influence" label="spheres of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145246" start="2727" end="2758" title="partition of the Ottoman Empire" label="partition of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q332612" start="2912" end="2922" title="Mark Sykes" label="Mark Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384702" start="2927" end="2949" title="François Georges-Picot" label="François Georges-Picot"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="3134" end="3140" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="3145" end="3154" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="3156" end="3162" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="3176" end="3180" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="3238" end="3243" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="3248" end="3252" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="3295" end="3311" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine region"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="3352" end="3371" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063772" start="3499" end="3530" title="1918 Anglo–French Modus Vivendi" label="1918 Anglo–French Modus Vivendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075820" start="3567" end="3606" title="Occupied Enemy Territory Administration" label="Occupied Enemy Territory Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065137" start="3645" end="3681" title="1918 Clemenceau–Lloyd George Agreement (Middle East)" label="the French ceded Palestine and Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3819" end="3833" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372503" start="3871" end="3884" title="Syria Vilayet" label="Syria Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12216999" start="3911" end="3917" title="Hauran Sanjak" label="Hauran"/>
<link wikidata="Q31616" start="3922" end="3932" title="Ma&amp;#x27;an" label="Ma&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="4058" end="4075" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141858" start="4154" end="4159" title="Ajloun" label="Ajlun"/>
<link wikidata="Q105062625" start="4161" end="4169" title="Balqa (region)" label="al-Balqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31572" start="4171" end="4179" title="al-Karak" label="al-Karak"/>
<link wikidata="Q31616" start="4184" end="4194" title="Ma&amp;#x27;an" label="Ma&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q330961" start="4246" end="4254" title="Tanzimat" label="Tanzimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q924225" start="4313" end="4326" title="Hejaz railway" label="Hejaz railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4591" end="4602" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q239060" start="4648" end="4659" title="Arab Revolt" label="Arab Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="4719" end="4733" title="T. E. Lawrence" label="T. E. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109402" start="4739" end="4754" title="Sharif of Mecca" label="Sharif of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q128906" start="4755" end="4770" title="Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca" label="Hussein bin Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="4841" end="4866" title="Dissolution of the Ottoman Empire" label="breaking up of its empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180522" start="4912" end="4917" title="Aqaba" label="Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081944" start="4936" end="4951" title="Battle of Aqaba" label="Battle of Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q146600" start="5429" end="5445" title="Arab Kingdom of Syria" label="Kingdom of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q212486" start="5462" end="5480" title="Faisal bin Hussein" label="Faisal bin Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q956357" start="5679" end="5695" title="Kingdom of Hejaz" label="Kingdom of Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365425" start="5761" end="5780" title="San Remo conference" label="San Remo conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q335218" start="5817" end="5831" title="Herbert Samuel, 1st Viscount Samuel" label="Herbert Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q994316" start="6009" end="6027" title="battle of Maysalun" label="battle of Maysalun"/>
<link wikidata="Q773403" start="6069" end="6087" title="no man&amp;#x27;s land" label="no man&amp;#x27;s land"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="6256" end="6268" title="River Jordan" label="River Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q271878" start="6372" end="6383" title="George Curzon, 1st Marquess Curzon of Kedleston" label="Lord Curzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65043490" start="6534" end="6549" title="Jerash Local Government" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q785638" start="6972" end="6986" title="Alec Kirkbride" label="Alec Kirkbride"/>
<link wikidata="Q192780" start="7077" end="7085" title="Abdullah I of Jordan" label="Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q31616" start="7145" end="7155" title="Ma&amp;#x27;an" label="Ma&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060531" start="7215" end="7228" title="&amp;#x27;Utaybah" label="&amp;#x27;Utaybah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="7471" end="7486" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q182515" start="8738" end="8754" title="Treaty of Sèvres" label="Treaty of Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017751" start="8983" end="9013" title="Cairo Conference (1921)" label="Cairo Conference of March 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9030" end="9047" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q231360" start="9219" end="9232" title="Gertrude Bell" label="Gertrude Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116169" start="9269" end="9287" title="Kinahan Cornwallis" label="Kinahan Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529157" start="9333" end="9348" title="Jaafar Al-Askari" label="Jaʿfar alAskari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905728" start="9376" end="9406" title="Sassoon Eskell" label="Sasun Effendi (Sasson Heskayl)"/>
<link wikidata="Q212486" start="9853" end="9869" title="Faisal I of Iraq" label="Faisal I of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q192780" start="9962" end="9982" title="Abdullah I of Jordan" label="Abdullah I of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220693" start="10619" end="10639" title="Homeland for the Jewish people" label="Jewish national home"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970316" start="10867" end="10888" title="Mandate for Palestine" label="Mandate for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834495" start="11297" end="11319" title="Transjordan memorandum" label="presented a memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084675" start="11857" end="11889" title="Constitution of Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine Order in Council, 1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q584868" start="12187" end="12201" title="St John Philby" label="St John Philby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774915" start="12232" end="12241" title="Hashemite" label="Hashemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="12242" end="12246" title="emir" label="emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q192780" start="12247" end="12255" title="Abdullah I of Jordan" label="Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q592710" start="12893" end="12912" title="Revisionist Zionism" label="Revisionist Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="13263" end="13273" title="Landlocked country" label="landlocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217686" start="13315" end="13328" title="Port of Aqaba" label="Port of Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q606340" start="13353" end="13363" title="Ma&amp;#x27;an Governorate" label="Ma&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q260796" start="13364" end="13369" title="Aqaba Governorate" label="Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q65041920" start="13428" end="13555" title="Occupation of Ma&amp;#x27;an" label="administered by OETA East (later the Arab Kingdom of Syria, and then Mandatory Transjordan) and claimed by the Kingdom of Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137527" start="13594" end="13602" title="kaymakam" label="kaymakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427167" start="14028" end="14051" title="Saudi conquest of Hejaz" label="Saudi conquest of Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035545" start="14277" end="14298" title="Treaty of Jeddah (1927)" label="1927 Treaty of Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="14305" end="14310" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899917" start="14730" end="14755" title="Kirkuk–Haifa oil pipeline" label="Kirkuk–Haifa oil pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q94635" start="14854" end="14868" title="Uqair Protocol of 1922" label="Uqair Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135260" start="15035" end="15051" title="32nd parallel north" label="32 degrees north"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186139" start="15062" end="15077" title="39th meridian east" label="39 degrees east"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530196" start="15338" end="15349" title="Wadi Sirhan" label="Wadi Sirhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719371" start="15366" end="15373" title="Dumat al-Jandal" label="al-Jauf"/>
<link wikidata="Q12229254" start="16088" end="16106" title="Ikhwan raids on Transjordan" label="Wahhabi incursions"/>
<link wikidata="Q143509" start="16114" end="16120" title="Ikhwan" label="Ikhwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208154" start="16136" end="16140" title="Najd" label="Najd"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="16151" end="16163" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="16344" end="16353" title="RAF" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="16373" end="16378" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q143509" start="16444" end="16450" title="Ikhwan" label="Ikhwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445497" start="16557" end="16561" title="Kura Rebellion" label="Kura"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686917" start="16576" end="16588" title="Adwan Rebellion" label="Sultan Adwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="17632" end="17649" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169219" start="17656" end="17685" title="Permanent Mandates Commission" label="Permanent Mandates Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699991" start="17695" end="17717" title="John Evelyn Shuckburgh" label="Sir John E. Shuckburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="19539" end="19560" title="U.S. State Department" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q332365" start="19950" end="19962" title="Ernest Bevin" label="Ernest Bevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="19976" end="19993" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="20024" end="20062" title="General Assembly of the United Nations" label="General Assembly of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q541293" start="20206" end="20222" title="Treaty of London (1946)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="20500" end="20517" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="21220" end="21234" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21266" end="21278" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q139708" start="22313" end="22353" title="French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon" label="French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006572" start="24034" end="24047" title="Oultrejordain" label="Oultrejordain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834492" start="24050" end="24070" title="Transjordan (region)" label="Transjordan (region)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182765" wikidata="Q421894" url="?curid=182765" title="Prussian blue">
<text>Prussian blue (also known as Berlin blue, Brandenburg blue, Parisian and Paris blue) is a dark blue pigment produced by oxidation of ferrous ferrocyanide salts. It has the chemical formula . Turnbull&#x27;s blue is essentially identical chemically, excepting that it has different impurities and particle sizes—because it is made from different reagents—and thus it has a slightly different color.

Prussian blue was created in the early 18th century and is the first modern synthetic pigment. It is prepared as a very fine colloidal dispersion, because the compound is not soluble in water. It contains variable amounts of other ions and its appearance depends sensitively on the size of the colloidal particles. The pigment is used in paints, it became prominent in 19th-century () Japanese woodblock prints, and it is the traditional &quot;blue&quot; in technical blueprints.

In medicine, orally administered Prussian blue is used as an antidote for certain kinds of heavy metal poisoning, e.g., by thallium(I) and radioactive isotopes of caesium. The therapy exploits Prussian blue&#x27;s ion-exchange properties and high affinity for certain &quot;soft&quot; metal cations. It is on the World Health Organization&#x27;s List of Essential Medicines, the most important medications needed in a basic health system.

Prussian blue lent its name to prussic acid (hydrogen cyanide) derived from it. In German, hydrogen cyanide is called (&#x27;blue acid&#x27;). Cyanide also acquired its name from this relationship.

==History==

Prussian blue pigment is significant since it was the first stable and relatively lightfast blue pigment to be widely used since the loss of knowledge regarding the synthesis of Egyptian blue. European painters had previously used a number of pigments such as indigo dye, smalt, and Tyrian purple, and the extremely expensive ultramarine made from lapis lazuli. Japanese painters and woodblock print artists, likewise, did not have access to a long-lasting blue pigment until they began to import Prussian blue from Europe.

Prussian blue (also () was probably synthesized for the first time by the paint maker Johann Jacob Diesbach in Berlin around 1706. The pigment is believed to have been accidentally created when Diesbach used potash tainted with blood to create some red cochineal dye. The original dye required potash, ferric sulfate, and dried cochineal. Instead, the blood, potash, and iron sulfate reacted to create a compound known as iron ferrocyanide, which, unlike the desired red pigment, has a very distinct blue hue. It was named and in 1709 by its first trader.

The pigment readily replaced the expensive lapis lazuli-derived ultramarine and was an important topic in the letters exchanged between Johann Leonhard Frisch and the president of the Prussian Academy of Sciences, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, between 1708 and 1716. It is first mentioned in a letter written by Frisch to Leibniz, from March 31, 1708. Not later than 1708, Frisch began to promote and sell the pigment across Europe. By August 1709, the pigment had been termed ; by November 1709, the German name had been used for the first time by Frisch. Frisch himself is the author of the first known publication of Prussian blue in the paper in 1710, as can be deduced from his letters. Diesbach had been working for Frisch since about 1701.

To date, the &quot;Entombment of Christ&quot;, dated 1709 by Pieter van der Werff (Picture Gallery, Sanssouci, Potsdam) is the oldest known painting where Prussian blue was used. Around 1710, painters at the Prussian court were already using the pigment. At around the same time, Prussian blue arrived in Paris, where Antoine Watteau and later his successors Nicolas Lancret and Jean-Baptiste Pater used it in their paintings. François Boucher used the pigment extensively for both blues and greens.

In 1731, Georg Ernst Stahl published an account of the first synthesis of Prussian blue. The story involves not only Diesbach, but also Johann Konrad Dippel. Diesbach was attempting to create a red lake pigment from cochineal, but obtained the blue instead as a result of the contaminated potash he was using. He borrowed the potash from Dippel, who had used it to produce his animal oil. No other known historical source mentions Dippel in this context. It is, therefore, difficult to judge the reliability of this story today. In 1724, the recipe was finally published by John Woodward.

In 1752, French chemist Pierre J. Macquer made the important step of showing Prussian blue could be reduced to a salt of iron and a new acid, which could be used to reconstitute the dye. The new acid, hydrogen cyanide, first isolated from Prussian blue in pure form and characterized in 1782 by Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele, was eventually given the name (literally &quot;blue acid&quot;) because of its derivation from Prussian blue, and in English became known popularly as prussic acid. Cyanide, a colorless anion that forms in the process of making Prussian blue, derives its name from the Greek word for dark blue.

In the late 1800s, Rabbi Gershon Henoch Leiner, the Hasidic Rebbe of Radzin, dyed tzitziyot with Prussian blue made with sepia, believing that this was the true techeiles dye. Even though some have questioned its identity as techeiles because of its artificial production, and claimed that had Rabbi Leiner been aware of this he would have retracted his position that his dye was techeiles, others have disputed this and claimed that Rabbi Leiner would not have retracted.

===Military symbol===
From the beginning of the 18th century, Prussian blue was the predominant uniform coat color worn by the infantry and artillery regiments of the Prussian Army. As (dark blue), this shade achieved a symbolic importance and continued to be worn by most German soldiers for ceremonial and off-duty occasions until the outbreak of World War I, when it was superseded by greenish-gray field gray ().

==Synthesis==
Prussian blue is produced by oxidation of ferrous ferrocyanide salts. These white solids have the formula where = or . The iron in this material is all ferrous, hence the absence of deep color associated with the mixed valency. Oxidation of this white solid with hydrogen peroxide or sodium chlorate produces ferricyanide and affords Prussian blue.

A &quot;soluble&quot; form, , which is really colloidal, can be made from potassium ferrocyanide and iron(III):
The similar reaction of potassium ferricyanide and iron(II) results in the same colloidal solution, because is converted into ferrocyanide.

The &quot;insoluble&quot; Prussian blue is obtained if, in the reactions above, an excess of Fe(III) is added:

Despite the fact that it is prepared from cyanide salts, Prussian blue is not toxic because the cyanide groups are tightly bound to iron. Both ferrocyanide (() and ferricyanide (() are particularly stable and non-toxic polymeric cyanometalates due to the strong iron coordination to cyanide ions. Although cyanide bonds well with transition metals in general like chromium, these non-iron coordination compounds are not as stable as iron cyanides, therefore increasing the risk of releasing CN− ions, and subsequently comparative toxicity.

===Turnbull&#x27;s blue===

In former times, the addition of iron(II) salts to a solution of ferricyanide was thought to afford a material different from Prussian blue. The product was traditionally named Turnbull&#x27;s blue (TB). X-ray diffraction and electron diffraction methods have shown, though, that the structures of PB and TB are identical. The differences in the colors for TB and PB reflect subtle differences in the methods of precipitation, which strongly affect particle size and impurity content.

===Prussian white===
Prussian white, also known as &quot;Berlin white&quot; or &quot;Everett&#x27;s salt&quot;, is the sodium end-member of the totally reduced form of the Prussian blue in which all iron is present as Fe(II). It is a sodium hexacyanoferrate of Fe(II) of formula . Its molecular weight value is .

A more generic formula allowing for the substitution of cations by cations is (in which A or B = or ).

The Prussian white is closely related to the Prussian blue, but it significantly differs by its crystallographic structure, molecular framework pore size, and its color. The cubic sodium Prussian white, , and potassium Prussian white, , are candidates as cathode materials for Na-ion batteries. The insertion of and cations in the framework of potassium Prussian white provides favorable synergistic effects improving the long-term battery stability and increasing the number of possible recharge cycles, lengthening its service life. The large-size framework of Prussian white easily accommodating and cations facilitates their intercalation and subsequent extraction during the charge/discharge cycles. The spacious and rigid host crystal structure contributes to its volumetric stability against the internal swelling stress and strain developing in sodium-batteries after many cycles. The material also offers perspectives of high energy densities (Ah/kg) while providing high recharge rate, even at low temperature.

==Properties==
Prussian blue is a microcrystalline blue powder. It is insoluble, but the crystallites tend to form a colloid. Such colloids can pass through fine filters. Despite being one of the oldest known synthetic compounds, the composition of Prussian blue remained uncertain for many years. Its precise identification was complicated by three factors:
* Prussian blue is extremely insoluble, but also tends to form colloids
* Traditional syntheses tend to afford impure compositions
* Even pure Prussian blue is structurally complex, defying routine crystallographic analysis

===Crystal structure===


The chemical formula of insoluble Prussian blue is , where &quot;x&quot; = 14–16. The structure was determined by using IR spectroscopy, Mössbauer spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography, and neutron crystallography. Since X-ray diffraction cannot easily distinguish carbon from nitrogen in the presence of heavier elements such as iron, the location of these lighter elements is deduced by spectroscopic means, as well as by observing the distances from the iron atom centers. Neutron diffraction can easily distinguish N and C atoms, and it has been used to determine the detailed structure of Prussian blue and its analogs.

PB has a face centered cubic lattice structure, with four iron(III) ions per unit cell. &quot;Soluble&quot; PB crystals contain interstitial ions; insoluble PB has interstitial water, instead. In ideal insoluble PB crystals, the cubic framework is built from Fe(II)–C–N–Fe(III) sequences, with Fe(II)–carbon distances of 1.92 Å and Fe(III)–nitrogen distances of 2.03 Å. One-fourth of the sites of subunits (supposedly at random) are vacant (empty), leaving three such groups on average per unit cell. The empty nitrogen sites are filled with water molecules instead, which are coordinated to Fe(III).

The Fe(II) centers, which are low spin, are surrounded by six carbon ligands in an octahedral configuration. The Fe(III) centers, which are high spin, are octahedrally surrounded on average by 4.5 nitrogen atoms and 1.5 oxygen atoms (the oxygen from the six coordinated water molecules). Around eight (interstitial) water molecules are present in the unit cell, either as isolated molecules or hydrogen bonded to the coordinated water. It is worth noting that in soluble hexacyanoferrates Fe(II or III) is always coordinated to the carbon atom of a cyanide, whereas in crystalline Prussian blue Fe ions are coordinated to both C and N.

The composition is notoriously variable due to the presence of lattice defects, allowing it to be hydrated to various degrees as water molecules are incorporated into the structure to occupy cation vacancies. The variability of Prussian blue&#x27;s composition is attributable to its low solubility, which leads to its rapid precipitation without the time to achieve full equilibrium between solid and liquid.

===Color===
Prussian blue is strongly colored and tends towards black and dark blue when mixed into oil paints. The exact hue depends on the method of preparation, which dictates the particle size. The intense blue color of Prussian blue is associated with the energy of the transfer of electrons from Fe(II) to Fe(III). Many such mixed-valence compounds absorb certain wavelengths of visible light resulting from intervalence charge transfer. In this case, orange-red light around 680 nanometers in wavelength is absorbed, and the reflected light appears blue as a result.

Like most high-chroma pigments, Prussian blue cannot be accurately displayed on a computer display. Prussian blue is electrochromic—changing from blue to colorless upon reduction. This change is caused by reduction of the Fe(III) to Fe(II), eliminating the intervalence charge transfer that causes Prussian blue&#x27;s color.

==Use==
===Pigment===

Because it is easily made, cheap, nontoxic, and intensely colored, Prussian blue has attracted many applications. It was adopted as a pigment very soon after its invention and was almost immediately widely used in oil paints, watercolor, and dyeing. The dominant uses are for pigments: about 12,000 tonnes of Prussian blue are produced annually for use in black and bluish inks. A variety of other pigments also contain the material. Engineer&#x27;s blue and the pigment formed on cyanotypes—giving them their common name blueprints. Certain crayons were once colored with Prussian blue (later relabeled midnight blue). Similarly, Prussian blue is the basis for laundry bluing.

Nanoparticles of Prussian blue are used as pigments in some cosmetics ingredients, according to the European Union Observatory for Nanomaterials.

===Medicine===

Prussian blue&#x27;s ability to incorporate monovalent metallic cations () makes it useful as a sequestering agent for certain toxic heavy metals. Pharmaceutical-grade Prussian blue in particular is used for people who have ingested thallium () or radioactive caesium (). According to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), an adult male can eat at least 10 g of Prussian blue per day without serious harm. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has determined the &quot;500-mg Prussian blue capsules, when manufactured under the conditions of an approved New Drug Application, can be found safe and effective therapy&quot; in certain poisoning cases. Radiogardase (Prussian blue insoluble capsules ) is a commercial product for the removal of caesium-137 from the intestine, so indirectly from the bloodstream by intervening in the enterohepatic circulation of caesium-137, reducing the internal residency time (and exposure) by about two-thirds. In particular, it was used to adsorb and remove from those poisoned in the Goiânia accident in Brazil.

===Stain for iron===
Prussian blue is a common histopathology stain used by pathologists to detect the presence of iron in biopsy specimens, such as in bone marrow samples. The original stain formula, known historically (1867) as &quot;Perls Prussian blue&quot; after its inventor, German pathologist Max Perls (1843–1881), used separate solutions of potassium ferrocyanide and acid to stain tissue (these are now used combined, just before staining). Iron deposits in tissue then form the purple Prussian blue dye in place, and are visualized as blue or purple deposits.
===By machinists and toolmakers===
Engineer&#x27;s blue, Prussian blue in an oily base, is the traditional material used for spotting metal surfaces such as surface plates and bearings for hand scraping. A thin layer of nondrying paste is applied to a reference surface and transfers to the high spots of the workpiece. The toolmaker then scrapes, stones, or otherwise removes the marked high spots. Prussian blue is preferable because it will not abrade the extremely precise reference surfaces as many ground pigments may. Other uses include marking gear teeth during assembly to determine their interface characteristics.

=== In analytical chemistry ===
Prussian blue is formed in the Prussian blue assay for total phenols. Samples and phenolic standards are given acidic ferric chloride and ferricyanide, which is reduced to ferrocyanide by the phenols. The ferric chloride and ferrocyanide react to form Prussian blue. Comparing the absorbance at 700 nm of the samples to the standards allows for the determination of total phenols or polyphenols.

=== Household use ===
Prussian blue is present in some preparations of laundry bluing, such as Mrs. Stewart&#x27;s Bluing.

==Research==
=== Battery materials ===

Prussian blue (PB) has been studied for its applications in electrochemical energy storage since 1978. Prussian blue proper (the Fe-Fe solid) shows two well-defined reversible redox transitions in K+ solutions. Weakly solvated potassium ions (as well as Rb+ and Cs+, not shown) have the solvated radius, which fits the framework of Prussian Blue. On the other hand, the sizes of solvated Na+ and Li+ are too large for the PB cavity, and the intercalation of these ions is hindered and much slower. The low and high voltage sets of peaks in the cyclic voltammetry correspond to 1 and ⅔ electron per Fe atom, respectively. The high voltage set is due to the transition at the low-spin Fe ions coordinated to C-atoms. The low-voltage set is due to high-spin Fe ion coordinated to N-atoms.

It is possible to replace the Fe metal centers in PB with other metal ions such as Mn, Co, Ni, Zn, to form electrochemically active Prussian blue analogues (PBAs). PB/PBAs and their derivatives have also been evaluated as electrode materials for reversible alkali-ion insertion and extraction in lithium-ion battery, sodium-ion battery, and potassium-ion battery.

==See also==
* Blue pigments
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* The FDA&#x27;s page on Prussian blue
* The CDC&#x27;s page on Prussian blue
* National Pollutant Inventory – Cyanide compounds fact sheet
* Heyltex Corporation distributors of Radiogardase (Prussian blue insoluble capsules) 
* Sarah Lowengard, &quot;Prussian Blue&quot; in &quot;The Creation of Color in Eighteenth Century Europe&quot; Columbia University Press, 2006
* Prussian blue, ColourLex</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="0" end="13" title="Prussian blue" label="Prussian blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="29" end="40" title="Prussian blue" label="Berlin blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="42" end="58" title="Prussian blue" label="Brandenburg blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="60" end="68" title="Prussian blue" label="Parisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="73" end="83" title="Prussian blue" label="Paris blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088" start="95" end="99" title="blue" label="blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="100" end="107" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963663" start="141" end="153" title="ferrocyanide" label="ferrocyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="172" end="188" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="191" end="211" title="Prussian blue" label="Turnbull&amp;#x27;s blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356542" start="345" end="352" title="reagent" label="reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q273499" start="475" end="484" title="chemical synthesis" label="synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181780" start="524" end="544" title="colloidal dispersion" label="colloidal dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q174219" start="737" end="742" title="paint" label="paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192525" start="784" end="808" title="Japanese woodblock print" label="Japanese woodblock print"/>
<link wikidata="Q422321" start="867" end="876" title="blueprint" label="blueprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q194168" start="941" end="949" title="antidote" label="antidote"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904193" start="971" end="992" title="heavy metal poisoning" label="heavy metal poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="1003" end="1014" title="thallium(I)" label="thallium(I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="1043" end="1050" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1154" end="1158" title="Lewis acids and bases#Hard and soft classification" label="soft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1171" end="1178" title="Ion#Anions and cations" label="cations"/>
<link wikidata="Q37155" start="1193" end="1253" title="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines" label="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000047" start="1304" end="1317" title="health system" label="health system"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="1351" end="1363" title="prussic acid" label="prussic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q909369" start="1614" end="1623" title="lightfast" label="lightfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q253181" start="1710" end="1723" title="Egyptian blue" label="Egyptian blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q422662" start="1792" end="1802" title="indigo dye" label="indigo dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q56297854" start="1804" end="1809" title="smalt" label="smalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180360" start="1815" end="1828" title="Tyrian purple" label="Tyrian purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q219660" start="1858" end="1869" title="ultramarine" label="ultramarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q216798" start="1880" end="1892" title="lapis lazuli" label="lapis lazuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683295" start="1894" end="1911" title="Japanese painting" label="Japanese painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192525" start="1916" end="1939" title="Woodblock printing in Japan" label="woodblock print artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903711" start="2143" end="2164" title="Johann Jacob Diesbach" label="Johann Jacob Diesbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564271" start="2265" end="2271" title="potash" label="potash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="2285" end="2290" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q244274" start="2310" end="2319" title="cochineal" label="cochineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q409021" start="2359" end="2373" title="ferric sulfate" label="ferric sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q97126" start="2750" end="2772" title="Johann Leonhard Frisch" label="Johann Leonhard Frisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="2798" end="2826" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Prussian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="2828" end="2853" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q768520" start="3420" end="3440" title="Pieter van der Werff" label="Pieter van der Werff"/>
<link wikidata="Q151330" start="3459" end="3468" title="Sanssouci" label="Sanssouci"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="3567" end="3581" title="Prussian court" label="Prussian court"/>
<link wikidata="Q183221" start="3677" end="3692" title="Antoine Watteau" label="Antoine Watteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q188172" start="3718" end="3733" title="Nicolas Lancret" label="Nicolas Lancret"/>
<link wikidata="Q731533" start="3738" end="3757" title="Jean-Baptiste Pater" label="Jean-Baptiste Pater"/>
<link wikidata="Q180932" start="3786" end="3802" title="François Boucher" label="François Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q57566" start="3869" end="3886" title="Georg Ernst Stahl" label="Georg Ernst Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q61485" start="3996" end="4016" title="Johann Konrad Dippel" label="Johann Konrad Dippel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478678" start="4058" end="4070" title="lake pigment" label="lake pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q448000" start="4237" end="4247" title="Dippel&amp;#x27;s oil" label="animal oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q902205" start="4474" end="4491" title="Pierre J. Macquer" label="Pierre J. Macquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="4651" end="4667" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q70538" start="4761" end="4781" title="Carl Wilhelm Scheele" label="Carl Wilhelm Scheele"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="4948" end="4955" title="Cyanide" label="Cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="5098" end="5103" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908995" start="5104" end="5125" title="Gershon Henoch Leiner" label="Gershon Henoch Leiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="5131" end="5138" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q359351" start="5139" end="5144" title="Rebbe" label="Rebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898959" start="5148" end="5154" title="Izhbitza - Radzin (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Radzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164991" start="5156" end="5160" title="dyeing" label="dyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q48300" start="5161" end="5170" title="tzitziyot" label="tzitziyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q767608" start="5200" end="5205" title="sepia (color)" label="sepia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590210" start="5240" end="5249" title="Tekhelet" label="techeiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="5720" end="5733" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q317931" start="5846" end="5856" title="full dress uniform" label="ceremonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5902" end="5913" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q181780" start="6381" end="6388" title="colloid" label="colloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422017" start="6409" end="6431" title="potassium ferrocyanide" label="potassium ferrocyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q408810" start="6471" end="6493" title="potassium ferricyanide" label="potassium ferricyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197471" start="6929" end="6942" title="cyanometalate" label="cyanometalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259447" start="7334" end="7346" title="ferricyanide" label="ferricyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12101244" start="7473" end="7490" title="X-ray diffraction" label="X-ray diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q864822" start="7495" end="7515" title="electron diffraction" label="electron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="7874" end="7880" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376204" start="7881" end="7891" title="end-member" label="end-member"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="7907" end="7914" title="Redox" label="reduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963663" start="7996" end="8012" title="hexacyanoferrate" label="hexacyanoferrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q145623" start="8040" end="8056" title="molecular weight" label="molecular weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q175233" start="8428" end="8435" title="cathode" label="cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q391088" start="8450" end="8466" title="Sodium-ion battery" label="Na-ion batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q206175" start="8994" end="9000" title="Stress (mechanics)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990546" start="9005" end="9011" title="Strain (mechanics)" label="strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="9108" end="9124" title="Energy density" label="energy densities"/>
<link wikidata="Q388283" start="9229" end="9245" title="microcrystalline" label="microcrystalline"/>
<link wikidata="Q899604" start="9284" end="9295" title="crystallite" label="crystallite"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="9809" end="9825" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q70906" start="9925" end="9940" title="IR spectroscopy" label="IR spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q899927" start="9942" end="9964" title="Mössbauer spectroscopy" label="Mössbauer spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="9966" end="9987" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q910499" start="9993" end="10016" title="neutron crystallography" label="neutron crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q910499" start="10279" end="10298" title="Neutron diffraction" label="Neutron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="10438" end="10457" title="face centered cubic" label="face centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81454" start="10755" end="10756" title="angstrom" label="Å"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577416" start="11061" end="11069" title="low spin" label="low spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="11100" end="11106" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q188884" start="11114" end="11124" title="octahedral" label="octahedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577416" start="11171" end="11180" title="high spin" label="high spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="11425" end="11438" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963663" start="11502" end="11518" title="hexacyanoferrate" label="hexacyanoferrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="11580" end="11587" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="11859" end="11865" title="cation" label="cation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="11956" end="11966" title="solubility" label="solubility"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="11993" end="12006" title="precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q296955" start="12179" end="12188" title="oil paint" label="oil paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="12366" end="12374" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902663" start="12410" end="12432" title="mixed-valence compound" label="mixed-valence compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057308" start="12493" end="12521" title="intervalence charge transfer" label="intervalence charge transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="12565" end="12574" title="nanometer" label="nanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27673" start="12669" end="12675" title="Colorfulness" label="chroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="12676" end="12683" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q899105" start="12771" end="12785" title="electrochromism" label="electrochromic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="12823" end="12832" title="redox" label="reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057308" start="12911" end="12939" title="intervalence charge transfer" label="intervalence charge transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="13303" end="13308" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q127418" start="13377" end="13380" title="ink" label="ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377756" start="13438" end="13458" title="Engineer&amp;#x27;s blue" label="Engineer&amp;#x27;s blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q372532" start="13485" end="13494" title="cyanotype" label="cyanotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q422321" start="13526" end="13535" title="blueprint" label="blueprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q69158" start="13546" end="13552" title="crayon" label="crayon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13608" end="13621" title="Midnight blue#Dark midnight blue (Crayola)" label="midnight blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596268" start="13666" end="13680" title="laundry bluing" label="laundry bluing"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="13890" end="13900" title="Valence (chemistry)" label="monovalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="13910" end="13916" title="cation" label="cation"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="13942" end="13960" title="Chelation" label="sequestering agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904193" start="13973" end="13990" title="toxic heavy metal" label="toxic heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="14079" end="14087" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="14094" end="14105" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="14106" end="14113" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="14135" end="14169" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="14265" end="14298" title="U.S. Food and Drug Administration" label="U.S. Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154826" start="14603" end="14614" title="caesium-137" label="caesium-137"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="14624" end="14633" title="intestine" label="intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="14658" end="14669" title="Circulatory system" label="bloodstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344633" start="14692" end="14717" title="enterohepatic circulation" label="enterohepatic circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q898533" start="14837" end="14843" title="Sorption" label="adsorb"/>
<link wikidata="Q591045" start="14882" end="14898" title="Goiânia accident" label="Goiânia accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070952" start="14958" end="14972" title="histopathology" label="histopathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="14987" end="14998" title="pathologist" label="pathologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179991" start="15034" end="15040" title="biopsy" label="biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="15063" end="15074" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984410" start="15147" end="15166" title="Perls Prussian blue" label="Perls Prussian blue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15212" end="15221" title="Max Perls" label="Max Perls"/>
<link wikidata="Q422017" start="15262" end="15284" title="potassium ferrocyanide" label="potassium ferrocyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="15303" end="15309" title="Tissue (biology)" label="tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377756" start="15518" end="15538" title="Engineer&amp;#x27;s blue" label="Engineer&amp;#x27;s blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634225" start="15640" end="15653" title="surface plate" label="surface plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18830" start="15659" end="15666" title="journal bearing" label="bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445284" start="15672" end="15685" title="hand scraper" label="hand scraping"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="16202" end="16208" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q290439" start="16524" end="16534" title="polyphenol" label="polyphenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596268" start="16609" end="16623" title="laundry bluing" label="laundry bluing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929884" start="16633" end="16659" title="Mrs. Stewart&amp;#x27;s Bluing" label="Mrs. Stewart&amp;#x27;s Bluing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16989" end="17004" title="solvated radius" label="solvated radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="17785" end="17804" title="lithium-ion battery" label="lithium-ion battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q391088" start="17806" end="17824" title="sodium-ion battery" label="sodium-ion battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234684" start="17830" end="17851" title="potassium-ion battery" label="potassium-ion battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q113587231" start="17869" end="17882" title="Blue pigments" label="Blue pigments"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182766" wikidata="Q725117" url="?curid=182766" title="Alcide Nunez">
<text>Alcide Patrick Nunez (March 17, 1884 – September 2, 1934), also known as Yellow Nunez and Al Nunez, was an American jazz clarinetist. He was one of the first musicians of New Orleans to make audio recordings.

== Biography ==
Alcide Patrick Nunez was born in St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana, United States. His parents were Victor Nunez and Elisa Nunez Chalaire and were of Isleño and French Creole descent respectively. The family moved to New Orleans when he was a child.

He grew up amid the Marigny and Bywater districts of New Orleans. For a time, Nunez lived at 1340 Arts Street in the St. Roch neighborhood of New Orleans. Nunez joined to several bands in which played guitar, although switched to clarinet about 1902. He soon became one of the top hot clarinetists in the city. By 1905 he was a regular in Papa Jack Laine&#x27;s band, in addition to playing with Tom Brown and sometimes leading bands of his own. Nunez could play several instruments, but mainly played the clarinet. In addition, he was able to improvise variations on the songs he heard. Before he was able to make music a full-time profession, Nunez worked for a while driving a mule-drawn wagon with fellow musician &quot;Chink&quot; Martin Abraham.

In early 1916, he went north to Chicago with Stein&#x27;s Dixie Jass Band, which was to become famous as the Original Dixieland Jass Band, but Nunez left the band shortly before they made their first recordings. In 1917 the Dixieland Jass Band achieved great success with their recording of the instrumental &quot;Livery Stable Blues&quot; under the direction of Nick LaRocca; however, Nunez and Ray Lopez filed copyright for a sheet music version of the tune before LaRocca. Nick LaRocca and the band sued Nunez for $10,000. In the end the lawsuit was thrown out without decision; the judge denied that any &quot;musicians&quot; who could not read written music could be said to have written anything.

After some time playing with Tom Brown&#x27;s band in Chicago, he went to New York City with Bert Kelly&#x27;s band. Pee Wee Russell announced in Chicago and New York that Nunez was the greatest jazz clarinetist in the world. Nunez became Kelly&#x27;s bandleader. After playing with Kelly through 1918, at the start of 1919 Nunez helped form the band the Louisiana Five, led by drummer Anton Lada. They became one of the most popular bands in New York and recorded for several record labels. In early 1920 Nunez worked with the New York dance band of Harry Yerkes but in the same year returned temporarily to the Louisiana Five, touring the United States.

In 1922, after Bert Kelly replaced him with Johnny Dodds, he returned to Chicago to lead the house band at Kelly&#x27;s Stables, one of the city&#x27;s top nightclubs and played with the band of Willard Robison. Soon thereafter Nuñez began to lose his teeth, impairing his ability to play clarinet. He returned to his family in New Orleans, but after getting dentures he regained his ability to play the clarinet. He joined the policy department to join the Police Band. During this time, Nunez was also part of &quot;The Moonlight Serenaders&quot; band and of several dance bands that played in New Orleans. He remained in New Orleans until his death.

== Personal life ==
Nunez married three times, had one child with his second wife and three children with his third. For a time in 1921, he settled in Baltimore, where he bought a large house. He died of a heart attack on September 2, 1934.

== References ==
==External links==

* extensive multi-page biography.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q725117" start="0" end="20" title="Alcide Nunez" label="Alcide Patrick Nunez"/>
<link wikidata="Q725117" start="73" end="85" title="Alcide Nunez" label="Yellow Nunez"/>
<link wikidata="Q725117" start="90" end="98" title="Alcide Nunez" label="Al Nunez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="116" end="120" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q503883" start="259" end="288" title="St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863724" start="372" end="378" title="Isleños in Louisiana" label="Isleño"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="383" end="396" title="French Creole people" label="French Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067307" start="493" end="500" title="Marigny, New Orleans" label="Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004681" start="505" end="512" title="Bywater, New Orleans" label="Bywater"/>
<link wikidata="Q353372" start="812" end="827" title="Papa Jack Laine" label="Papa Jack Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439546" start="869" end="878" title="Tom Brown (trombonist)" label="Tom Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101081" start="1191" end="1223" title="Chink Martin" label="&amp;quot;Chink&amp;quot; Martin Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q933710" start="1335" end="1363" title="Original Dixieland Jass Band" label="Original Dixieland Jass Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347917" start="1540" end="1559" title="Livery Stable Blues" label="Livery Stable Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q737521" start="1589" end="1601" title="Nick LaRocca" label="Nick LaRocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895164" start="2023" end="2040" title="Bert Kelly (jazz musician)" label="Bert Kelly&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q718419" start="2047" end="2062" title="Pee Wee Russell" label="Pee Wee Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133531" start="2285" end="2299" title="Louisiana Five" label="Louisiana Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q10425318" start="2316" end="2326" title="Anton Lada" label="Anton Lada"/>
<link wikidata="Q19882028" start="2481" end="2493" title="Harry Yerkes" label="Harry Yerkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q498495" start="2631" end="2643" title="Johnny Dodds" label="Johnny Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998202" start="2694" end="2714" title="Kelly&amp;#x27;s Stables (Chicago)" label="Kelly&amp;#x27;s Stables"/>
<link wikidata="Q48805843" start="3045" end="3056" title="Police band (music)" label="Police Band"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182768" wikidata="Q16867254" url="?curid=182768" title="Moore Brothers">
<text>The Moore Brothers were three Irish born brothers who became famous in the motion picture business in early Hollywood.

* Tom Moore (actor) (1883–1955)
* Owen Moore (1886–1939)
* Matt Moore (actor) (1888–1960)

==See also==
* List of people with surname Moore</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16867254" start="4" end="18" title="Moore Brothers" label="Moore Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992510" start="122" end="139" title="Tom Moore (actor)" label="Tom Moore (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q966972" start="154" end="164" title="Owen Moore" label="Owen Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q288547" start="179" end="197" title="Matt Moore (actor)" label="Matt Moore (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633261" start="226" end="259" title="List of people with surname Moore" label="List of people with surname Moore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182769" wikidata="Q156469" url="?curid=182769" title="Siim Kallas">
<text>Siim Kallas (; born 2 October 1948) is an Estonian former politician, having served as Prime Minister of Estonia and European Commissioner.

From 1972-90 Kallas was a member of the CPSU (Communist Party of the Soviet Union). In 1987, Kallas was one of the authors of the IME plan for self-managing Estonia with Tiit Made, Edgar Savisaar and Mikk Titma. The plan proposed to make Estonia economically independent from the Soviet Union – adopting a market economy and establishing Estonia’s own currency and tax system. Kallas was elected a member of the Congress of People&#x27;s Deputies of the Soviet Union in the 1989 Soviet Union legislative election, the first partially free elections in the Soviet Union. 

After Estonia restored its independence in 1991, Kallas was appointed the President of the Bank of Estonia, which at the time had only 11 employees. Within a year a coherent structure of the bank was set up and on 20 June 1992, Estonia&#x27;s own currency Kroon was back in circulation after being removed from circulation by the Soviets on 25 March 1941.

Kallas entered politics in 1994 as one of the founders of liberal Estonian Reform Party. The 1995 elections were successful for the new party. Kallas served as the minister of foreign affairs from 1995 to 1996. He later served also as the minister of finance from 1999 to 2002 and the Prime Minister from 2002 to 2003.

He served as the European Commissioner for Transport between 2010 and 2014. Before that he was the European Commissioner for Administrative Affairs, Audit and Anti-Fraud between 2004 and 2009. In both Barroso Commissions he was also a Vice-President. He was twice appointed the Acting Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Euro in Olli Rehn&#x27;s stead, from 19 April 2014 to 25 May 2014 while he was on electoral campaign leave for the 2014 elections to the European Parliament and from 1 July 2014 to 16 July 2014 after he took up his seat.

After leaving the European Commission, Kallas ran in the Estonian presidential election in 2016, but was not elected. In October 2017, he started as the municipal mayor of Viimsi Parish. In 2019 he was elected member of the Riigikogu, a post he was also elected to in 2023. He resigned as a member of Riigikogu and from politics in September 2024.

His daughter, Kaja Kallas, was the prime minister of Estonia from 2021 to 2024.

==Education==
*1966–1969, 1972–1974 Budget and Finance, University of Tartu, specialist
*(1969–1972 Junior Sergeant, Soviet Armed Forces Corps of Signals)
*1974–1977 Economics of environmental protection, University of Tartu, Candidate of Sciences

==Career==
*1969–1972 : Signals officer in Soviet Army
*1975–1979: Specialist at the Finance Ministry Planning Committee of the Estonian SSR
*1979–1986: Joint Secretary of the Central Authority of the Savings Banks of the Estonian SSR.
*1986–1989: Deputy chief editor of the Communist Party of Estonia newspaper &quot;Rahva Hääl&quot;
*1989–1991: Chairman of the Central Union of the Estonian Trade Unions
*1989–1991: Member of the Congress of People&#x27;s Deputies of the Soviet Union
*1991–1995: President of the Bank of Estonia
*1995–2004: Member of the Parliament of the Republic of Estonia
*1995–1996: Minister of Foreign Affairs
*1996: Chairman of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
*1999–2002: Minister of Finance
*2002–2003: Prime minister
*2004–2004: EU Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs, serving with Joaquín Almunia
*2004–2010: EU Commissioner for Administrative Affairs, Audit and Anti-Fraud and Vice-president of the Commission
*2010–2014: EU Commissioner for Transport and Vice-president of the Commission
*2017–2019: Municipal mayor of Viimsi.
*2019–2024: Member of the Riigikogu.

==Personal life==

Kallas&#x27; grandfather was Eduard Alver, one of the founders of the Republic of Estonia on 24 February 1918, and the Commander of the Estonian Defence League during the Estonian War of Independence, and the first chief of the Estonian Police from 1918 to 24 May 1919. He speaks Estonian, English, Russian, Finnish, and German. Kallas is of Estonian and distant Baltic German ancestry.

Kallas is married to doctor Kristi Kallas, who, during the Soviet deportations from Estonia, at age six months, was deported to Siberia with her mother and grandmother in a cattle car and lived there until she was 10 years old.

He has one son and one daughter. His daughter Kaja Kallas was the leader of the Reform party and was the prime minister of Estonia from 2021 to 2024.
==References==
==External links==

*Siim Kallas, Official Media Gallery
*Official website
*KALLAS Siim International Who&#x27;s Who
*European Parliament Answers to Commissioner Designate M. Kallas



|-


|-


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156469" start="0" end="11" title="Siim Kallas" label="Siim Kallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q737115" start="87" end="112" title="Prime Minister of Estonia" label="Prime Minister of Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="117" end="136" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="181" end="185" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="CPSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="187" end="222" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274273" start="311" end="320" title="Tiit Made" label="Tiit Made"/>
<link wikidata="Q355241" start="322" end="336" title="Edgar Savisaar" label="Edgar Savisaar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="341" end="351" title="Mikk Titma" label="Mikk Titma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888941" start="553" end="607" title="Congress of People&amp;#x27;s Deputies of the Soviet Union" label="Congress of People&amp;#x27;s Deputies of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128701" start="615" end="653" title="1989 Soviet Union legislative election" label="1989 Soviet Union legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q366960" start="804" end="819" title="Bank of Estonia" label="Bank of Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q129983" start="969" end="974" title="Estonian kroon" label="Kroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q738947" start="1136" end="1157" title="Estonian Reform Party" label="Estonian Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570456" start="1159" end="1177" title="1995 Estonian parliamentary election" label="The 1995 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760777" start="1234" end="1261" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Estonia)" label="minister of foreign affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21103025" start="1309" end="1328" title="Minister of Finance (Estonia)" label="minister of finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q737115" start="1355" end="1369" title="Prime Minister of Estonia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676795" start="1407" end="1442" title="European Commissioner for Transport" label="European Commissioner for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q388354" start="1591" end="1609" title="Barroso Commission" label="Barroso Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q651703" start="1625" end="1639" title="Vice-President of the European Commission" label="Vice-President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780230" start="1668" end="1734" title="European Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Euro" label="Acting Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q294411" start="1738" end="1747" title="Olli Rehn" label="Olli Rehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15536534" start="1845" end="1859" title="2014 European Parliament election in Estonia" label="2014 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="1867" end="1886" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676594" start="2018" end="2039" title="2016 Estonian presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q993014" start="2124" end="2137" title="Viimsi Parish" label="Viimsi Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q217799" start="2176" end="2185" title="Riigikogu" label="Riigikogu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869065" start="2315" end="2326" title="Kaja Kallas" label="Kaja Kallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q204181" start="2438" end="2457" title="University of Tartu" label="University of Tartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q737462" start="2608" end="2629" title="Candidate of Sciences" label="Candidate of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q130280" start="2759" end="2771" title="Estonian SSR" label="Estonian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q130280" start="2853" end="2865" title="Estonian SSR" label="Estonian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633891" start="2906" end="2932" title="Communist Party of Estonia" label="Communist Party of Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038151" start="2949" end="2959" title="Rahva Hääl" label="Rahva Hääl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992666" start="2994" end="3036" title="Confederation of Estonian Trade Unions" label="Central Union of the Estonian Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888941" start="3063" end="3117" title="Congress of People&amp;#x27;s Deputies of the Soviet Union" label="Congress of People&amp;#x27;s Deputies of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q366960" start="3147" end="3162" title="Bank of Estonia" label="Bank of Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217799" start="3185" end="3226" title="Riigikogu" label="the Parliament of the Republic of Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735723" start="3274" end="3337" title="Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe" label="Chairman of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780230" start="3409" end="3458" title="European Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs" label="EU Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q56628258" start="3501" end="3565" title="European Commissioner for Administrative Affairs, Audit and Anti-Fraud" label="EU Commissioner for Administrative Affairs, Audit and Anti-Fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676795" start="3615" end="3644" title="European Commissioner for Transport" label="EU Commissioner for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044100" start="3713" end="3719" title="Viimsi" label="Viimsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q217799" start="3747" end="3756" title="Riigikogu" label="Riigikogu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12361064" start="3807" end="3819" title="Eduard Alver" label="Eduard Alver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174038" start="3848" end="3867" title="History of Estonia (1920–39)" label="Republic of Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721814" start="3914" end="3937" title="Estonian Defence League" label="Estonian Defence League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127302" start="3949" end="3977" title="Estonian War of Independence" label="Estonian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401617" start="4006" end="4021" title="Estonian Police" label="Estonian Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q157139" start="4141" end="4154" title="Baltic German" label="Baltic German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622368" start="4225" end="4257" title="Soviet deportations from Estonia" label="Soviet deportations from Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="4294" end="4301" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869065" start="4441" end="4452" title="Kaja Kallas" label="Kaja Kallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054254" start="4648" end="4676" title="International Who&amp;#x27;s Who" label="International Who&amp;#x27;s Who"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182771" wikidata="Q1029825" url="?curid=182771" title="2000 Camp David Summit">
<text>The 2000 Camp David Summit was a summit meeting at Camp David between United States president Bill Clinton, Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian Authority chairman Yasser Arafat. The summit took place between 11 and 25 July 2000 and was an effort to end the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. The summit ended without an agreement, largely due to irreconcilable differences between Israelis and Palestinians on the status of Jerusalem. Its failure is considered one of the main triggers of the Second Intifada.

The issues discussed included the establishment of a Palestinian state, the fate of Israeli settlements (illegal under international law), the status of Jerusalem, the question of Palestinian refugees, and potential Israeli control over the airspace and borders of a future Palestinian state. The summit ended after irreconcilable differences over who should have sovereignty over the Temple Mount (which Muslims call &quot;Haram al-Sharif&quot; or Al-Aqsa): Barak insisted on Israeli sovereignty, while Arafat insisted on Palestinian sovereignty.

Reports of the outcome of the summit have been described as illustrating the Rashomon effect, in which the multiple witnesses gave contradictory and self-serving interpretations. After the summit, the Israeli narrative was widely accepted by the American media, which sought to cast Arafat as a villain and that Palestinians did not want peace. That narrative lead to the decline of the Israeli peace movement.

==Summit==

U.S. President Bill Clinton announced his invitation to Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Yasser Arafat on 5 July 2000, to come to Camp David, Maryland, in order to continue their negotiations on the Middle East peace process. There was a hopeful precedent in the 1978 Camp David Accords where President Jimmy Carter was able to broker a peace agreement between Egypt, represented by President Anwar Sadat, and Israel represented by Prime Minister Menachem Begin. The Oslo Accords of 1993 between the later assassinated Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Palestine Liberation Organization Chairman Yasser Arafat had provided that agreement should be reached on all outstanding issues between the Palestinians and Israeli sides – the so-called final status settlement – within five years of the implementation of Palestinian autonomy. However, the interim process put in place under Oslo had fulfilled neither Israeli nor Palestinian expectations.

On 11 July, the Camp David 2000 Summit convened, although the Palestinians considered the summit premature. They even saw it as a &quot;trap&quot; – meaning either they would be pressured into agreeing to Israeli demands, or they would be blamed for the summit&#x27;s failure. Many sources have said the Summit was rushed. Dan Kurtzer and Scott Lasensky wrote that American diplomats &quot;scrambled at the last minute to put together U.S. positions on complex issues such as Jerusalem and borders.&quot; Israeli diplomat Gilead Sher would later write, &quot;the most serious shortcoming of the American team was that some of its members appeared to be less knowledgeable than the president in the details and implications of the process.&quot; And Yasser Abed Rabbo, member of the Palestinian negotiating team, recalled &quot;It was chaos. Every day a different meeting, committee and issue. We didn’t know what were our aims, to succeed, to fail, to escape.&quot;

The summit ended on 25 July, without an agreement being reached. At its conclusion, a Trilateral Statement was issued defining the agreed principles to guide future negotiations.

==Negotiations==

The negotiations were based on an all-or-nothing approach, such that &quot;nothing was considered agreed and binding until everything was agreed.&quot; The proposals were, for the most part, verbal. As no agreement was reached and there is no official written record of the proposals, some ambiguity remains over details of the positions of the parties on specific issues.

The talks ultimately failed to reach agreement on the final status issues:

* Territory
** Territorial contiguity
* Jerusalem and the Temple Mount
* Refugees and Palestinian right of return
* Security arrangements
* Settlements

===Territory===
The Palestinian negotiators indicated they wanted full Palestinian sovereignty over the entire West Bank and the Gaza Strip, although they would consider a one-to-one land swap with Israel. Their historic position was that Palestinians had already made a territorial compromise with Israel by accepting Israel&#x27;s right to 78% of &quot;historic Palestine&quot;, and accepting their state on the remaining 22% of such land. This consensus was expressed by Faisal Husseini when he remarked: &quot;There can be no compromise on the compromise&quot;. They maintained that Resolution 242 calls for full Israeli withdrawal from these territories, which were captured in the Six-Day War, as part of a final peace settlement. In the 1993 Oslo Accords the Palestinian negotiators accepted the Green Line borders (1949 armistice lines) for the West Bank but the Israelis rejected this proposal and disputed the Palestinian interpretation of Resolution 242. Israel wanted to annex the numerous settlement blocks on the Palestinian side of the Green Line, and were concerned that a complete return to the 1967 borders was dangerous to Israel&#x27;s security. The Palestinian and Israeli definition of the West Bank differs by approximately 5% land area as the Israeli definition does not include East Jerusalem (71 km2), the territorial waters of the Dead Sea (195 km2) and the area known as No Man&#x27;s Land (50 km2 near Latrun).

Based on the Israeli definition of the West Bank, Barak offered to form a Palestinian state initially on 73% of the West Bank (that is, 27% less than the Green Line borders) and 100% of the Gaza Strip. In 10–25 years, the Palestinian state would expand to a maximum of 92% of the West Bank (91 percent of the West Bank and 1 percent from a land swap). From the Palestinian perspective this equated to an offer of a Palestinian state on a maximum of 86% of the West Bank.

According to Robert Wright, Israel would only keep the settlements with large populations. Wright states that all others would be dismantled, with the exception of Kiryat Arba (adjacent to the holy city of Hebron), which would be an Israeli enclave inside the Palestinian state, and would be linked to Israel by a bypass road. The West Bank would be split in the middle by an Israeli-controlled road from Jerusalem to the Dead Sea, with free passage for Palestinians, although Israel reserved the right to close the road to passage in case of emergency. In return, Israel would allow the Palestinians to use a highway in the Negev to connect the West Bank with Gaza. Wright states that in the Israeli proposal, the West Bank and Gaza Strip would be linked by an elevated highway and an elevated railroad running through the Negev, ensuring safe and free passage for Palestinians. These would be under the sovereignty of Israel, and Israel reserved the right to close them to passage in case of emergency.

Israel would retain around 9% in the West Bank in exchange for 1% of land within the Green Line. The land that would be conceded included symbolic and cultural territories such as the Al-Aqsa Mosque, whereas the Israeli land conceded was unspecified. Additional to territorial concessions, Palestinian airspace would be controlled by Israel under Barak&#x27;s offer. The Palestinians rejected the Halutza Sand region (78 km2) alongside the Gaza Strip as part of the land swap on the basis that it was of inferior quality to that which they would have to give up in the West Bank.

=== Territorial contiguity ===
In the proposed Palestinian state, Gaza Strip would be discontinuous from the West Bank. The degree to which the West Bank itself would be dis-contiguous is disputed. Noam Chomsky writes that the West Bank would have been divided into three cantons and Palestinian East Jerusalem would have constituted the fourth canton; all 4 cantons would be separated from one another by Israeli territory. Other sources also said that the proposed West Bank would be divided into three cantons. By contrast, Ehud Barak said the West Bank would only be divided by a wedge of Israeli territory stretching from Maale Adumim to the Jordan River, but would otherwise be continuous.

The Palestinians reacted strongly negatively to the proposed cantonization of the West Bank into three blocs, which the Palestinian delegation likened to South African Bantustans, a loaded word that was disputed by the Israeli and American negotiators. Settlement blocs, bypassed roads and annexed lands would create barriers between Nablus and Jenin with Ramallah. The Ramallah bloc would in turn be divided from Bethlehem and Hebron. A separate and smaller bloc would contain Jericho. Further, the border between West Bank and Jordan would additionally be under Israeli control. The Palestinian Authority would receive pockets of East Jerusalem which would be surrounded entirely by annexed lands in the West Bank.

===East Jerusalem===
One of the most significant obstacles to an agreement was the final status of Jerusalem, especially the status of Temple Mount, known to Muslims as Al-Aqsa or &quot;Haram al-Sharif.&quot; Clinton and Barak insisted that the entire area be placed under Israeli sovereignty, while Palestinians could have &quot;custodianship&quot;. Arafat insisted on Palestinian sovereignty over the Haram. As this deadlock could not be resolved, the summit ended.

Leaders were ill-prepared for the central role the Jerusalem issue in general and the Temple Mount dispute in particular would play in the negotiations. Barak instructed his delegates to treat the dispute as &quot;the central issue that will decide the destiny of the negotiations&quot;, whereas Arafat admonished his delegation to &quot;not budge on this one thing: the Haram (the Temple Mount or Al-Aqsa mosque) is more precious to me than everything else.&quot; At the opening of Camp David, Barak warned the Americans he could not accept giving the Palestinians more than a purely symbolic sovereignty over any part of East Jerusalem.

The Palestinians demanded complete sovereignty over East Jerusalem and its holy sites, in particular, the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock, which are located on the Temple Mount (Haram al-Sharif), a site holy in both Islam and Judaism, and the dismantling of all Israeli neighborhoods built over the Green Line. The Palestinian position, according to Mahmoud Abbas, at that time Arafat&#x27;s chief negotiator, was that: &quot;All of East Jerusalem should be returned to Palestinian sovereignty. The Jewish Quarter and Western Wall should be placed under Israeli authority, not Israeli sovereignty. An open city and cooperation on municipal services.&quot;

Israel proposed that the Palestinians be granted &quot;custodianship,&quot; though not sovereignty, on the Temple Mount (Haram al-Sharif), with Israel retaining control over the Western Wall, a remnant of the ancient wall that surrounded the Temple Mount, the most sacred site in Judaism outside of the Temple Mount itself. Israeli negotiators also proposed that the Palestinians be granted administration of, but not sovereignty over, the Muslim and Christian Quarters of the Old City, with the Jewish and Armenian Quarters remaining in Israeli hands. Palestinians would be granted administrative control over all Islamic and Christian holy sites, and would be allowed to raise the Palestinian flag over them. A passage linking northern Jerusalem to Islamic and Christian holy sites would be annexed by the Palestinian state. The Israeli team proposed annexing to Israeli Jerusalem settlements within the West Bank beyond the Green Line, such as Ma&#x27;ale Adumim, Givat Ze&#x27;ev, and Gush Etzion. Israel proposed that the Palestinians merge certain outer Arab villages and small cities that had been annexed to Jerusalem just after 1967 (such as Abu Dis, al-Eizariya, &#x27;Anata, A-Ram, and eastern Sawahre) to create the city of Al-Quds, which would serve as the capital of Palestine. The historically important Arab neighborhoods such as Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan and at-Tur would remain under Israeli sovereignty, while Palestinians would only have civilian autonomy. The Palestinians would exercise civil and administrative autonomy in the outer Arab neighborhoods. Israeli neighborhoods within East Jerusalem would remain under Israeli sovereignty. The holy places in the Old City would enjoy independent religious administration. In total, Israel demanded that Palestine&#x27;s territory in East Jerusalem be reduced to eight sections including six small enclaves according to Palestine&#x27;s delegation to the summit.
Palestinians objected to the lack of sovereignty and to the right of Israel to keep Jewish neighborhoods that it built over the Green Line in East Jerusalem, which the Palestinians claimed block the contiguity of the Arab neighborhoods in East Jerusalem.

===Refugees and the right of return===

Due to the first Arab-Israeli war, a significant number of Palestinian Arabs fled or were expelled from their homes inside what is now Israel. These refugees numbered approximately 711,000 to 725,000 at the time. Today, they and their descendants number about four million, comprising about half the Palestinian people. Since that time, the Palestinians have demanded full implementation of the right of return, meaning that each refugee would be granted the option of returning to his or her home, with property restored, and receive compensation. Israelis asserted that allowing a right of return to Israel proper, rather than to the newly created Palestinian state, would mean an influx of Palestinians that would fundamentally alter the demographics of Israel, jeopardizing Israel&#x27;s Jewish character and its existence as a whole.

At Camp David, the Palestinians maintained their traditional demand that the right of return be implemented. They demanded that Israel recognize the right of all refugees who so wished to settle in Israel, but to address Israel&#x27;s demographic concerns, they promised that the right of return would be implemented via a mechanism agreed upon by both sides, which would try to channel a majority of refugees away from the option of returning to Israel. According to U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, some of the Palestinian negotiators were willing to privately discuss a limit on the number of refugees who would be allowed to return to Israel. Palestinians who chose to return to Israel would do so gradually, with Israel absorbing 150,000 refugees every year.

The Israeli negotiators denied that Israel was responsible for the refugee problem, and were concerned that any right of return would pose a threat to Israel&#x27;s Jewish character. In the Israeli proposal, a maximum of 100,000 refugees would be allowed to return to Israel on the basis of humanitarian considerations or family reunification. All other people classified as Palestinian refugees would be settled in their present place of inhabitance, the Palestinian state, or third-party countries. Israel would help fund their resettlement and absorption. An international fund of $30 billion would be set up, which Israel would help contribute to, along with other countries, that would register claims for compensation of property lost by Palestinian refugees and make payments within the limits of its resources.

===Israeli control over a future Palestinian state===
The Israeli negotiators proposed that Israel be allowed to set up radar stations inside the Palestinian state, and be allowed to use its airspace. Israel also wanted the right to deploy troops on Palestinian territory in the event of an emergency, and the stationing of an international force in the Jordan Valley. Palestinian authorities would maintain control of border crossings under temporary Israeli observation. Israel would maintain a permanent security presence along 15% of the Palestinian-Jordanian border. Israel also demanded that the Palestinian state be demilitarized with the exception of its paramilitary security forces, that it would not make alliances without Israeli approval or allow the introduction of foreign forces west of the Jordan River, and that it dismantle terrorist groups. One of Israel&#x27;s strongest demands was that Arafat declare the conflict over, and make no further demands. Israel also wanted water resources in the West Bank to be shared by both sides and remain under Israeli management.

== Palestinian proposal ==
According to Gilead Sher and others, Palestinians made counter-proposals of their own during the negotiations. Just like the Israeli proposals, sources differ on the details.

On territory, the Palestinian proposal gave Israel either 2.5% (according to Beinart) or 3.1% (according to Emerson and Tocci) of the West Bank. The proposal demanded any territory in occupied West Bank annexed by Israel be swapped one-to-one with territory inside Israel. Israel would have to evacuate Kiryat Arba and Hebron. A corridor between the West Bank and Gaza Strip was proposed for the movement of people and goods, via a narrow strip of Israeli land. The corridor would remain under Israeli sovereignty.

On Jerusalem, the Palestinians propose Israeli sovereignty over the Jewish neighborhoods of East Jerusalem and Palestinian sovereignty over the Arab neighborhoods. In the Old City of Jerusalem, Israel would get the Jewish Quarter and parts of the Armenian Quarter, while Palestine would get the Muslim Quarter and the Christian Quarter. Israel would get the Western Wall, while Palestinians would get the Temple Mount/Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Palestinians proposed that instead of setting up border checkpoints inside Jerusalem, the border checkpoints should be set around the city. This meant Palestinians wishing to enter their own capital city would be treated as crossing an international border (and same with Israelis entering their capital). But once inside the city, citizens and traffic would be free to move around. If this was not acceptable to Israel, the Palestinian alternate proposal was to have a &quot;hard border&quot; between Israeli and Palestinian parts of Jerusalem.

On security, the Palestinian proposal allowed for an international military force (including Americans but not including Israelis) to control the Palestinian state&#x27;s border with Jordan. The State of Palestine would also coordinate with Israel for the Israeli Airforce to use the Palestinian airspace.

On refugees, Palestinian insisted on the Right of Return but the proposal would, according to Robert Malley, respect the &quot;preservation of Israel&#x27;s demographic balance between Jews and Arabs&quot;. Under the Palestinian proposal mechanisms would be created to make it more attractive for refugees to choose to settle any other place beside Israel. Erekat proposed that the return of Palestinian refugees from Lebanon serve as a &quot;pilot&quot; program to see whether refugees choose to return to Israel or go somewhere else. In this pilot program, Israel would admit 2,000 refugees per year over a 5-6 year period under the framework of family reunification.

== Final Israeli proposal to the Palestinians ==
The proposals made to the Palestinians were never put into writing, but told orally to Palestinian negotiators. There are conflicting accounts as to what transpired. The following table summarizes what was finally offered to Palestinians, according to various sources. Most sources agree, that under Israel&#x27;s final proposal, the Temple Mount (including Al-Aqsa) would remain under Israeli sovereignty. Israel would also take most of the rest of East Jerusalem, while Palestinians would get some parts too. Israel would annex 8% or 13.5% of the West Bank, and would maintain a military of an additional 6–12% of the West Bank for an unspecified period of time (sometimes called a &quot;long term lease&quot;). According to some sources, Israel would also retain its settlement blocks in the Gaza Strip. The Palestinian state would not be contiguous and the West Bank would be split into 2 or 3 sections. Finally, Israel would control Palestinian airspace.
:
==Aftermath==

In mid-October, Clinton and the parties held a summit in Sharm El Sheikh, resulting in a &quot;Sharm memorandum&quot; with understandings aimed at ending the violence and renewing security cooperation. From 18 to 23 December they held negotiations, followed by Clinton&#x27;s presentation of his &quot;parameters&quot;, in a last attempt to achieve peace in the Middle East before his second term ended in January 2001. Although the official statements stated that both parties had accepted the Clinton Parameters with reservations, these reservations in fact meant that the parties had rejected the parameters on certain essential points. On 2 January 2001, the Palestinians put forward their acceptance with some fundamental objections. Barak accepted the parameters with a 20-page letter of reservations. A Sharm el-Sheikh summit planned for 28 December did not take place.

Clinton&#x27;s initiative led to the Taba negotiations in January 2001, where the two sides published a statement saying they had never been closer to agreement (though such issues as Jerusalem, the status of Gaza, and the Palestinian demand for compensation for refugees and their descendants remained unresolved), but Barak, facing elections, re-suspended the talks. Ehud Barak was to be defeated by Ariel Sharon in 2001.

==Responsibility for failure==
Which party (parties) should be blamed for the lack of success of the Summit is hotly debated. In a 2005 book published by Heribert Adam and Kogila Moodley, the authors state &quot;Informed observer blamed all three parties&#x27; negotiation strategies for the failure&quot;, referring to the Israelis, Palestinians, and Americans. Nevertheless, after the summit, most of the Israeli and American establishment bought into the Israeli narrative, in which Arafat was portrayed as a villain. Although it was the question of Jerusalem that dominated the discussions and the Palestinian refugee issue didn&#x27;t occupy much attention, Israeli leaders instead said that the refugee question lead to the collapse of the negotiations. The Israeli argument was that the Palestinian right of return meant the end of Israel as a Jewish state, hence it was the Palestinians who didn&#x27;t want peace. This narrative lead to the decline of the Israeli peace movement. 

Under the Israeli narrative, a Palestinian state in 91% of the West Bank and Gaza was considered &quot;generous&quot; and Palestinians were portrayed as stubborn for not accepting it. In the Palestinian view, such a proposal was contrary to Resolution 242. In their view, the Palestinians had already compromised by conceding 78% of historic Palestine to Israel and accepting a Palestinian state in only 22% of the land and thus should not be expected to concede even more land to Israel. Palestinians also saw Israeli proposals to control Palestinian airspace, borders and natural resources as an attempt to maintain the occupation indefinitely.

===Accusations of Palestinian responsibility===
Most of the Israeli and American criticism for the failure of the 2000 Camp David Summit was leveled at Arafat. Ehud Barak portrays Arafat&#x27;s behavior at Camp David as a &quot;performance geared to exact as many Israeli concessions as possible without ever seriously intending to reach a peace settlement or sign an &quot;end to the conflict&quot;.

Clinton blamed Arafat after the failure of the talks, stating, &quot;I regret that in 2000 Arafat missed the opportunity to bring that nation into being and pray for the day when the dreams of the Palestinian people for a state and a better life will be realized in a just and lasting peace.&quot; The failure to come to an agreement was widely attributed to Yasser Arafat, as he walked away from the table without making a concrete counter-offer and because Arafat did little to quell the series of Palestinian riots that began shortly after the summit. Arafat was also accused of scuttling the talks by Nabil Amr, a former minister in the Palestinian Authority. In &quot;My Life&quot;, Clinton wrote that Arafat once complimented Clinton by telling him, &quot;You are a great man.&quot; Clinton responded, &quot;I am not a great man. I am a failure, and you made me one.&quot;

Dennis Ross, the US Middle East envoy and a key negotiator at the summit, summarized his perspectives in his book &quot;The Missing Peace&quot;. During a lecture in Australia, Ross suggested that the reason for the failure was Arafat&#x27;s unwillingness to sign a final deal with Israel that would close the door on any of the Palestinians&#x27; maximum demands, particularly the right of return. Ross claimed that what Arafat really wanted was &quot;a one-state solution. Not independent, adjacent Israeli and Palestinian states, but a single Arab state encompassing all of Historic Palestine&quot;. Ross also quoted Saudi Prince Bandar as saying while negotiations were taking place: &quot;If Arafat does not accept what is available now, it won&#x27;t be a tragedy; it will be a crime.&quot;

In his book, &quot;The Oslo Syndrome&quot;, Harvard Medical School professor of psychiatry and historian Kenneth Levin summarized the failure of the 2000 Camp David Summit in this manner: &quot;despite the dimensions of the Israeli offer and intense pressure from President Clinton, Arafat demurred. He apparently was indeed unwilling, no matter what the Israeli concessions, to sign an agreement that declared itself final and forswore any further Palestinian claims.&quot; Levin argues that both the Israelis and the Americans were naive in expecting that Arafat would agree to give up the idea of a literal &quot;right of return&quot; for all Palestinians into Israel proper no matter how many 1948 refugees or how much monetary compensation Israel offered.

Alan Dershowitz, an Israel advocate and a law professor at Harvard University, said that the failure of the negotiations was due to &quot;the refusal of the Palestinians and Arafat to give up the right of return. That was the sticking point. It wasn&#x27;t Jerusalem. It wasn&#x27;t borders. It was the right of return.&quot; He claimed that President Clinton told this to him &quot;directly and personally.&quot;

===Accusations of Israeli and American responsibility===
Robert Malley, part of the Clinton administration and present at the summit, wrote to dispel three &quot;myths&quot; regarding the summit&#x27;s failure. First myth, Malley says, was &quot;Camp David was an ideal test of Mr. Arafat&#x27;s intentions&quot;. Malley recalls that Arafat didn&#x27;t think that Israeli and Palestinian diplomats had sufficiently narrowed issues in preparation for the summit and that the Summit happened at a &quot;low point&quot; in the relations between Arafat and Barak. The second myth was &quot;Israel&#x27;s offer met most if not all of the Palestinians&#x27; legitimate aspirations&quot;. According to Malley, Arafat was told that Israel would not only retain sovereignty over some Arab neighborhoods of Jerusalem, but Haram al Sharif too, and Arafat was also asked to accept an unfavorable 9-to-1 ratio in land swaps. The third myth was that &quot;The Palestinians made no concession of their own&quot;. Malley pointed out that the Palestinians starting position was at the 1967 borders, but they were ready to give up Jewish neighborhoods in East Jerusalem, and parts of the West Bank with Israeli settlements. Further, the Palestinians were willing to implement the right of return in a way that guaranteed Israel&#x27;s demographic interests. He argues that Arafat was far more compromising in his negotiations with Israel than Anwar el-Sadat or King Hussein of Jordan had been when they negotiated with Israel.

Clayton Swisher wrote a rebuttal to Clinton and Ross&#x27;s accounts about the causes for the breakdown of the Camp David Summit in his 2004 book, &quot;The Truth About Camp David&quot;. Swisher, the Director of Programs at the Middle East Institute, concluded that the Israelis and the Americans were at least as guilty as the Palestinians for the collapse. M.J. Rosenberg praised the book: &quot;Clayton Swisher&#x27;s &#x27;The Truth About Camp David,&#x27; based on interviews with [US negotiators] Martin Indyk, Dennis Ross and [Aaron] Miller himself provides a comprehensive and acute account – the best we&#x27;re likely to see – on the [one-sided diplomacy] Miller describes.&quot;

Shlomo Ben-Ami, then Israel&#x27;s Minister of Foreign Relations who participated in the talks, stated that the Palestinians wanted the immediate withdrawal of the Israelis from the West Bank, Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem, and only subsequently the Palestinian authority would dismantle the Palestinian organizations. The Israeli response was &quot;we can&#x27;t accept the demand for a return to the borders of June 1967 as a pre-condition for the negotiation.&quot; In 2006, Shlomo Ben-Ami stated on Democracy Now! that &quot;Camp David was not the missed opportunity for the Palestinians, and if I were a Palestinian I would have rejected Camp David, as well. This is something I put in the book. But Taba is the problem. The Clinton parameters are the problem&quot; referring to his 2001 book &quot;Scars of War, Wounds of Peace: The Israeli-Arab Tragedy.&quot;

Norman Finkelstein published an article in the winter 2007 issue of &quot;Journal of Palestine Studies,&quot; excerpting from his longer essay called &quot;Subordinating Palestinian Rights to Israeli &quot;Needs&quot;&quot;. The abstract for the article states: &quot;In particular, it examines the assumptions informing Ross’s account of what happened during the negotiations and why, and the distortions that spring from these assumptions. Judged from the perspective of Palestinians&#x27; and Israelis&#x27; respective rights under international law, all the concessions at Camp David came from the Palestinian side, none from the Israeli side.&quot;

Berkeley political science professor Ron Hassner has argued that it was the failure of participants at the negotiations to include religious leaders in the process or even consult with religious experts prior to the negotiations, that led to the collapse of the negotiations over the subject of Jerusalem. &quot;Both parties seem to have assumed that the religious dimensions of the dispute could be ignored. As a result, neither party had prepared seriously for the possibility that the Temple Mount issue would come to stand at the heart of the negotiations.&quot; Political Scientist Menahem Klein, who advised the Israeli government during the negotiations, confirmed that &quot;The professional back channels did not sufficiently treat Jerusalem as a religious city... It was easier to conduct discussions about preservation of historical structures in the old city than to discuss the link between the political sanctity and the religious sanctity at the historical and religious heart of the city.&quot;

The Israeli group Gush Shalom stated that &quot;the offer is a pretense of generosity for the benefit of the media&quot;, and included detailed maps of what the offer specifically entailed. Among Gush Shalom&#x27;s concerns with Barak&#x27;s offer were Barak&#x27;s demand to annex large settlement blocs (9% of the West Bank), lack of trust in the commitment and/or ability of the Israeli government to evacuate the thousands of non-bloc Israeli settlers in the 15-year timeline, and limited sovereignty for Palestinians in Jerusalem.

==Public opinion towards the summit==
The Palestinian public was supportive of Arafat&#x27;s role in the negotiations. After the summit, Arafat&#x27;s approval rating increased seven percentage points from 39 to 46%. Overall, 68% of the Palestinian public thought Arafat&#x27;s positions on a final agreement at Camp David were just right and 14% thought Arafat compromised too much while only 6% thought Arafat had not compromised enough.

Barak did not fare as well in public opinion polls. Only 25% of the Israeli public thought his positions on Camp David were just right as opposed to 58% of the public that thought Barak compromised too much. A majority of Israelis were opposed to Barak&#x27;s position on every issue discussed at Camp David except for security.

==Concluding &quot;Trilateral statement&quot; (full text)==
==See also==
*Mitchell Report (Arab–Israeli conflict)
*History of the State of Palestine

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Ehud Barak. Statement by Prime Minister Barak at Press Conference upon the Conclusion of the Camp David Summit
*Shlomo Ben-Ami. Camp David Diaries. Excerpts from a 6 April 2001 article in Ma&#x27;ariv
*Gilead Sher (2006). &quot;The Israeli-Palestinian Peace Negotiations, 1999–2001&quot;. Routledge. A first hand account from the chief negotiator for the Israeli team
*Mahmoud Abbas, &quot;Reports of the Camp David Summit, 9 September 2000&quot; Excerpts published in the Journal of Palestine Studies, vol. XXX, No. 2 (Winter 2001), pp. 168–170
*Akram Haniyah, &quot;The Camp David Papers&quot;, first hand account by a member of the Palestinian negotiating team, originally published in the Palestinian daily al-Ayyam. English translation in Journal of Palestine Studies, vol. XXX, No. 2 (Winter 2001), pp. 75–97
*Madeleine Albright (2003). &quot;Madam Secretary: A Memoir&quot;. New York: Hyperion (especially chapter 28)
*Bill Clinton, &quot;My Life: The Presidential Years&quot; (especially chapter 25)
*Dennis Ross &quot;The Missing Peace : The Inside Story of the Fight for Middle East Peace&quot;
*Kenneth Levin. &quot;The Oslo Syndrome: Delusions of a People Under Siege&quot;. Hanover: Smith and Kraus, 2005.

==Further reading==
*Bregman, Ahron &quot;Elusive Peace: How the Holy Land Defeated America&quot;.

==External links==


===General===
*&quot;Principles of Camp David&#x27;s &quot;American Plan&quot;&quot;. FMEP, Settlement Report, September–October 2000. American proposals, as reported in Ha&#x27;aretz and Yediot Aharanot.
*Interview with Dennis Ross about the summit
*More recent interview with Dennis Ross about the summit
*Several articles on the 2000 summit, including interviews with Clinton and Ben-Ami at the Jewish Virtual Library
*Camp David offer according to Palestinian Academic Society for the Study of International Affairs
*The Middle East Peace Summit at Camp David- July 2000 Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs

===Maps===
*Camp David proposal maps (with explanations) according to MidEastWeb.
*Palestinian Maps of the Camp David 2 Proposals.
*West Bank Final Status Map Presented By Israel, May 2000 Foundation for Middle East Peace.
* Peres Center for Peace.
* Maps: Israeli proposals, from Camp David (2000) to Taba (2001)
*Failed compromise at Camp David. December 2000 English article in &quot;Le Monde diplomatique&quot; refers to some of the above-linked French-language maps.
* and, Orient House, 2000 
*&quot;Barak&#x27;s generous offers&quot;. Gush Shalom.

===&quot;New York Review of Books&quot; series===
*Robert Malley and Hussein Agha. &quot;Camp David: The Tragedy of Errors,&quot; New York Review of Books, 9 August 2001
*Dennis Ross, Gidi Grinstein, Hussein Agha, Robert Malley. &quot;Camp David: An Exchange.&quot; New York Review of Books, 20 September 2001
*Camp David and After: An Exchange (1. An Interview with Ehud Barak), by Benny Morris, in response to &quot;Camp David: The Tragedy of Errors&quot;) 13 June 2002
*Camp David and After: An Exchange (2. A Reply to Ehud Barak) By Hussein Agha, Robert Malley, 13 June 2002
*Camp David and After – Continued Benny Morris, Ehud Barak, Reply by Hussein Agha, Robert Malley, 27 June 2002

===Views and analysis===
*Comparing Camp David I and II, Dr. Kenneth W. Stein, Emory University
*&quot;Was Arafat the Problem?&quot; by Robert Wright
*&quot;Barak: A Villa in the Jungle.&quot; Uri Avnery, July 2002
*&quot;The Day Barak&#x27;s Bubble Burst&quot;. 15 Sept. 2001 article, by Uri Avnery, a founder of the Israeli peace group Gush Shalom. More of their articles about Camp David are here.
*Jerome M. Segal, &quot;The Palestinian Peace Offer,&quot; originally published in Ha&#x27;aretz, 1 October 2001
*Visions in Collision: What Happened at Camp David and Taba? , Dr. Jeremy Pressman, 2003.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1029825" start="4" end="26" title="2000 Camp David Summit" label="2000 Camp David Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072326" start="33" end="47" title="Summit (meeting)" label="summit meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q309202" start="51" end="61" title="Camp David" label="Camp David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="94" end="106" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q125731" start="131" end="141" title="Ehud Barak" label="Ehud Barak"/>
<link wikidata="Q42620" start="146" end="167" title="Palestinian Authority" label="Palestinian Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="177" end="190" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="271" end="299" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q49106" start="502" end="517" title="Second Intifada" label="Second Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="905" end="917" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610806" start="944" end="959" title="Haram al-Sharif" label="Haram al-Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610806" start="969" end="976" title="Al-Aqsa" label="Al-Aqsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197375" start="1146" end="1161" title="Rashomon effect" label="Rashomon effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="1508" end="1520" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q125731" start="1572" end="1582" title="Ehud Barak" label="Ehud Barak"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="1587" end="1600" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="1640" end="1648" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141816" start="1697" end="1722" title="Middle East peace process" label="Middle East peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q309204" start="1761" end="1784" title="Camp David Accords (1978)" label="1978 Camp David Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="1801" end="1813" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1859" end="1864" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="1891" end="1902" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1908" end="1914" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="1945" end="1959" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013132" start="1965" end="1977" title="Oslo Accords" label="Oslo Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q34060" start="2040" end="2053" title="Yitzhak Rabin" label="Yitzhak Rabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="2058" end="2091" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestine Liberation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="2315" end="2335" title="State of Palestine" label="Palestinian autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561583" start="2973" end="2984" title="Gilead Sher" label="Gilead Sher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920410" start="3200" end="3217" title="Yasser Abed Rabbo" label="Yasser Abed Rabbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="4106" end="4115" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="4124" end="4136" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="4139" end="4146" title="Refugee" label="Refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748025" start="4152" end="4179" title="Palestinian right of return" label="Palestinian right of return"/>
<link wikidata="Q582706" start="4206" end="4217" title="Israeli settlements" label="Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="4330" end="4339" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="4348" end="4358" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371476" start="4693" end="4708" title="Faisal Husseini" label="Faisal Husseini"/>
<link wikidata="Q621230" start="4806" end="4820" title="Resolution 242" label="Resolution 242"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="4906" end="4917" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013132" start="4968" end="4980" title="Oslo Accords" label="Oslo Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132137" start="5022" end="5032" title="Green Line (Israel)" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="5431" end="5440" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q212938" start="5522" end="5536" title="East Jerusalem" label="East Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="5577" end="5585" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670976" start="5650" end="5656" title="Latrun" label="Latrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="5734" end="5751" title="Palestinian state" label="Palestinian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123126" start="6145" end="6158" title="Robert Wright (journalist)" label="Robert Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q247003" start="6296" end="6307" title="Kiryat Arba" label="Kiryat Arba"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="6338" end="6344" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="6373" end="6380" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="6554" end="6562" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="6956" end="6961" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192963" start="7322" end="7336" title="Qibli Mosque" label="Al-Aqsa Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="7917" end="7929" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q125731" start="8246" end="8256" title="Ehud Barak" label="Ehud Barak"/>
<link wikidata="Q190354" start="8584" end="8593" title="Bantustan" label="Bantustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214178" start="8750" end="8756" title="Nablus" label="Nablus"/>
<link wikidata="Q374748" start="8761" end="8766" title="Jenin" label="Jenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q158119" start="8772" end="8780" title="Ramallah" label="Ramallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="8830" end="8839" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="8844" end="8850" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687" start="8894" end="8901" title="Jericho" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="9233" end="9242" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="9269" end="9281" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610806" start="9303" end="9310" title="Al-Aqsa" label="Al-Aqsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="9689" end="9701" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192963" start="10001" end="10015" title="Al-Aqsa mosque" label="Al-Aqsa mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192963" start="10349" end="10363" title="Qibli Mosque" label="Al-Aqsa Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q172077" start="10372" end="10388" title="Dome of the Rock" label="Dome of the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="10415" end="10427" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q127998" start="10601" end="10614" title="Mahmoud Abbas" label="Mahmoud Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q134821" start="11086" end="11098" title="Western Wall" label="Western Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q213274" start="11385" end="11393" title="Old City of Jerusalem" label="Old City"/>
<link wikidata="Q582706" start="11791" end="11801" title="Israeli settlement" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q502272" start="11855" end="11873" title="Ma&amp;#x27;ale Adumim" label="Ma&amp;#x27;ale Adumim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369607" start="11875" end="11891" title="Givat Ze&amp;#x27;ev" label="Givat Ze&amp;#x27;ev"/>
<link wikidata="Q990664" start="11897" end="11908" title="Gush Etzion" label="Gush Etzion"/>
<link wikidata="Q246590" start="12059" end="12066" title="Abu Dis" label="Abu Dis"/>
<link wikidata="Q831190" start="12068" end="12079" title="al-Eizariya" label="al-Eizariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061100" start="12081" end="12092" title="&amp;#x27;Anata" label="&amp;#x27;Anata"/>
<link wikidata="Q775087" start="12094" end="12099" title="A-Ram" label="A-Ram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12113" end="12120" title="Sawahre" label="Sawahre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026801" start="12254" end="12267" title="Sheikh Jarrah" label="Sheikh Jarrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448062" start="12269" end="12275" title="Silwan" label="Silwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916177" start="12280" end="12286" title="At-Tur (Mount of Olives)" label="at-Tur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506487" start="13281" end="13289" title="Palestinian refugee" label="refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="13432" end="13450" title="Palestinian people" label="Palestinian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q174438" start="14464" end="14482" title="Madeleine Albright" label="Madeleine Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561583" start="16697" end="16708" title="Gilead Sher" label="Gilead Sher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073881" start="16937" end="16944" title="Peter Beinart" label="Beinart"/>
<link wikidata="Q29636006" start="16980" end="16985" title="Nathalie Tocci" label="Tocci"/>
<link wikidata="Q247003" start="17163" end="17174" title="Kiryat Arba" label="Kiryat Arba"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="17179" end="17185" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q213274" start="17547" end="17568" title="Old City of Jerusalem" label="Old City of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186403" start="17591" end="17605" title="Jewish Quarter (Jerusalem)" label="Jewish Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645501" start="17623" end="17639" title="Armenian Quarter" label="Armenian Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781931" start="17671" end="17685" title="Muslim Quarter (Jerusalem)" label="Muslim Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391891" start="17694" end="17711" title="Christian Quarter" label="Christian Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q134821" start="17734" end="17746" title="Western Wall" label="Western Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="17781" end="17793" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192963" start="17794" end="17808" title="Al-Aqsa Mosque" label="Al-Aqsa Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="18544" end="18550" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q462211" start="18617" end="18633" title="Israeli Airforce" label="Israeli Airforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301488" start="18709" end="18724" title="Right of Return" label="Right of Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347302" start="18762" end="18775" title="Robert Malley" label="Robert Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q283791" start="19316" end="19336" title="family reunification" label="family reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="19722" end="19734" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610806" start="19746" end="19753" title="Al-Aqsa" label="Al-Aqsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555352" start="20158" end="20193" title="Gush Katif" label="settlement blocks in the Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409717" start="20667" end="20677" title="The Clinton Parameters" label="parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q684313" start="21280" end="21297" title="Taba summit" label="Taba negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q125731" start="21612" end="21622" title="Ehud Barak" label="Ehud Barak"/>
<link wikidata="Q60206" start="21645" end="21657" title="Ariel Sharon" label="Ariel Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738428" start="21822" end="21835" title="Heribert Adam" label="Heribert Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425802" start="21840" end="21854" title="Kogila Moodley" label="Kogila Moodley"/>
<link wikidata="Q621230" start="22900" end="22914" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 242" label="Resolution 242"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="24068" end="24081" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49106" start="24199" end="24226" title="al-Aqsa Intifada" label="series of Palestinian riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800210" start="24314" end="24323" title="Nabil Amr" label="Nabil Amr"/>
<link wikidata="Q42620" start="24350" end="24371" title="Palestinian Authority" label="Palestinian Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540963" start="24382" end="24389" title="My Life (Bill Clinton autobiography)" label="My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189483" start="24589" end="24600" title="Dennis Ross" label="Dennis Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751737" start="24709" end="24726" title="The Missing Peace (book)" label="The Missing Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301488" start="24970" end="24985" title="right of return" label="right of return"/>
<link wikidata="Q556137" start="25221" end="25227" title="Bandar bin Sultan" label="Bandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955259" start="25405" end="25422" title="The Oslo Syndrome" label="The Oslo Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q49121" start="25430" end="25452" title="Harvard Medical School" label="Harvard Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q183058" start="26148" end="26163" title="Alan Dershowitz" label="Alan Dershowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="26207" end="26225" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347302" start="26620" end="26633" title="Robert Malley" label="Robert Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824550" start="26647" end="26669" title="Clinton administration" label="Clinton administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610806" start="27375" end="27390" title="Haram al Sharif" label="Haram al Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="27988" end="28002" title="Anwar el-Sadat" label="Anwar el-Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q146906" start="28006" end="28028" title="King Hussein of Jordan" label="King Hussein of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712204" start="28432" end="28446" title="M.J. Rosenberg" label="M.J. Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920579" start="28576" end="28588" title="Martin Indyk" label="Martin Indyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q559208" start="28764" end="28778" title="Shlomo Ben-Ami" label="Shlomo Ben-Ami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185824" start="29267" end="29281" title="Democracy Now!" label="Democracy Now!"/>
<link wikidata="Q160163" start="29632" end="29650" title="Norman Finkelstein" label="Norman Finkelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709867" start="29706" end="29734" title="Journal of Palestine Studies" label="Journal of Palestine Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q515673" start="31317" end="31328" title="Gush Shalom" label="Gush Shalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438414" start="32681" end="32720" title="Mitchell Report (Arab–Israeli conflict)" label="Mitchell Report (Arab–Israeli conflict)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405535" start="32722" end="32755" title="History of the State of Palestine" label="History of the State of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q125731" start="32790" end="32800" title="Ehud Barak" label="Ehud Barak"/>
<link wikidata="Q559208" start="32902" end="32916" title="Shlomo Ben-Ami" label="Shlomo Ben-Ami"/>
<link wikidata="Q257407" start="32978" end="32990" title="Maariv" label="Ma&amp;#x27;ariv"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561583" start="32992" end="33003" title="Gilead Sher" label="Gilead Sher"/>
<link wikidata="Q127998" start="33159" end="33172" title="Mahmoud Abbas" label="Mahmoud Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709867" start="33263" end="33291" title="Journal of Palestine Studies" label="Journal of Palestine Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701611" start="33337" end="33350" title="Akram Haniyah" label="Akram Haniyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702244" start="33501" end="33509" title="Al-Ayyam (Ramallah)" label="al-Ayyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709867" start="33534" end="33562" title="Journal of Palestine Studies" label="Journal of Palestine Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q174438" start="33606" end="33624" title="Madeleine Albright" label="Madeleine Albright"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33639" end="33664" title="Madam Secretary: A Memoir" label="Madam Secretary: A Memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="33716" end="33728" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189483" start="33799" end="33810" title="Dennis Ross" label="Dennis Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390374" start="33896" end="33909" title="Kenneth Levin" label="Kenneth Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q402905" start="34031" end="34045" title="Ahron Bregman" label="Bregman, Ahron"/>
<link wikidata="Q858121" start="35130" end="35151" title="Le Monde diplomatique" label="Le Monde diplomatique"/>
<link wikidata="Q325679" start="36279" end="36289" title="Uri Avnery" label="Uri Avnery"/>
<link wikidata="Q515673" start="36328" end="36339" title="Gush Shalom" label="Gush Shalom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182774" wikidata="Q1779838" url="?curid=182774" title="Accounting standard">
<text>Publicly traded companies typically are subject to rigorous standards. Small and midsized businesses often follow more simplified standards, plus any specific disclosures required by their specific lenders and shareholders. Some firms operate on the cash method of accounting which can often be simple and straightforward. Larger firms most often operate on an accrual basis. Accrual basis is one of the fundamental accounting assumptions and if it is followed by the company while preparing the Financial statements then no further disclosure is required. Accounting standards prescribe in considerable detail what accruals must be made, how the financial statements are to be presented, and what additional disclosures are required. The term &quot;generally accepted accounting principles&quot; (GAAP) was popularized in the late 1930s.

Some important elements that accounting standards cover include identifying the exact entity which is reporting, discussing any &quot;going concern&quot; questions, specifying monetary units, and reporting time frames.

In the public sector, 30% of 165 governments surveyed used accrual accounting, rather than cash accounting, in 2020.

==Benefits==
The lack of transparent accounting standards in some nations has been cited as increasing the difficulty of doing business in them. In particular, the Asian financial meltdown in the late 1990s has been partially attributed to the lack of detailed accounting standards. Giant firms in some Asian countries were able to take advantage of their poorly devised accounting standards to cover up immense debts and losses, which yielded a collective effect that eventually led the whole region into financial crisis.

==Limitations==
The notable limitations of accounting standards are their inflexibility, time-consuming process to create them, the difficulty of choosing between alternative treatments and their restrictive scope. Accounting standards were largely written in the early 21st century. Accounting scandals such as Worldcom and Enron illustrate that, despite all these efforts, widespread fraud can still occur, and even be missed by the outside auditors.
==Accounting standards by nation==
* Canada – Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ( Canada)
* China – Chinese Accounting Standards (&quot;Zhōngguó qǐyè kuàijì zhǔnzé&quot; 中国企业会计准则) 
* France – Generally Accepted Accounting Practice (&quot;Plan Comptable Général&quot;)
* Germany – Generally Accepted Accounting Practice (&quot;Grundsätze ordnungsmäßiger Buchführung&quot;)
* India – Indian Accounting Standards (Ind_AS) can be used by Any Company within the rules and regulations under Companies Act,2013 And Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (USA) is used by Foreign and Multinational company in India 
* Italy – Principi contabili nazionali
* Luxembourg - Luxembourg Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (Lux GAAP)
* Nepal – Nepal Financial Reporting Standards
* Russia – Russian GAAP
* Sweden – BAS (accounting)
* Switzerland – Swiss GAAP FER (&quot;Fachempfehlungen zur Rechnungslegung&quot;)
* Turkey – Uniform Accounting Plan (Turkey)
* United Kingdom – Generally Accepted Accounting Practice (UK)
* United States – Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States) Domestic firms typically report in this format. Foreign firms that trade in the U.S. typically report in IFRS format (below). Statutory accounting principles are for insurance companies in the US.

==Global standardization and IFRS==
Many countries use or are converging on the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) that were established and are maintained by the International Accounting Standards Board. In some countries, local accounting principles are applied for regular companies but listed or large companies must conform to IFRS, so statutory reporting is comparable internationally.

All listed and grouped EU companies have been required to use IFRS since 2005, Canada moved in 2009, Taiwan in 2013, and other countries are adopting local versions.

In the United States, while &quot;... the SEC published a statement of continued support for a single set of high-quality, globally accepted accounting standards, and acknowledged that IFRS is best positioned to serve this role...&quot; progress is less evident.

==See also==
* Constant item purchasing power accounting
* Convention of consistency
* Convergence of accounting standards
* Creative accounting
* Forensic accounting
* Philosophy of accounting

==References==
== Further reading ==
* Meeks, Geoff, and GM Peter Swann. &quot;Accounting standards and the economics of standards.&quot; &quot;Accounting and Business Research&quot; 39.3 (2009): 191-210m

==External links==
*FASAB Handbook of Federal Accounting Standards (2014)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1308430" start="250" end="275" title="cash method of accounting" label="cash method of accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q832927" start="361" end="374" title="Basis of accounting" label="accrual basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779838" start="557" end="577" title="Accounting standard" label="Accounting standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906339" start="1119" end="1137" title="accrual accounting in the public sector" label="accrual accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215744" start="1987" end="2006" title="Accounting scandals" label="Accounting scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881291" start="2015" end="2023" title="Worldcom" label="Worldcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q327646" start="2028" end="2033" title="Enron" label="Enron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2193" end="2199" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981751" start="2202" end="2252" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (Canada)" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ( Canada)"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2255" end="2260" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100693" start="2263" end="2291" title="Chinese Accounting Standards" label="Chinese Accounting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2346" end="2352" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080435" start="2355" end="2430" title="French generally accepted accounting principles" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Practice (&amp;quot;Plan Comptable Général&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2433" end="2440" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2443" end="2534" title=":de:Grundsätze ordnungsmäßiger Buchführung" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Practice (&amp;quot;Grundsätze ordnungsmäßiger Buchführung&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2537" end="2542" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019786" start="2545" end="2581" title="Indian Accounting Standards" label="Indian Accounting Standards (Ind_AS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950654" start="2648" end="2666" title="Companies Act 2013" label="Companies Act,2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q650978" start="2671" end="2717" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (USA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2775" end="2780" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2783" end="2811" title=":it:Principi contabili nazionali" label="Principi contabili nazionali"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111387" start="2814" end="2889" title="Accountancy in Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg - Luxembourg Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (Lux GAAP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="2892" end="2897" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19321926" start="2900" end="2935" title="Nepal Financial Reporting Standards" label="Nepal Financial Reporting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2938" end="2944" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370559" start="2947" end="2959" title="Russian GAAP" label="Russian GAAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2962" end="2968" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18448723" start="2971" end="2987" title="BAS (accounting)" label="BAS (accounting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="2990" end="3001" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="3072" end="3078" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3116" end="3130" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981746" start="3133" end="3176" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Practice (UK)" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Practice (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3179" end="3192" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q650978" start="3195" end="3251" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604695" start="3378" end="3409" title="Statutory accounting principles" label="Statutory accounting principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q176831" start="3530" end="3573" title="International Financial Reporting Standards" label="International Financial Reporting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142430" start="3629" end="3669" title="International Accounting Standards Board" label="International Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4033" end="4046" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163665" start="4305" end="4346" title="Constant item purchasing power accounting" label="Constant item purchasing power accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166279" start="4349" end="4374" title="Convention of consistency" label="Convention of consistency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166387" start="4377" end="4412" title="Convergence of accounting standards" label="Convergence of accounting standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308363" start="4415" end="4434" title="Creative accounting" label="Creative accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663158" start="4437" end="4456" title="Forensic accounting" label="Forensic accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186255" start="4459" end="4483" title="Philosophy of accounting" label="Philosophy of accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534224" start="4524" end="4536" title="Meeks, Geoff" label="Meeks, Geoff"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182778" wikidata="Q613319" url="?curid=182778" title="Mike Piazza">
<text>Michael Joseph Piazza ( ; born September 4, 1968) is an American former professional baseball catcher who played 16 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB), from 1992 to 2007. He intended to serve as the manager of the Italian national baseball team in 2020 and 2021 championships, though was unable to do so because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Piazza played most notably for the New York Mets and Los Angeles Dodgers, while also having brief stints with the Florida Marlins, San Diego Padres, and Oakland Athletics. A 12-time All-Star and 10-time Silver Slugger Award winner at catcher, he produced strong offensive numbers at his position; in his career, he recorded 427 home runs—a record 396 of which were hit as catcher—along with a .308 batting average and 1,335 runs batted in (RBI).

Piazza was drafted by the Dodgers in the 1988 MLB draft as a favor from Tommy Lasorda to Piazza&#x27;s father. He was the last player selected and signed in his draft class to play in the Major Leagues. Initially a first baseman, Piazza converted to catcher in the minor leagues at Lasorda&#x27;s suggestion to improve his chances of being promoted. He made his major league debut in 1992 and the following year was named the National League (NL) Rookie of the Year and was an All-Star for the first of 10 consecutive seasons. Piazza immediately impressed with his ability to hit for power and average. His best year as a Dodger came in 1997 when he batted .362, hit 40 home runs, and had 124 RBI, leading to a runner-up finish in voting for the NL Most Valuable Player Award. In 1998, he was traded to the Marlins and then a week later to the Mets, with whom he spent most of the remainder of his career. He helped the Mets reach the 2000 World Series, the only World Series appearance of his career. After the 2005 season, Piazza left the Mets to play one season each for the Padres and Athletics before retiring after the 2007 season.

Piazza is regarded as one of the best offensive catchers in baseball history. He had at least one RBI in 15 straight games for the Mets in 2000, the second-longest RBI streak ever. In 2013, the Mets inducted Piazza into the New York Mets Hall of Fame. In 2016, Piazza was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame. Piazza owned the Italian soccer team A.C. Reggiana 1919, which played for two seasons (2017–2018) in Serie C under his leadership before its non-registration due to continued financial troubles.

==Early life==
Piazza was born in Norristown, Pennsylvania, grew up in Phoenixville, Pennsylvania, and attended Phoenixville Area High School. He is the second-oldest son of an Italian father named Vince (1932–2021) and a Slovak mother named Veronica, with brothers Vince Jr., Dan, Tony, and Tom. His father was the son of Italian immigrants from Sciacca, Sicily. Tom&#x27;s godfather was former MLB manager Tommy Lasorda. Mike grew up a Philadelphia Phillies fan and fan of Philadelphia sports, and admiring Hall of Fame third baseman Mike Schmidt. Piazza watched the Philadelphia 76ers court side in their January 1983 game when Julius Erving performed a defensive play by swiping the ball and completing his famous Rock-a-Baby dunk, which Piazza cited as one of his indelible childhood memories as a sports fan. Vince Piazza earned a fortune of more than $100 million in used cars and real estate, and attempted several times to purchase an MLB franchise. When the Dodgers—managed by Vince&#x27;s childhood friend Tommy Lasorda, the godfather of Mike Piazza&#x27;s youngest brother, Tommy—visited Philadelphia, Piazza visited the Dodger clubhouse and served as a bat boy in the dugout.

Vince&#x27;s own hopes of playing baseball had ended at the age of 16 when he left school to support his family. He saw that Piazza had potential in the sport, and began encouraging his son to build his arm strength at the age of five. When he was 16, Piazza received personal instruction in his backyard batting cage from Ted Williams. The Hall of Famer praised his talent, advised him not to let anyone change his swing, and autographed Piazza&#x27;s copy of Williams&#x27; &quot;The Science of Hitting&quot;. Vince threw hundreds of pitches nightly to his son, who shared his father&#x27;s focus on baseball, clearing snow if necessary to practice his hitting and, after reaching the major leagues, practicing on Christmas Eve. Piazza graduated from Phoenixville Area High School in 1986, after which he went to South Florida and joined the Miami Hurricanes his freshman year; receiving no playing time that season, Piazza transferred to Miami-Dade Community College. Piazza played first base at Miami-Dade in 1988. In 29 games, he hit .364 with three home runs and drove in 23 runs.

==Major league career==

===Los Angeles Dodgers===
After his father asked Lasorda to select Piazza as a favor, the Miami-Dade Community College student was drafted by the Dodgers in the 62nd round of the 1988 MLB amateur draft as the 1,390th player picked out of 1,395 players. Lasorda asked Piazza to give up his first base position and learn how to catch to improve his chances of reaching the major leagues and helped him attend a special training camp for catchers in the Dominican Republic. Piazza became an excellent hitter, especially for a catcher. His MLB debut came with the Dodgers on September 1, 1992, against the Chicago Cubs. He drew a walk in his first plate appearance and then doubled to deep center field in his first official at-bat, against Mike Harkey of the Cubs. He hit his first home run on September 12, 1992, against Steve Reed of the San Francisco Giants. He only appeared in 21 games that season, hitting .232.

Piazza won the NL Rookie of the Year Award in 1993 after appearing in 149 games, hitting .318, slugging 35 home runs, and driving in 112 RBI. He was also selected to the 1993 Major League Baseball All-Star Game, his first of 10 consecutive (and 12 total) All-Star appearances. Until Joc Pederson passed him in 2015, Piazza&#x27;s 18 home runs before the All-Star break was a Dodgers&#x27; rookie record. In 1996, Piazza hit .336 with 36 home runs and 105 RBI, finishing second in NL MVP voting, behind Ken Caminiti. Piazza&#x27;s best season with the Dodgers came in 1997, when he hit .362, with 40 home runs, 124 RBI, an on-base percentage of .431, and a slugging percentage of .638. He became the first catcher in MLB history to get 200 hits in a season. He finished second in NL MVP voting for the second straight year, behind Larry Walker.

===Florida Marlins===

Piazza played seven seasons for the Dodgers before he was traded to the Florida Marlins on May 15, 1998, after an offseason in which Piazza wanted a new contract prior to his eligibility for arbitration; Piazza wanted $105 million for seven years while the Dodgers offered $76 million for six years. Piazza blasted the Dodgers when his demands were criticized by fans and the media, blaming Vin Scully in particular. Piazza and Todd Zeile went to the Marlins in return for Gary Sheffield, Charles Johnson, Bobby Bonilla, Manuel Barrios, and Jim Eisenreich. He only appeared in five games with the Marlins, where he hit .278.

===New York Mets===

One week later, on May 22, Piazza was traded from the Marlins to the New York Mets for Preston Wilson, Ed Yarnall, and Geoff Goetz. Despite an excellent performance from Piazza, the Mets missed the 1998 postseason by one game. Piazza finished the 1998 season batting .328 with 32 home runs and 111 RBI, becoming the first player in MLB history to hit more than 30 home runs in a season while playing at least one game for three different franchises.

Piazza helped the Mets to two consecutive playoff appearances in 1999 and 2000. In the former season, Piazza tied his career highs of 40 home runs and 124 RBI. He also set the record for most home runs in a season without ever hitting more than one in a game, passing a mark previously set by Rogers Hornsby in 1929.
The following year, Piazza led the Mets to an NL pennant and a World Series appearance in the 2000 Subway Series. He became known as &quot;The Monster&quot; after coach John Stearns was caught on tape during the 2000 National League Championship Series after a Piazza hit saying &quot;The Monster is out of the Cage&quot;.

Piazza was involved in a bizarre incident during the 2000 World Series. Earlier in the season during interleague play, Yankees pitcher Roger Clemens hit Piazza in the head with a fastball. Piazza suffered a concussion and was forced to miss the 2000 MLB All-Star Game. Clemens was widely criticized by Mets fans for the incident, but Clemens maintained that the pitch was not intentional. Clemens and Piazza would go on to face each other again in the first inning of World Series Game 2. During the at-bat, Clemens threw a pitch that broke Piazza&#x27;s bat as he fouled it off, sending the barrel and a sharp edge of the broken bat directly at Clemens on the mound just as he finished his delivery. Clemens caught the barrel and threw it across the first base line towards the Yankees&#x27; dugout and just past Piazza who was running down to first. Piazza gave a long stare at Clemens and slowly started walking towards Clemens to confront him, and Clemens asked the umpire for a new ball as if nothing had happened. During replays, Clemens can be seen shouting &quot;I thought it was the ball!&quot; and asking the umpire for a new ball multiple times as the two benches cleared and met at the mound. Words were exchanged between the two players, but no punches were thrown from either team and nobody was ejected. Piazza later caught for Clemens when both were on the NL team in the 2004 All-Star Game. Clemens gave up six runs in the first inning.
Piazza&#x27;s game-winning 8th-inning home run in the first professional baseball game played in New York following the 9/11 attacks has been called iconic, therapeutic, and symbolic. The jersey he wore in that September 21, 2001 game was purchased in April 2016 for $365,000, the highest price ever paid for a modern-day jersey, and is displayed on a rotating basis among the 9/11 Memorial Museum, Citi Field, and the National Baseball Hall of Fame.

To ease the stress on his deteriorating knees, Piazza began to split his time between catching and playing first base during the 2004 season, an experiment which was abandoned before the end of the season because of Piazza&#x27;s defensive deficiencies. Although recognized as a great hitter, Piazza has had some notable defensive accomplishments. Among them, Piazza caught two no-hitters thrown by Ramón Martínez and Hideo Nomo while playing with the Dodgers. Nomo&#x27;s was particularly impressive because it happened at Coors Field, notorious for being a hitter-friendly ballpark. Additionally, Piazza&#x27;s .997 fielding percentage was the highest among NL catchers in 2000.

On May 5, 2004, Piazza surpassed Carlton Fisk for most home runs by a catcher with his 352nd.

On October 2, 2005, Piazza played his final game in a Mets uniform. Because it was well-reported that Piazza would soon depart to free agency, Mets manager Willie Randolph elected to replace Piazza in the top of the eighth inning. With the Shea Stadium crowd giving him a standing ovation, Piazza humbly bowed to the stands and blew kisses to the adoring fans.
===San Diego Padres===

Following the 2005 season, Piazza signed a one-year contract with the San Diego Padres on January 29, 2006.

Serving as the Padres&#x27; starting catcher and clean-up hitter, Piazza experienced somewhat of a rejuvenation in 2006, batting .283 with 22 homers and helping the Padres to a division title. On July 21, 2006, Piazza collected his 2,000th career hit.

On August 8, 2006, Piazza played his first game at Shea Stadium since leaving the Mets. Throughout the three-game series, Piazza drew frequent standing ovations from New York fans. It was on par with that of Tom Seaver on his return to pitch at Shea Stadium in 1977 and 1978. Even more telling was during that series, on August 9, he drew a rare curtain call in the opposing park following a home run off Mets pitcher (and former Dodgers and Mets teammate) Pedro Martínez in the fourth inning. Not done for the day, Piazza went deep off Martinez again in the sixth. With the Mets ahead 4–2 in the eighth, and two runners aboard, Piazza hit one to the wall in center, nearly bashing his third homer of the day and putting the Padres ahead.

===Oakland Athletics===
Piazza signed as a free agent with the Oakland Athletics on December 8, 2006.

On July 25, 2007, in the top of the ninth inning in a game between the Angels and Athletics at Angel Stadium, a fan threw a water bottle that hit Piazza, who had homered earlier in the game. Piazza pointed his bat in the stands at the fan he believed threw the water bottle to get the attention of security. The fan, who was identified as Roland Flores from La Puente, California, was arrested by the ballpark security. Piazza pressed charges against Flores, and Flores was sentenced to 30 days in jail and three years of probation on March 27, 2008. On September 26, against the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park, Piazza hit his 427th and what would be his final major league home run of his career, off of rookie pitcher Jon Lester.

After not being signed to any MLB team for the 2008 season, Piazza announced his retirement on May 20, 2008, saying, &quot;After discussing my options with my wife, family and agent, I felt it is time to start a new chapter in my life. It has been an amazing journey.&quot;

===Retirement===
Piazza made a return to Shea Stadium during the &quot;Shea Goodbye&quot; closing ceremony on September 28, 2008, where he received the final pitch in the history of the stadium from Hall of Famer Tom Seaver. Piazza and Seaver also officially &quot;closed&quot; Shea when they walked off together into the center field exit and closed the door on the park after waving goodbye to the capacity crowd. On April 13, 2009, Piazza received the very first pitch in the new Citi Field from Seaver before the Mets&#x27; opening game against the Padres.

==International baseball==
Before the 2006 MLB season, Piazza represented Italy in the 2006 World Baseball Classic.

Piazza was the Italian National Baseball team&#x27;s hitting coach at the 2009 and 2013 World Baseball Classic. He was an instructor for the Italian Baseball Academy when it won back-to-back European Baseball Championships in 2010 and 2012.

On November 13, 2019, Piazza announced that he would manage the Italian National Baseball team in the 2020 European Baseball Championship and the 2021 World Baseball Classic. Due to the coronavirus pandemic and cancellation of the 2020 European Baseball Club competitions, Piazza was unable to do so.

==Reggiana==
In 2016, Piazza purchased a majority ownership stake of the third-division Italian soccer club A.C. Reggiana in Reggio Emilia, with an estimated investment of $3 million. His interest grew from his friendship with former Italian soccer player Maurizio Franzone.

After two seasons of ownership and a controversial playoff loss to Robur Siena (with a penalty called in the 96th minute) Piazza put the team up for sale. Finding no buyers, and faced with mounting costs, including rent, the club ceased operations in July 2018. In December 2018 the team declared bankruptcy for the third time in twenty years. Piazza and his wife had feuded with Luca Vecchi, then mayor of Reggio Emilia, during their time as owners of the club.

==Legacy==

In a sixteen-year major league career, Piazza played in 1,912 games, accumulating 2,127 hits in 6,911 at bats for a .308 career batting average along with 427 home runs, 1,335 runs batted in, an on-base plus slugging percentage of .922 and an on-base percentage of .377. Piazza is one of the best-hitting catchers of all time, hitting 427 career home runs, 396 of them while he was playing the catcher position, a Major League Baseball record for career home runs by a catcher. Only eight other players have ever had over 400 home runs with over a .300 lifetime average while never striking out more than 100 times in a season (Ted Williams, Stan Musial, Lou Gehrig, Mel Ott, Hank Aaron, Babe Ruth, Vladimir Guerrero and Chipper Jones). He is one of only three players in history to win ten Silver Slugger Awards, along with Barry Bonds and Alex Rodriguez.

In addition to his hitting, Piazza&#x27;s defense has undergone a more positive reassessment in light of new defensive metrics. His pitch framing, in particular, ranks seventh-best among all catchers going back to the first data in 1988. Another report published in 2008 put him third among all catchers since 1948 in improving the performances of his pitchers.

Mets teammate Tom Glavine called Piazza a &quot;first-ballot Hall of Famer, certainly the best hitting catcher of our era and arguably the best hitting catcher of all time&quot;. On May 8, 2010, while receiving an award, Piazza said to reporters that if he got into the Hall of Fame, he would like to be inducted as a Met, for whom he played seven-plus seasons.

Piazza managed the USA team in the 2011 futures game wearing a Mets cap to the event.

On January 9, 2013, Piazza failed to be elected to Baseball Hall of Fame, receiving only 57.8% of the votes and falling short of the 75% qualifying votes. He stated that he would address the performance-enhancing drugs and steroid rumors in his book &quot;Long Shot&quot;. In his second appearance on the ballot, Piazza&#x27;s percentage numbers did rise (62.2%), but not to the 75% needed to be inducted. Piazza again failed to make the Hall of Fame in 2015, receiving 69.9% of the votes needed (28 votes shy of the mark). On January 6, 2016, Piazza was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame, receiving 83% of the vote.

Piazza was inducted into the New York Mets Hall of Fame on September 29, 2013. The New York Mets retired his uniform number, 31, in a ceremony on July 30, 2016, prior to the Mets&#x27; game against the Colorado Rockies at Citi Field.

A triangular pennant bearing Piazza&#x27;s surname and uniform number is in the background of character Peter Parker&#x27;s bedroom in the 2019 film &quot;Spider-Man: Far From Home&quot;. The song &#x27;Piazza, New York Catcher&#x27; by Scottish indie pop band Belle &amp; Sebastian is about Piazza. Piazza&#x27;s autobiography, entitled &quot;Long Shot&quot;, was released in February 2013.

==Acting==
Piazza appeared in the movie &quot;Two Weeks Notice&quot;. He has acted in various TV shows and commercials. During the 1994–95 MLB strike, Piazza and a handful of other striking players appeared as themselves in the November 27, 1994, episode of &quot;Married...with Children&quot;.

On May 3, 2013, Piazza debuted with the Miami City Ballet, saying a few lines in the role of a hit man in the troupe&#x27;s production of &quot;Slaughter on Tenth Avenue&quot;. Piazza sought to increase the reputation of ballet among sports fans after his daughter attended a ballet school.

In 2023, Piazza appeared on the Fox reality challenge series &quot;Special Forces: World&#x27;s Toughest Test&quot;.

==Personal life==
Piazza described Dodgers teammate Eric Karros as his &quot;best friend in baseball.&quot;

On January 29, 2005, Piazza married actress and &quot;Playboy&quot; Playmate Alicia Rickter at St. Jude Catholic Church in Miami, Florida. Angelica Bridges was the maid of honor. Piazza and Rickter have three children.

Piazza is known to be a fan of heavy metal music and is featured on the album &quot;Stronger than Death&quot; by Black Label Society. He is also godfather to Zakk Wylde&#x27;s son, Hendrix. He often cohosts Eddie Trunk&#x27;s &quot;Friday Night Rocks&quot; show on WAXQ (&quot;Q-104.3 FM&quot;) in New York City and was featured as the primary guest on an episode of &quot;That Metal Show&quot;. He is also an accomplished drummer and has performed on stage with various bands.

Piazza is a devout Roman Catholic. His faith was instilled in him by his Catholic mother and was featured in &quot;Champions of Faith&quot;, a DVD documentary exploring the intersection of Catholic religious faith and sports. He also appeared in the follow-up video &quot;Champions of Faith: Bases of Life&quot;.

Piazza is also avidly involved in the National Italian American Sports Hall of Fame in Chicago.

While playing with the Mets, Piazza was a resident of Cresskill, New Jersey. He also maintained a penthouse apartment on 18th Street in New York City.

==See also==
* List of Major League Baseball home run records
* List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career intentional bases on balls leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career OPS leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career putouts as a catcher leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career slugging percentage leaders
* List of Major League Baseball individual streaks
* List of members of the Baseball Hall of Fame
* Los Angeles Dodgers award winners and league leaders
* Mike Piazza&#x27;s Strike Zone
* New York Mets award winners and league leaders
==References==
==External links==
*
* Article from New York magazine, October 2000, about Piazza and the Mets
* HardRadio.com interview with Piazza about his passion for Heavy Metal music</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q613319" start="0" end="21" title="Mike Piazza" label="Michael Joseph Piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="85" end="93" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050571" start="94" end="101" title="catcher" label="catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="127" end="148" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019349" start="218" end="248" title="Italy national baseball team" label="Italian national baseball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q86458103" start="323" end="340" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Europe" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="377" end="390" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="395" end="414" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="456" end="471" title="Miami Marlins" label="Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="473" end="489" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="495" end="512" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="524" end="532" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366948" start="545" end="565" title="Silver Slugger Award" label="Silver Slugger Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="670" end="679" title="home runs" label="home runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="740" end="755" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="766" end="780" title="runs batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q11186071" start="830" end="844" title="1988 Major League Baseball draft" label="1988 MLB draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071896" start="861" end="874" title="Tommy Lasorda" label="Tommy Lasorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326154" start="1004" end="1017" title="first baseman" label="first baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="1215" end="1230" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q594227" start="1236" end="1254" title="Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award" label="Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q25039726" start="1373" end="1378" title="power hitter" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="1538" end="1564" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q922550" start="1724" end="1741" title="2000 World Series" label="2000 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013760" start="2152" end="2178" title="New York Mets Hall of Fame" label="New York Mets Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741103" start="2183" end="2187" title="2016 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="2215" end="2236" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q289707" start="2275" end="2293" title="A.C. Reggiana 1919" label="A.C. Reggiana 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010236" start="2468" end="2492" title="Norristown, Pennsylvania" label="Norristown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181862" start="2505" end="2531" title="Phoenixville, Pennsylvania" label="Phoenixville, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187047" start="2546" end="2575" title="Phoenixville Area High School" label="Phoenixville Area High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q432681" start="2781" end="2796" title="Sciacca, Sicily" label="Sciacca, Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071896" start="2842" end="2855" title="Tommy Lasorda" label="Tommy Lasorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="2872" end="2893" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147513" start="2970" end="2982" title="Mike Schmidt" label="Mike Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q138089" start="3003" end="3021" title="Philadelphia 76ers" label="Philadelphia 76ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q209921" start="3065" end="3078" title="Julius Erving" label="Julius Erving"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="3947" end="3959" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827330" start="4468" end="4484" title="Miami Hurricanes baseball" label="Miami Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027788" start="4565" end="4593" title="Miami Dade College" label="Miami-Dade Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="4659" end="4662" title="batting average (baseball)" label="hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="4679" end="4687" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="4693" end="4701" title="runs batted in" label="drove in"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027788" start="4827" end="4855" title="Miami-Dade Community College" label="Miami-Dade Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11186071" start="4916" end="4938" title="1988 Major League Baseball draft" label="1988 MLB amateur draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="5339" end="5351" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847136" start="5474" end="5485" title="Mike Harkey" label="Mike Harkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613708" start="5556" end="5566" title="Steve Reed (baseball)" label="Steve Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="5574" end="5594" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q594227" start="5671" end="5695" title="Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award" label="Rookie of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298322" start="5823" end="5863" title="1993 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="1993 Major League Baseball All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234668" start="5936" end="5948" title="Joc Pederson" label="Joc Pederson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="6136" end="6139" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147649" start="6155" end="6167" title="Ken Caminiti" label="Ken Caminiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154654" start="6275" end="6293" title="on-base percentage" label="on-base percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815849" start="6309" end="6328" title="slugging percentage" label="slugging percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="6435" end="6438" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218116" start="6483" end="6495" title="Larry Walker" label="Larry Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="6593" end="6608" title="Miami Marlins" label="Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422581" start="6912" end="6922" title="Vin Scully" label="Vin Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530293" start="6949" end="6959" title="Todd Zeile" label="Todd Zeile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098626" start="6994" end="7008" title="Gary Sheffield" label="Gary Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079558" start="7010" end="7025" title="Charles Johnson (catcher)" label="Charles Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246427" start="7027" end="7040" title="Bobby Bonilla" label="Bobby Bonilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194825" start="7062" end="7076" title="Jim Eisenreich" label="Jim Eisenreich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242019" start="7255" end="7269" title="Preston Wilson" label="Preston Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335615" start="7271" end="7281" title="Ed Yarnall" label="Ed Yarnall"/>
<link wikidata="Q262945" start="7912" end="7926" title="Rogers Hornsby" label="Rogers Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q922550" start="7999" end="8011" title="2000 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q181448" start="8035" end="8048" title="Subway Series" label="Subway Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258932" start="8105" end="8117" title="John Stearns" label="John Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001855" start="8148" end="8188" title="2000 National League Championship Series" label="2000 National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q713493" start="8204" end="8207" title="Hit (baseball)" label="hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q922550" start="8313" end="8330" title="2000 World Series" label="2000 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="8387" end="8394" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="8395" end="8408" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="8467" end="8477" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298338" start="8505" end="8527" title="2000 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="2000 MLB All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298342" start="9648" end="9666" title="2004 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="2004 All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="9834" end="9846" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136137" start="10091" end="10111" title="9/11 Memorial Museum" label="9/11 Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072882" start="10113" end="10123" title="Citi Field" label="Citi Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="10133" end="10163" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="10544" end="10553" title="no-hitter" label="no-hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418690" start="10565" end="10579" title="Ramón Martínez (pitcher)" label="Ramón Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q486690" start="10584" end="10594" title="Hideo Nomo" label="Hideo Nomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129916" start="10690" end="10701" title="Coors Field" label="Coors Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043433" start="10881" end="10893" title="Carlton Fisk" label="Carlton Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="11073" end="11084" title="Free agent" label="free agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569102" start="11099" end="11114" title="Willie Randolph" label="Willie Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="11183" end="11195" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287084" start="11898" end="11908" title="Tom Seaver" label="Tom Seaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195599" start="12036" end="12048" title="curtain call" label="curtain call"/>
<link wikidata="Q726918" start="12147" end="12161" title="Pedro Martínez" label="Pedro Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="12493" end="12510" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608799" start="12604" end="12610" title="2007 Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim season" label="Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q531897" start="12628" end="12641" title="Angel Stadium of Anaheim" label="Angel Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q475724" start="12891" end="12912" title="La Puente, California" label="La Puente, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="13113" end="13127" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="13131" end="13142" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q928223" start="13252" end="13262" title="Jon Lester" label="Jon Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231094" start="13312" end="13323" title="2008 MLB season" label="2008 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072882" start="14023" end="14033" title="Citi Field" label="Citi Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019349" start="14176" end="14181" title="Italy national baseball team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321947" start="14189" end="14216" title="2006 World Baseball Classic" label="2006 World Baseball Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363969" start="14302" end="14329" title="2013 World Baseball Classic" label="2013 World Baseball Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q809871" start="14568" end="14598" title="European Baseball Championship" label="European Baseball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q26457" start="14612" end="14634" title="World Baseball Classic" label="World Baseball Classic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14871" end="14884" title="AC Reggiana 1919#A.C. Reggiana 1919 (2005–2018)" label="A.C. Reggiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360" start="14888" end="14901" title="Reggio Emilia" label="Reggio Emilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852601" start="15019" end="15036" title="Maurizio Franzone" label="Maurizio Franzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19850596" start="15419" end="15430" title="Luca Vecchi" label="Luca Vecchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520121" start="15577" end="15582" title="Games played" label="games"/>
<link wikidata="Q713493" start="15603" end="15607" title="Hit (baseball)" label="hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208705" start="15617" end="15624" title="at bats" label="at bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090832" start="15710" end="15731" title="on-base plus slugging" label="on-base plus slugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154654" start="15758" end="15776" title="on-base percentage" label="on-base percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="16097" end="16109" title="Strikeout" label="striking out"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="16143" end="16155" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328142" start="16157" end="16168" title="Stan Musial" label="Stan Musial"/>
<link wikidata="Q357444" start="16170" end="16180" title="Lou Gehrig" label="Lou Gehrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q726655" start="16182" end="16189" title="Mel Ott" label="Mel Ott"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="16191" end="16201" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="16203" end="16212" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185254" start="16214" end="16231" title="Vladimir Guerrero" label="Vladimir Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q948508" start="16236" end="16249" title="Chipper Jones" label="Chipper Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366948" start="16306" end="16326" title="Silver Slugger Award" label="Silver Slugger Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q314712" start="16340" end="16351" title="Barry Bonds" label="Barry Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q558664" start="16356" end="16370" title="Alex Rodriguez" label="Alex Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q943668" start="16750" end="16761" title="Tom Glavine" label="Tom Glavine"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="16797" end="16810" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Hall of Famer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168187" start="17377" end="17404" title="performance-enhancing drugs" label="performance-enhancing drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="17409" end="17416" title="steroid" label="steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013760" start="17836" end="17862" title="New York Mets Hall of Fame" label="New York Mets Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q388858" start="18009" end="18025" title="Colorado Rockies" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069129" start="18044" end="18062" title="Pennon" label="triangular pennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23991129" start="18146" end="18158" title="Peter Parker (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="Peter Parker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18197" end="18222" title="Spider-Man: Far From Home" label="Spider-Man: Far From Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841366" start="18245" end="18269" title="Piazza, New York Catcher" label="Piazza, New York Catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q691568" start="18303" end="18324" title="Belle and Sebastian" label="Belle &amp;amp; Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q719823" start="18481" end="18497" title="Two Weeks Notice" label="Two Weeks Notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q208647" start="18699" end="18722" title="Married...with Children" label="Married...with Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307876" start="18771" end="18788" title="Miami City Ballet" label="Miami City Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539051" start="18875" end="18900" title="Slaughter on Tenth Avenue" label="Slaughter on Tenth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19090" end="19132" title="Special Forces: World&amp;#x27;s Toughest Test" label="Special Forces: World&amp;#x27;s Toughest Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056314" start="19193" end="19204" title="Eric Karros" label="Eric Karros"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="19304" end="19311" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q728711" start="19318" end="19326" title="Playboy Playmate" label="Playmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359106" start="19327" end="19341" title="Alicia Rickter" label="Alicia Rickter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19354" end="19362" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="19373" end="19378" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="19380" end="19387" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q455077" start="19389" end="19405" title="Angelica Bridges" label="Angelica Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="19501" end="19518" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754232" start="19554" end="19573" title="Stronger than Death" label="Stronger than Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q727736" start="19583" end="19602" title="Black Label Society" label="Black Label Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q144746" start="19628" end="19638" title="Zakk Wylde" label="Zakk Wylde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564618" start="19735" end="19739" title="WAXQ" label="WAXQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285279" start="19843" end="19858" title="That Metal Show" label="That Metal Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554689" start="20064" end="20082" title="Champions of Faith" label="Champions of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q15956062" start="20301" end="20346" title="National Italian American Sports Hall of Fame" label="National Italian American Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088520" start="20414" end="20435" title="Cresskill, New Jersey" label="Cresskill, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577606" start="20527" end="20573" title="List of Major League Baseball home run records" label="List of Major League Baseball home run records"/>
<link wikidata="Q9016370" start="20576" end="20625" title="List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643442" start="20628" end="20681" title="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037336" start="20684" end="20755" title="List of Major League Baseball career intentional bases on balls leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career intentional bases on balls leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589023" start="20758" end="20806" title="List of Major League Baseball career OPS leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career OPS leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037317" start="20809" end="20874" title="List of Major League Baseball career putouts as a catcher leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career putouts as a catcher leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244079" start="20877" end="20936" title="List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589011" start="20939" end="20995" title="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589022" start="20998" end="21062" title="List of Major League Baseball career slugging percentage leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career slugging percentage leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577608" start="21065" end="21113" title="List of Major League Baseball individual streaks" label="List of Major League Baseball individual streaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q649861" start="21116" end="21160" title="List of members of the Baseball Hall of Fame" label="List of members of the Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682122" start="21163" end="21215" title="Los Angeles Dodgers award winners and league leaders" label="Los Angeles Dodgers award winners and league leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313495" start="21218" end="21248" title="Mike Piazza&amp;#x27;s Strike Zone" label="Mike Piazza&amp;#x27;s Strike Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956393" start="21251" end="21297" title="New York Mets award winners and league leaders" label="New York Mets award winners and league leaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182779" wikidata="Q205768" url="?curid=182779" title="Sedimentology">
<text>Sedimentology encompasses the study of modern sediments such as sand, silt, and clay, and the processes that result in their formation (erosion and weathering), transport, deposition and diagenesis. Sedimentologists apply their understanding of modern processes to interpret geologic history through observations of sedimentary rocks and sedimentary structures.

Sedimentary rocks cover up to 75% of the Earth&#x27;s surface, record much of the Earth&#x27;s history, and harbor the fossil record. Sedimentology is closely linked to stratigraphy, the study of the physical and temporal relationships between rock layers or strata.

The premise that the processes affecting the earth today are the same as in the past is the basis for determining how sedimentary features in the rock record were formed. By comparing similar features today to features in the rock record—for example, by comparing modern sand dunes to dunes preserved in ancient aeolian sandstones—geologists reconstruct past environments.

==Sedimentary rock types==

There are four primary types of sedimentary rocks: clastics, carbonates, evaporites, and chemical.
* Clastic rocks are composed of particles derived from the weathering and erosion of precursor rocks and consist primarily of fragmental material. Clastic rocks are classified according to their predominant grain size and their composition. In the past, the term &quot;Clastic Sedimentary Rocks&quot; were used to describe silica-rich clastic sedimentary rocks, however there have been cases of clastic carbonate rocks. The more appropriate term is siliciclastic sedimentary rocks.
** Organic sedimentary rocks are important deposits formed from the accumulation of biological detritus, and form coal and oil shale deposits, and are typically found within basins of clastic sedimentary rocks
* Carbonates are composed of various carbonate minerals (most often calcium carbonate (CaCO3)) precipitated by a variety of organic and inorganic processes. 
* Evaporites are formed through the evaporation of water at the Earth&#x27;s surface and most commonly include halite or gypsum.
* Chemical sedimentary rocks, including some carbonates, are deposited by precipitation of minerals from aqueous solution. These include jaspilite and chert.

==Importance of sedimentary rocks==

Sedimentary rocks provide a multitude of products which modern and ancient society has come to utilise.
* Art: marble, although a metamorphosed limestone, is an example of the use of sedimentary rocks in the pursuit of aesthetics and art
* Architectural uses: stone derived from sedimentary rocks is used for dimension stone and in architecture, notably slate (metamorphosed shale) for roofing, sandstone for load-bearing buttresses
* Ceramics and industrial materials: clay for pottery and ceramics including bricks; cement and lime derived from limestone.
* Economic geology: sedimentary rocks host large deposits of SEDEX ore deposits of lead-zinc-silver, large deposits of copper, deposits of gold, tungsten, Uranium, and many other precious minerals, gemstones and industrial minerals including heavy mineral sands ore deposits
* Energy: petroleum geology relies on the capacity of sedimentary rocks to generate deposits of petroleum oils. Coal and oil shale are found in sedimentary rocks. A large proportion of the world&#x27;s uranium energy resources are hosted within sedimentary successions.
* Groundwater: sedimentary rocks contain a large proportion of the Earth&#x27;s groundwater aquifers. Our understanding of the extent of these aquifers and how much water can be withdrawn from them depends critically on our knowledge of the rocks that hold them (the reservoir).

== Basic principles ==

The aim of sedimentology, studying sediments, is to derive information on the depositional conditions which acted to deposit the rock unit, and the relation of the individual rock units in a basin into a coherent understanding of the evolution of the sedimentary sequences and basins, and thus, the Earth&#x27;s geological history as a whole.

The scientific basis of this is the principle of uniformitarianism, which states that the sediments within ancient sedimentary rocks were deposited in the same way as sediments which are being deposited at the Earth&#x27;s surface today.

Sedimentological conditions are recorded within the sediments as they are laid down; the form of the sediments at present reflects the events of the past and all events which affect the sediments, from the source of the sedimentary material to the stresses enacted upon them after diagenesis are available for study.

The principle of superposition is critical to the interpretation of sedimentary sequences, and in older metamorphic terrains or fold and thrust belts where sediments are often intensely folded or deformed, recognising younging indicators or graded bedding is critical to interpretation of the sedimentary section and often the deformation and metamorphic structure of the region.

Folding in sediments is analysed with the principle of original horizontality, which states that sediments are deposited at their angle of repose which, for most types of sediment, is essentially horizontal. Thus, when the younging direction is known, the rocks can be &quot;unfolded&quot; and interpreted according to the contained sedimentary information.

The principle of lateral continuity states that layers of sediment initially extend laterally in all directions unless obstructed by a physical object or topography.

The principle of cross-cutting relationships states that whatever cuts across or intrudes into the layers of strata is younger than the layers of strata.

== Methodology ==

The methods employed by sedimentologists to gather data and evidence on the nature and depositional conditions of sedimentary rocks include;
* Measuring and describing the outcrop and distribution of the rock unit;
** Describing the rock formation, a formal process of documenting thickness, lithology, outcrop, distribution, contact relationships to other formations
** Mapping the distribution of the rock unit, or units
* Descriptions of rock core (drilled and extracted from wells during hydrocarbon exploration)
* Sequence stratigraphy
** Describes the progression of rock units within a basin
* Describing the lithology of the rock;
** Petrology and petrography; particularly measurement of texture, grain size, grain shape (sphericity, rounding, etc.), sorting and composition of the sediment
* Analysing the geochemistry of the rock
** Isotope geochemistry, including use of radiometric dating, to determine the age of the rock, and its affinity to source regions

== Recent developments ==

The longstanding understanding of how some mudstones form has been challenged by geologists at Indiana University (Bloomington) and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The research, which appears in the December 14, 2007, edition of &quot;Science&quot;, counters the prevailing view of geologists that mud only settles when water is slow-moving or still, instead showing that &quot;muds will accumulate even when currents move swiftly.&quot; The research shows that some mudstones may have formed in fast-moving waters: &quot;Mudstones can be deposited under more energetic conditions than widely assumed, requiring a reappraisal of many geologic records.&quot;

Macquaker and Bohacs, in reviewing the research of Schieber et al., state that &quot;these results call for critical reappraisal of all mudstones previously interpreted as having been continuously deposited under still waters. Such rocks are widely used to infer past climates, ocean conditions, and orbital variations.&quot;

Considerable recent research into mudstones has been driven by the recent effort to commercially produce hydrocarbons from them as unconventional reservoirs, in both the shale gas and tight oil (or Light Tight Oil) plays.

Recent research by an Australian sedimentologist, Dutkiewicz, has described how geocirculation is related to global temperatures and climate change. The research described carbon and water circulation, and impacts of heat on current and future capacity of carbon capture by the ocean. 

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205768" start="0" end="13" title="Sedimentology" label="Sedimentology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="46" end="54" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="64" end="68" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="70" end="74" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="80" end="84" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="136" end="143" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="148" end="158" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445303" start="161" end="170" title="Transportation (sediment)" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987070" start="172" end="182" title="Deposition (geology)" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="187" end="197" title="diagenesis" label="diagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="316" end="333" title="sedimentary rocks" label="sedimentary rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982302" start="338" end="360" title="sedimentary structures" label="sedimentary structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="404" end="409" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q156312" start="445" end="465" title="History of Earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s history"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="482" end="495" title="fossil record" label="fossil record"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="532" end="544" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="622" end="628" title="stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q208650" start="635" end="642" title="Uniformitarianism" label="premise"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="902" end="911" title="sand dune" label="sand dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q215839" start="943" end="950" title="Aeolian processes" label="aeolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="1065" end="1082" title="sedimentary rocks" label="sedimentary rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q612133" start="1134" end="1147" title="Clastic rocks" label="Clastic rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="1191" end="1201" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="1206" end="1213" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140503" start="1339" end="1349" title="Particle size" label="grain size"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514925" start="1581" end="1594" title="siliciclastic" label="siliciclastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="1728" end="1732" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q221378" start="1737" end="1746" title="oil shale" label="oil shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q190429" start="1788" end="1794" title="Depression (geology)" label="basins"/>
<link wikidata="Q777913" start="1826" end="1836" title="Carbonate rocks" label="Carbonates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073138" start="1861" end="1879" title="carbonate minerals" label="carbonate minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="1892" end="1909" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q491689" start="1984" end="1993" title="Evaporite" label="Evaporite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314" start="2093" end="2099" title="halite" label="halite"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="2103" end="2109" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100753" start="2248" end="2257" title="jaspilite" label="jaspilite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="2262" end="2267" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="2413" end="2416" title="Art" label="Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="2418" end="2424" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="2437" end="2450" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2451" end="2460" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q121649" start="2616" end="2631" title="dimension stone" label="dimension stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="2639" end="2651" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="2661" end="2666" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="2682" end="2687" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156728" start="2693" end="2700" title="Roofing material" label="roofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="2702" end="2711" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q331900" start="2729" end="2737" title="buttress" label="buttress"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="2742" end="2749" title="Ceramic" label="Ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="2777" end="2781" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="2786" end="2793" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="2798" end="2805" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="2817" end="2822" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="2825" end="2831" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="2836" end="2840" title="lime (mineral)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2854" end="2863" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q853915" start="2867" end="2883" title="Economic geology" label="Economic geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264358" start="2926" end="2931" title="Sedimentary exhalative deposits" label="SEDEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="2948" end="2952" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="2953" end="2957" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="2958" end="2964" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="2984" end="2990" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="3004" end="3008" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="3010" end="3018" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="3020" end="3027" title="Uranium" label="Uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="3063" end="3072" title="gemstones" label="gemstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q461478" start="3107" end="3139" title="heavy mineral sands ore deposits" label="heavy mineral sands ore deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048416" start="3150" end="3167" title="petroleum geology" label="petroleum geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="3236" end="3245" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="3246" end="3249" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="3252" end="3256" title="Coal" label="Coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q221378" start="3261" end="3270" title="oil shale" label="oil shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="3342" end="3349" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="3412" end="3423" title="Groundwater" label="Groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="3502" end="3509" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="4578" end="4588" title="diagenesis" label="diagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q842427" start="4619" end="4645" title="Law of superposition" label="principle of superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q81659" start="4801" end="4807" title="fold (geology)" label="folded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622979" start="4833" end="4841" title="Younging direction" label="younging"/>
<link wikidata="Q390511" start="4856" end="4870" title="graded bedding" label="graded bedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362281" start="5038" end="5073" title="principle of original horizontality" label="principle of original horizontality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645395" start="5359" end="5390" title="principle of lateral continuity" label="principle of lateral continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232500" start="5526" end="5566" title="principle of cross-cutting relationships" label="principle of cross-cutting relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q66037955" start="5929" end="5943" title="rock formation" label="rock formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="6188" end="6211" title="hydrocarbon exploration" label="hydrocarbon exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732190" start="6215" end="6236" title="Sequence stratigraphy" label="Sequence stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538759" start="6312" end="6321" title="lithology" label="lithology"/>
<link wikidata="Q163082" start="6338" end="6347" title="Petrology" label="Petrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q289600" start="6352" end="6363" title="petrography" label="petrography"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826906" start="6393" end="6400" title="rock microstructure" label="texture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140503" start="6402" end="6412" title="Particle size" label="grain size"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="6512" end="6524" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674549" start="6540" end="6560" title="Isotope geochemistry" label="Isotope geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="6579" end="6597" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642424" start="6739" end="6747" title="mudstone" label="mudstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="6791" end="6823" title="Indiana University (Bloomington)" label="Indiana University (Bloomington)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="6832" end="6869" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="6942" end="6949" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642424" start="7727" end="7735" title="mudstone" label="mudstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q115822542" start="7824" end="7838" title="Unconventional (oil &amp;amp; gas) reservoir" label="unconventional"/>
<link wikidata="Q564726" start="7863" end="7872" title="shale gas" label="shale gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45734" start="7877" end="7886" title="tight oil" label="tight oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60845697" start="7966" end="7976" title="Adriana Dutkiewicz" label="Dutkiewicz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182781" wikidata="Q886799" url="?curid=182781" title="Bloody Sunday (1920)">
<text>Bloody Sunday () was a day of violence in Dublin on 21 November 1920, during the Irish War of Independence. More than 30 people were killed or fatally wounded.

The day began with an Irish Republican Army (IRA) operation, organised by Michael Collins, to assassinate the &quot;Cairo Gang&quot; – a group of undercover British intelligence agents working and living in Dublin. IRA operatives went to a number of addresses and killed or fatally wounded 15 men. Most were British Army officers, one was a Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) sergeant, and two were Auxiliaries responding to the attacks. At least two civilians were killed, but the status of some of those killed is unclear. Five others were wounded. The assassinations sparked panic among the British authorities, and many British agents fled to Dublin Castle for safety.

Later that afternoon, British forces raided a Gaelic football match in Croke Park. British RIC members called &quot;Black and Tans&quot;, Auxiliaries, and British soldiers, were sent to carry out a cordon and search operation. Without warning, the police opened fire on the spectators and players, killing or fatally wounding 14 civilians and wounding at least sixty others. Three of those killed were children. Some of the police claimed they were fired at, and this was accepted by the British authorities. All other witnesses said the shooting was unprovoked, and a military inquiry concluded it was indiscriminate and excessive. The massacre further turned Irish public opinion against the British authorities.

That evening, two Irish republicans (Dick McKee and Peadar Clancy) who had helped plan the earlier assassinations, along with a civilian (Conor Clune) who happened to be caught with the others, were beaten and shot dead in Dublin Castle by their British captors, who said that they were killed during an escape attempt. Two other IRA members were later convicted and hanged in March 1921 for their part in the assassinations.

Overall, the IRA assassination operation severely damaged British intelligence, while the later reprisals increased support for the IRA at home and abroad.

==Background==

Bloody Sunday was one of the most significant events to take place during the Irish War of Independence, which followed the declaration of an Irish Republic and the founding of its parliament, Dáil Éireann. The Irish Republican Army (IRA) waged a guerrilla war against British forces: the Royal Irish Constabulary and the British Army, who were tasked with suppressing it.

In response to increasing IRA activity, the British government began bolstering the RIC with recruits from Britain, who became known as &quot;Black and Tans&quot; due to their mixture of dark green RIC police and khaki military uniforms. It also formed an RIC paramilitary unit, the Auxiliary Division (or &quot;Auxiliaries&quot;). Both groups soon became notorious for their brutal treatment of the civilian population. In Dublin, the conflict largely took the form of assassinations and reprisals on both sides.

The events on the morning of 21 November were an effort by the IRA in Dublin, under Michael Collins and Richard Mulcahy, to destroy the British intelligence network in the city.

===Collins&#x27;s plan===

Michael Collins was the IRA&#x27;s Chief of Intelligence and Finance Minister of the Irish Republic. Since 1919 he had operated a clandestine &quot;Squad&quot; of IRA members in Dublin (a.k.a. &quot;The Twelve Apostles&quot;), who were tasked with assassinating prominent RIC officers and British agents, including suspected informers.

By late 1920, British Intelligence in Dublin had established an extensive network of spies and informers around the city. This included eighteen British Intelligence agents known as the &quot;Cairo Gang&quot;; a nickname which came from their patronage of the Cairo Café on Grafton Street and from their service in British military intelligence in Egypt and Palestine during the First World War. Mulcahy, the IRA Chief of Staff, described it as, &quot;a very dangerous and cleverly placed spy organisation&quot;.

In early November 1920, some prominent IRA members in Dublin were almost captured. On 10 November, Mulcahy narrowly evaded capture in a raid, but British forces seized documents which included names and addresses of 200 IRA members. Shortly after, Collins ordered the assassination of British agents in the city, judging that if this was not done, the IRA&#x27;s organisation in the capital would be in grave danger. The IRA also believed that British forces were implementing a coordinated policy of assassination of leading republicans.

Dick McKee was put in charge of planning the operation. The addresses of the British agents were discovered from a variety of sources, including sympathetic maids and other servants, careless talk from some of the British, and an IRA informant in the RIC (Sergeant Mannix) based in Donnybrook barracks. Collins&#x27;s plan had initially been to kill more than 50 suspected British intelligence officers and informers, but the list was reduced to thirty-five on the insistence of Cathal Brugha, the Minister for Defence for the Irish Republic, reportedly on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence against some of those named. The number was eventually lowered again, to 20.

On the night of 20 November, the leaders of the assassination teams, which included the Squad and members of the IRA&#x27;s Dublin Brigade, were briefed on their targets, which included twenty agents at eight different locations in Dublin. Two of those who attended the meeting—Dick McKee and Peadar Clancy—were arrested in a raid a few hours later, and Collins narrowly evaded capture in another raid.

==Bloody Sunday==

===Morning: IRA assassinations===
Early on the morning of 21 November, the IRA teams mounted the operation. Most of the assassinations occurred within a small middle-class area of south inner-city Dublin, except for two shootings at the Gresham Hotel on Sackville Street (now O&#x27;Connell Street). At 28 Upper Pembroke Street, six British Army officers were shot. Two Intelligence officers were killed outright; (Lieutenant-Colonel Hugh Montgomery), a staff officer, died of his wounds on 10 December; the rest survived. Another successful attack took place at 38 Upper Mount Street, where another two Intelligence officers were killed. A British Army dispatch rider stumbled upon the operation on Upper Mount Street and was held at gunpoint by the IRA. As they left the scene the IRA exchanged fire with a British major who had spotted them from a nearby house.

At 22 Lower Mount Street, one Intelligence officer was killed, but another escaped. A third, surnamed &quot;Peel&quot;, managed to keep the assassins from entering his room. The building was then surrounded by members of the Auxiliary Division, who happened to be passing by, and the IRA team was forced to shoot its way out. One IRA volunteer, Frank Teeling, was shot and captured as the team fled the building. In the meantime, two of the Auxiliaries had been sent on foot to bring reinforcements from the nearby barracks. They were captured by an IRA team on Mount Street Bridge and marched to a house on Northumberland Road where they were interrogated and shot dead. They were the first Auxiliaries to be killed on active duty.

At 117 Morehampton Road, the IRA killed a sixth Intelligence officer, but also shot his civilian landlord, presumably by mistake. While at the Gresham Hotel, they killed another two men who were apparently civilians, both of them former British officers who served in the First World War. The IRA team had ordered a hotel porter to take them to specific rooms. In one of them (MacCormack) was apparently not the intended target. The status of the other (Wilde) is unclear. According to one of the IRA team, James Cahill, Wilde told the IRA he was an Intelligence officer when asked his name, apparently mistaking them for a police raiding party.

One of the IRA volunteers who took part in these attacks, Seán Lemass, later became a prominent Irish politician and served as Taoiseach. On the morning of Bloody Sunday, he took part in the assassination of a British court-martial officer at 119 Lower Baggot Street. Another court-martial officer was killed at another address on the same street. At 28 Earlsfort Terrace, an RIC sergeant named Fitzgerald was killed, but apparently the target was a British lieutenant-colonel Fitzpatrick.

There has been confusion and disagreement about the status of the IRA&#x27;s victims on the morning of Bloody Sunday. At the time, the British government said that the men killed were ordinary British officers or (in some cases) innocent civilians. The IRA were convinced that most of their targets had been British Intelligence agents. In a 1972 article, historian Tom Bowden concluded that &quot;the officers shot by the IRA were, in the main, involved in some aspect of British intelligence&quot;. Charles Townshend disagreed: in a response published in 1979, he criticised Bowden&#x27;s work, while presenting evidence from the Collins Papers to show that &quot;several of the 21st November cases were just regular officers&quot;. The most recent research, by Irish military historian Jane Leonard, concluded that, of the nine British officers who were killed, six had been undertaking intelligence work; two had been court-martial officers; another was a senior staff officer serving with Irish Command, but unconnected with military intelligence. One of the two men shot at the Gresham Hotel (Wilde) was probably on secret service, but the other was an innocent civilian, killed because the assassins went to the wrong room.

In all, 14 men were killed outright, and another was mortally wounded, while five others were wounded but survived. Only one Squad member was captured, Frank Teeling, but he managed to escape from jail soon after. Another IRA volunteer was slightly wounded in the hand. IRA volunteer and future Irish politician, Todd Andrews, said later that &quot;the fact is that the majority of the IRA raids were abortive. The men sought were not in their digs or in several cases, the men looking for them bungled their jobs&quot;.

Collins justified the killings in this way: My one intention was the destruction of the undesirables who continued to make miserable the lives of ordinary decent citizens. I have proof enough to assure myself of the atrocities which this gang of spies and informers have committed. If I had a second motive it was no more than a feeling such as I would have for a dangerous reptile. By their destruction the very air is made sweeter. For myself, my conscience is clear. There is no crime in detecting in wartime the spy and the informer. They have destroyed without trial. I have paid them back in their own coin.

List of those killed
*Lieutenant Peter Ames (British Army Intelligence Officer) – Upper Mount Street
*Lieutenant Henry Angliss (cover name &#x27;Patrick McMahon&#x27;, British Army Intelligence Officer) – Lower Mount Street
*Lieutenant Geoffrey Baggallay (British Army Court-Martial Officer) – 119 Lower Baggot St
*Lieutenant George Bennett (British Army Intelligence Officer) – Upper Mount Street
*Major Charles Dowling (British Army Intelligence Officer) – Pembroke Street
*Sergeant John Fitzgerald (RIC officer) – Earlsfort Terrace
*Auxiliary Frank Garniss (RIC Auxiliary, former British Army lieutenant) – Northumberland Road
*Lieutenant Donald MacLean (British Army Intelligence Officer) – Morehampton Road
*Patrick MacCormack (civilian, former British Army RAVC captain) – Gresham Hotel
*Lieutenant-Colonel Hugh Montgomery (British Army Staff Officer) – Pembroke Street (died on 10 December)
*Auxiliary Cecil Morris (RIC Auxiliary, former British Army captain) – Northumberland Road
*Captain William Newberry (British Army Court-Martial Officer) – 92 Lower Baggot Street
*Captain Leonard Price (British Army Intelligence Officer) – Pembroke Street
*Thomas Smith (civilian, landlord of MacLean) – Morehampton Road
*Leonard Wilde (civilian and possible Intelligence agent, former British Army lieutenant) – Gresham Hotel

===Afternoon: Croke Park massacre===

The Dublin Gaelic football team was scheduled to play the Tipperary team later the same day in Croke Park, the Gaelic Athletic Association&#x27;s major football ground. Money raised from ticket sales would go to the Republican Prisoners&#x27; Dependents&#x27; Fund. Despite the general unease in Dublin as news broke of the assassinations, a war-weary populace continued with life. At least 5,000 spectators went to Croke Park for the match, which began thirty minutes late, at 3:15 p.m.

Meanwhile, unbeknownst to the crowd, British forces were approaching and preparing to raid the match. A convoy of troops in trucks and three armoured cars drove in from the north and halted along Clonliffe Road. A convoy of RIC police drove in from the southwest, along Russell Street–Jones&#x27;s Road. It comprised twelve trucks of Black and Tans in front and six trucks of Auxiliaries behind. Several plain-clothes Auxiliaries also rode in front with the Black and Tans. Their orders were to surround Croke Park, guard the exits, and search every man. The authorities later stated that their intention was to announce by megaphone that all males leaving the grounds would be searched and that anyone leaving by other means would be shot. However, for some reason, shots were fired by police as soon as they reached the southwest gate at the Royal Canal end of Croke Park, at 3:25 pm.

Some of the police later claimed they were fired on first as they arrived outside Croke Park, allegedly by IRA sentries; but other police at the front of the convoy did not corroborate this, and there is no convincing evidence for it. Civilian witnesses all agreed that the RIC opened fire without provocation as they ran into the grounds. Two Dublin Metropolitan Police (DMP) constables on duty near the Canal gate did not report the RIC being fired on. Another DMP constable testified that an RIC group also arrived at the Main gate and began firing in the air. Correspondents for the &quot;Manchester Guardian&quot; and Britain&#x27;s &quot;Daily News&quot; interviewed witnesses, and concluded that the &quot;IRA sentries&quot; were actually ticket-sellers: It is the custom at this football ground for tickets to be sold outside the gates by recognised ticket-sellers, who would probably present the appearance of pickets, and would naturally run inside at the approach of a dozen military lorries. No man exposes himself needlessly in Ireland when a military lorry passes by. The police in the convoy&#x27;s leading trucks appear to have jumped out, run down the passage to the Canal end gate, forced their way through the turnstiles, and started firing rapidly with rifles and revolvers. Ireland&#x27;s &quot;Freeman&#x27;s Journal&quot; reported that The spectators were startled by a volley of shots fired from inside the turnstile entrances. Armed and uniformed men were seen entering the field, and immediately after the firing broke out scenes of the wildest confusion took place. The spectators made a rush for the far side of Croke Park and shots were fired over their heads and into the crowd.

The police kept shooting for about ninety seconds. Their commander, Major Mills, later admitted that his men were &quot;excited and out of hand&quot;. Some police fired into the fleeing crowd from the pitch, while others, outside the grounds, opened fire from the Canal Bridge at spectators who climbed over the Canal Wall trying to escape. At the other side of the Park, soldiers on Clonliffe Road were startled first by the sound of the fusillade, then by the sight of panicked people fleeing the grounds. As the spectators streamed out, an armoured car on St James Avenue fired its machine guns over the heads of the crowd, trying to halt them.

By the time Major Mills got his men back under control, the police had fired 114 rounds of rifle ammunition, while fifty rounds were fired from the armoured car outside the Park. Seven people had been shot to death, and five more had been shot and wounded so badly that they later died; another two people had died in the crowd crush. The dead included Jane Boyle, the only woman killed, who had gone to the match with her fiancé and was due to be married five days later. Two boys aged ten and eleven were shot dead. Two football players, Michael Hogan and Jim Egan, had been shot; Egan survived but Hogan was killed, the only player fatality. There were dozens of other wounded and injured. The police raiding party suffered no casualties.

Once the firing stopped, the security forces searched the remaining men in the crowd before letting them go. The military raiding party recovered one revolver: a local householder testified that a fleeing spectator had thrown it away in his garden. The British authorities stated that 30–40 discarded revolvers were found in the grounds. However, Major Mills stated that no weapons were found on the spectators or in the grounds.

The actions of the police were officially unauthorised and were greeted with horror by the British authorities at Dublin Castle. In an effort to cover up the nature of the behaviour by British forces, a press release was issued which claimed:A number of men came to Dublin on Saturday under the guise of asking to attend a football match between Tipperary and Dublin. But their real intention was to take part in the series of murderous outrages which took place in Dublin that morning. Learning on Saturday that a number of these gunmen were present in Croke Park, the Crown forces went to raid the field. It was the original intention that an officer would go to the centre of the field and speaking from a megaphone, invite the assassins to come forward. But on their approach, armed pickets gave warning. Shots were fired to warn the wanted men, who caused a stampede and escaped in the confusion.

&quot;The Times&quot;, which during the war was a pro-Unionist publication, ridiculed Dublin Castle&#x27;s version of events, as did a British Labour Party delegation visiting Ireland at the time. British Brigadier Frank Percy Crozier, overall commander of the Auxiliary Division, later resigned over what he believed was the official condoning of the unjustified actions of the Auxiliaries in Croke Park. One of his officers told him that &quot;Black and Tans fired into the crowd without any provocation whatsoever&quot;. Major Mills stated: &quot;I did not see any need for any firing at all&quot;.

List of the Croke Park victims
*Jane Boyle (26), Dublin
*James Burke (44), Dublin
*Daniel Carroll (31), Tipperary (died 23 November)
*Michael Feery (40), Dublin
*Michael &#x27;Mick&#x27; Hogan (24), Tipperary
*Tom Hogan (19), Limerick (died 26 November)
*James Matthews (38), Dublin
*Patrick O&#x27;Dowd (57), Dublin
*Jerome O&#x27;Leary (10), Dublin
*William Robinson (11), Dublin (died 22 November)
*Tom Ryan (27), Wexford
*John William Scott (14), Dublin
*James Teehan (26), Tipperary
*Joe Traynor (21), Dublin

===Evening: Dublin Castle killings===

Later that night, two high-ranking IRA officers, Dick McKee and Peadar Clancy, together with another man, Conor Clune, were killed while being held and interrogated in Dublin Castle. McKee and Clancy had been involved in planning the assassinations of the British agents, and had been captured in a raid hours before they took place. Clune, a member of the Gaelic League, had joined the Irish Volunteers shortly after it was founded, but it is unclear if he was ever active. He had been arrested in another raid on a hotel that IRA members had just left.

Their captors said that, because there was no room in the cells, the prisoners were placed in a guardroom containing arms, and were killed while trying to escape. They allegedly threw grenades, which did not detonate, then fired at the guards with a rifle, but missed. They were shot by Auxiliaries. Medical examination found broken bones and abrasions consistent with prolonged assaults, and bullet wounds to the head and body. Their faces were covered in cuts and bruises, and McKee had an apparent bayonet wound in his side. Michael Lynch, an IRA Brigade Commander stated that McKee suffered severe beatings prior to being shot to death – &quot;I saw Dick McKee&#x27;s body afterwards, and it was almost unrecognizable. He had evidently been tortured before being shot...They must have beaten Dick to a pulp. When they threatened him with death, according to reports, Dick&#x27;s last words were, Go on, and do your worst!&quot;

However, Clune&#x27;s employer, Edward MacLysaght, who viewed the corpses at King George V Hospital, stated that the claim &quot;that their faces were so battered about as to be unrecognisable and horrible to look at is quite untrue. I remember those pale dead faces as if I had looked at them yesterday, they were not disfigured&quot;. An army doctor who examined the bodies found signs of discolouring on the skin, but stated this could have been the result of how the bodies were left lying. He found numerous bullet wounds as did a private doctor hired by Edward MacLysaght but no signs of any other injuries such as bayoneting. IRA mole David Neligan was also adamant about this fact. Head of British Intelligence Brigadier General Ormonde Winter carried out his own private investigation, interviewing the guards and inspecting the scene, pronouncing himself happy with their account, noting &quot;One of the rebels was lying on his back near the fireplace, with a grenade in his right hand, and the other two were close by. And on a form in front of the fireplace I found a deep cut that had been made by the spade when it had been used to attack the auxiliary. I extracted the bullet from the door and at once reported to Sir John Anderson who, somewhat dubious of the accuracy of my information, accompanied me to the guardroom. He listened to the statements of the auxiliaries and I was able to show him ocular and tangible proof of them&quot;.

==Aftermath==
Together, the attacks on the British agents, and the British massacre of civilians, damaged British authority and increased support for the IRA. The killings of the match-goers (including a woman, two children, and a player) made international headlines, damaging British credibility and further turning the Irish public against the British authorities. Some contemporary newspapers, including the nationalist &quot;Freeman&#x27;s Journal&quot;, likened the shootings in Croke Park to the Amritsar massacre, which had taken place in India in April 1919. Later commentators also did likewise.

When Joseph Devlin, an Irish Parliamentary Party Member of Parliament (MP), tried to bring up the Croke Park massacre at Westminster, he was shouted down and physically assaulted by his fellow MPs; the sitting had to be suspended. There was no public inquiry into the Croke Park massacre. Instead, two British military courts of inquiry into the massacre were held behind closed doors, at the Mater Hospital and at Jervis Street Hospital. More than thirty people gave evidence, most of them anonymous Black and Tans, Auxiliaries and British soldiers. One inquiry concluded that unknown civilians probably fired first, either as a warning of the raid or to create panic. But it also concluded: &quot;the fire of the RIC was carried out without orders and exceeded the demands of the situation&quot;. Major General Boyd, the British officer commanding Dublin District, added that in his opinion, the firing on the crowd &quot;was indiscriminate, and unjustifiable, with the exception of any shooting which took place inside the enclosure&quot;. The findings of these inquiries were suppressed by the British Government, and only came to light in 2000.

The IRA assassinations sparked panic among the British military authorities, and numerous British agents fled to Dublin Castle for safety. In Britain and in the short term, the killings of the British Army officers received more attention. The bodies of nine of the Army officers assassinated were brought in procession through the streets of London en route to their funerals. The fate of the British agents was seen in Dublin as an IRA intelligence victory, but British Prime Minister David Lloyd George commented dismissively that his men &quot;got what they deserved, beaten by counter-jumpers&quot;. Winston Churchill added that the agents were &quot;careless fellows ... who ought to have taken precautions&quot;.

One IRA member was captured during the assassinations that morning, and several others were arrested in the following days. Frank Teeling (who had been captured) was tried for the killing of Lieutenant Angliss along with William Conway, Edward Potter and Daniel Healy. Teeling, Conway and Potter were convicted and sentenced to death. Teeling escaped from prison and the other two were later reprieved. Thomas Whelan, James Boyce, James McNamara and Michael Tobin were arrested for the killing of Lieutenant Baggallay. Only Whelan was convicted; he was executed on 14 March 1921. Patrick Moran was sentenced to death for Gresham Hotel killings and also executed on 14 March.

The Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) named one of the stands in Croke Park as the Hogan Stand in memory of Michael Hogan, the football player killed in the incident.

James &quot;Shanker&quot; Ryan, who had informed on Clancy and McKee, was shot and killed by the IRA in February 1921.

IRA assassinations continued in Dublin for the remainder of the war, in addition to more large-scale urban guerrilla actions by the Dublin Brigade. By the spring of 1921, the British had rebuilt their intelligence organisation in Dublin, and the IRA were planning another assassination attempt on British agents in the summer of that year. However, many of these plans were called off because of the truce that ended the war in July 1921.

== 22 Lower Mount Street trial ==
The trial for the Lower Mount Street killings was held as a Field General Court-martial at City Hall in Dublin, on Tuesday 25 January 1921. The four accused men were William Conway, Daniel Healy, Edward Potter, and Frank Teeling. Daniel Healy was excused by the prosecution and given a separate trial after a petition by counsel that the evidence against the other prisoners would embarrass his client. The trial of the three other prisoners proceeded. They were charged with the murder of Lieutenant H. Angliss of the Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers, otherwise known as Mr McMahon of 22 Lower Mount Street. The whole of Ireland was enthralled by the trial, with most Irish newspapers and international newspapers reporting it.

The prosecution opened with an account of the start of the incident:
Mr &quot;C&quot; was brought forward as a witness on 28 January and was identified as the man sleeping in the same bed who escaped by jumping out the window when the attackers came into the room. Mr &quot;C&quot; was identified as Lieutenant John Joseph Connolly.

Mr &quot;B&quot; was another trial witness, and he was later identified as Lt Charles R. Peel. His description of the incident during the trial was reported in Hansard:
The &quot;Irish Independent&quot; (26 January 1921) reported that &quot;Cross examined by a witness at the house, Mr. Bewley said &#x27;he did not see Teeling in the house.&#x27; He saw him being carried out from the yard. One witness stated that he took the first witness Nellie Stapleton to Wellington Barracks on 17 December. She was put into a corridor in which there 3 or 4 windows covered with brown paper. Eight prisoners were brought out and the lady pointed out Potter. The man who shared McMahons room, Mr. &#x27;C&#x27; also identified Potter.&quot;

Frank Teeling managed to escape from Kilmainham in a daring raid organised by Collins.

&quot;The Irish Times&quot; reported that on 6 March 1921, the death sentences of Conway and Potter were commuted by the Viceroy of Ireland to penal servitude. Daniel Healy was eventually acquitted.

==See also==
* List of massacres in Ireland

==References==
===Notes===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Collins, Lorcan, (2019), &quot;Irelands War of Independence 1919–1921&quot;, The O&#x27;Brien Press, Dublin, </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q886799" start="0" end="13" title="Bloody Sunday (1920)" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="42" end="48" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="81" end="106" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084968" start="183" end="204" title="Irish Republican Army (1919–1922)" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q173196" start="235" end="250" title="Michael Collins (Irish leader)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920646" start="277" end="287" title="Cairo Gang" label="Cairo Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="469" end="481" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549059" start="502" end="526" title="Royal Irish Constabulary" label="Royal Irish Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q789704" start="556" end="567" title="Auxiliary Division" label="Auxiliaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q204632" start="877" end="892" title="Gaelic football" label="Gaelic football"/>
<link wikidata="Q478225" start="902" end="912" title="Croke Park" label="Croke Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q880656" start="947" end="961" title="Black and Tans" label="Black and Tans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170034" start="1029" end="1046" title="cordon and search" label="cordon and search"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587023" start="1584" end="1594" title="Dick McKee" label="Dick McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157768" start="1599" end="1612" title="Peadar Clancy" label="Peadar Clancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162213" start="1685" end="1696" title="Conor Clune" label="Conor Clune"/>
<link wikidata="Q742767" start="1770" end="1783" title="Dublin Castle" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042670" start="2271" end="2282" title="Irish Declaration of Independence" label="declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140152" start="2289" end="2303" title="Irish Republic" label="Irish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="2340" end="2352" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084968" start="2358" end="2379" title="Irish Republican Army (1917–22)" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="2394" end="2407" title="guerrilla war" label="guerrilla war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549059" start="2436" end="2460" title="Royal Irish Constabulary" label="Royal Irish Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q880656" start="2663" end="2677" title="Black and Tans" label="Black and Tans"/>
<link wikidata="Q789704" start="2804" end="2822" title="Auxiliary Division" label="Auxiliary Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q173196" start="3120" end="3135" title="Michael Collins (Irish leader)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q560499" start="3140" end="3155" title="Richard Mulcahy" label="Richard Mulcahy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125131" start="3390" end="3395" title="The Squad (IRA unit)" label="Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920646" start="3771" end="3781" title="Cairo Gang" label="Cairo Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q135501" start="3853" end="3867" title="Grafton Street" label="Grafton Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q370173" start="3927" end="3932" title="Sultanate of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="3937" end="3946" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3958" end="3973" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587023" start="4633" end="4643" title="Dick McKee" label="Dick McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776296" start="4915" end="4925" title="Donnybrook, Dublin" label="Donnybrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q560482" start="5112" end="5125" title="Cathal Brugha" label="Cathal Brugha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587023" start="5595" end="5605" title="Dick McKee" label="Dick McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157768" start="5610" end="5623" title="Peadar Clancy" label="Peadar Clancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607580" start="5977" end="5990" title="Gresham Hotel" label="Gresham Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190487" start="6016" end="6037" title="O&amp;#x27;Connell Street" label="O&amp;#x27;Connell Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q15971273" start="6174" end="6189" title="Hugh Montgomery (Royal Marines officer)" label="Hugh Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422947" start="6394" end="6408" title="dispatch rider" label="dispatch rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008105" start="6951" end="6964" title="Frank Teeling" label="Frank Teeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q467680" start="8045" end="8056" title="Seán Lemass" label="Seán Lemass"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="8114" end="8123" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q105560870" start="8341" end="8358" title="Earlsfort Terrace" label="Earlsfort Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812247" start="10023" end="10035" title="Todd Andrews" label="Todd Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q50414394" start="10869" end="10890" title="Peter Ashmun Ames" label="Lieutenant Peter Ames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373699" start="11610" end="11614" title="Royal Army Veterinary Corps" label="RAVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15971273" start="11641" end="11675" title="Hugh Montgomery (Royal Marines officer)" label="Lieutenant-Colonel Hugh Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430769" start="12215" end="12221" title="Dublin GAA" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204632" start="12222" end="12237" title="Gaelic football" label="Gaelic football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753316" start="12269" end="12278" title="Tipperary GAA" label="Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q548520" start="12322" end="12349" title="Gaelic Athletic Association" label="Gaelic Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160445" start="12841" end="12854" title="Peerless armoured car" label="armoured cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q880656" start="13034" end="13048" title="Black and Tans" label="Black and Tans"/>
<link wikidata="Q789704" start="13076" end="13087" title="Auxiliary Division" label="Auxiliaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542268" start="13544" end="13555" title="Royal Canal" label="Royal Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263099" start="13932" end="13958" title="Dublin Metropolitan Police" label="Dublin Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="14181" end="14200" title="The Guardian" label="Manchester Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605160" start="14232" end="14242" title="Daily News (London)" label="Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388729" start="14507" end="14514" title="Picket (military)" label="pickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500969" start="14904" end="14926" title="Freeman&amp;#x27;s Journal" label="Freeman&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q109905701" start="16269" end="16280" title="crowd crush" label="crowd crush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831183" start="16487" end="16500" title="Michael Hogan (sportsman)" label="Michael Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="18030" end="18039" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="18078" end="18086" title="Unionists (Ireland)" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="18159" end="18179" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="British Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19267820" start="18239" end="18258" title="Frank Percy Crozier" label="Frank Percy Crozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587023" start="19230" end="19240" title="Dick McKee" label="Dick McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157768" start="19245" end="19258" title="Peadar Clancy" label="Peadar Clancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162213" start="19287" end="19298" title="Conor Clune" label="Conor Clune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074958" start="19568" end="19584" title="Irish Volunteers" label="Irish Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103466" start="21407" end="21421" title="Ormonde Winter" label="Ormonde Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500969" start="22556" end="22578" title="Freeman&amp;#x27;s Journal" label="Freeman&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208855" start="22629" end="22646" title="Amritsar massacre" label="Amritsar massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282618" start="22738" end="22751" title="Joseph Devlin" label="Joseph Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311653" start="22756" end="22781" title="Irish Parliamentary Party" label="Irish Parliamentary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="22782" end="22802" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="22854" end="22865" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623933" start="22953" end="22962" title="List of incidents of grave disorder in the British House of Commons" label="suspended"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786523" start="23126" end="23140" title="Mater Misericordiae University Hospital" label="Mater Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185278" start="23148" end="23170" title="Jervis Street Hospital" label="Jervis Street Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="24371" end="24389" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="24489" end="24506" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008105" start="24729" end="24742" title="Frank Teeling" label="Frank Teeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795036" start="25008" end="25021" title="Thomas Whelan" label="Thomas Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147246" start="25185" end="25198" title="Patrick Moran (Irish republican)" label="Patrick Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="25670" end="25685" title="urban guerrilla" label="urban guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101808" start="26134" end="26143" title="City Hall, Dublin" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637700" start="26209" end="26223" title="William Conway (Irish republican)" label="William Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008105" start="26258" end="26271" title="Frank Teeling" label="Frank Teeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590833" start="27282" end="27299" title="Irish Independent" label="Irish Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="27928" end="27943" title="The Irish Times" label="The Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="28043" end="28061" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Viceroy of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627259" start="28137" end="28165" title="List of massacres in Ireland" label="List of massacres in Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182783" wikidata="Q134783" url="?curid=182783" title="Stratigraphy">
<text>Stratigraphy is a branch of geology concerned with the study of rock layers (strata) and layering (stratification). It is primarily used in the study of sedimentary and layered volcanic rocks.
Stratigraphy has three related subfields: lithostratigraphy (lithologic stratigraphy), biostratigraphy (biologic stratigraphy), and chronostratigraphy (stratigraphy by age).

==Historical development==

Catholic priest Nicholas Steno established the theoretical basis for stratigraphy when he introduced the law of superposition, the principle of original horizontality and the principle of lateral continuity in a 1669 work on the fossilization of organic remains in layers of sediment.

The first practical large-scale application of stratigraphy was by William Smith in the 1790s and early 19th century. Known as the &quot;Father of English geology&quot;, Smith recognized the significance of strata or rock layering and the importance of fossil markers for correlating strata; he created the first geologic map of England. Other influential applications of stratigraphy in the early 19th century were by Georges Cuvier and Alexandre Brongniart, who studied the geology of the region around Paris.
==Lithostratigraphy==

Variation in rock units, most obviously displayed as visible layering, is due to physical contrasts in rock type (lithology). This variation can occur vertically as layering (bedding), or laterally, and reflects changes in environments of deposition (known as facies change). These variations provide a lithostratigraphy or lithologic stratigraphy of the rock unit. Key concepts in stratigraphy involve understanding how certain geometric relationships between rock layers arise and what these geometries imply about their original depositional environment. The basic concept in stratigraphy, called the law of superposition, states: in an undeformed stratigraphic sequence, the oldest strata occur at the base of the sequence.

Chemostratigraphy studies the changes in the relative proportions of trace elements and isotopes within and between lithologic units. Carbon and oxygen isotope ratios vary with time, and researchers can use those to map subtle changes that occurred in the paleoenvironment. This has led to the specialized field of isotopic stratigraphy.

Cyclostratigraphy documents the often cyclic changes in the relative proportions of minerals (particularly carbonates), grain size, thickness of sediment layers (varves) and fossil diversity with time, related to seasonal or longer term changes in palaeoclimates.

==Biostratigraphy==
Biostratigraphy or paleontologic stratigraphy is based on fossil evidence in the rock layers. Strata from widespread locations containing the same fossil fauna and flora are said to be correlatable in time. Biologic stratigraphy was based on William Smith&#x27;s principle of faunal succession, which predated, and was one of the first and most powerful lines of evidence for, biological evolution. It provides strong evidence for the formation (speciation) and extinction of species. The geologic time scale was developed during the 19th century, based on the evidence of biologic stratigraphy and faunal succession. This timescale remained a relative scale until the development of radiometric dating, which was based on an absolute time framework, leading to the development of chronostratigraphy.

One important development is the Vail curve, which attempts to define a global historical sea-level curve according to inferences from worldwide stratigraphic patterns. Stratigraphy is also commonly used to delineate the nature and extent of hydrocarbon-bearing reservoir rocks, seals, and traps of petroleum geology.

==Chronostratigraphy==

Chronostratigraphy is the branch of stratigraphy that places an absolute age, rather than a relative age on rock strata. The branch is concerned with deriving geochronological data for rock units, both directly and inferentially, so that a sequence of time-relative events that created the rocks formation can be derived. The ultimate aim of chronostratigraphy is to place dates on the sequence of deposition of all rocks within a geological region, and then to every region, and by extension to provide an entire geologic record of the Earth.

A gap or missing strata in the geological record of an area is called a stratigraphic hiatus. This may be the result of a halt in the deposition of sediment. Alternatively, the gap may be due to removal by erosion, in which case it may be called a stratigraphic vacuity. It is called a &quot;hiatus&quot; because deposition was &quot;on hold&quot; for a period of time. A physical gap may represent both a period of non-deposition and a period of erosion. A geologic fault may cause the appearance of a hiatus.

===Magnetostratigraphy===

Magnetostratigraphy is a chronostratigraphic technique used to date sedimentary and volcanic sequences. The method works by collecting oriented samples at measured intervals throughout a section. The samples are analyzed to determine their detrital magnetism (DRM), that is, the polarity of Earth&#x27;s magnetic field at the time a stratum was deposited. For sedimentary rocks this is possible because, as they fall through the water column, very fine-grained magnetic minerals (&lt; 17 μm) behave like tiny compasses, orienting themselves with Earth&#x27;s magnetic field. Upon burial, that orientation is preserved. For volcanic rocks, magnetic minerals, which form in the melt, orient themselves with the ambient magnetic field, and are fixed in place upon crystallization of the lava.

Oriented paleomagnetic core samples are collected in the field; mudstones, siltstones, and very fine-grained sandstones are the preferred lithologies because the magnetic grains are finer and more likely to orient with the ambient field during deposition. If the ancient magnetic field were oriented similar to today&#x27;s field (North Magnetic Pole near the North Rotational Pole), the strata would retain a normal polarity. If the data indicate that the North Magnetic Pole were near the South Rotational Pole, the strata would exhibit reversed polarity.

Results of the individual samples are analyzed by removing the natural remanent magnetization (NRM) to reveal the DRM. Following statistical analysis, the results are used to generate a local magnetostratigraphic column that can then be compared against the Global Magnetic Polarity Time Scale.

This technique is used to date sequences that generally lack fossils or interbedded igneous rocks. The continuous nature of the sampling means that it is also a powerful technique for the estimation of sediment-accumulation rates.

==See also==

* Assise
* Bed (geology)
* Conodont biostratigraphy
* Erygmascope (old instrument for studying strata)
* Harris matrix
* International Commission on Stratigraphy
* Key bed
* Sedimentary basin analysis
* Sequence stratigraphy
* Sadler effect
* Tectonostratigraphy
==References==
==Further reading==
*Christopherson, R. W., 2008. &quot;Geosystems: An Introduction to Physical Geography&quot;, 7th ed., New York: Pearson Prentice-Hall. .
*Montenari, M., 2016. &quot;Stratigraphy and Timescales&quot;, 1st ed., Amsterdam: Academic Press (Elsevier). .

==External links==

*ICS Subcommission for Stratigraphic Information
*University of South Carolina Sequence Stratigraphy Web
*International Commission on Stratigraphy
*University of Georgia (USA) Stratigraphy Lab
*Stratigraphy.net A stratigraphic data provider.
*Agenames.org A global index of stratigraphic terms</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="0" end="12" title="Stratigraphy" label="Stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="28" end="35" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="64" end="68" title="rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="77" end="83" title="Stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="153" end="164" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="177" end="190" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q856124" start="235" end="252" title="lithostratigraphy" label="lithostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q864826" start="280" end="295" title="biostratigraphy" label="biostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q973297" start="325" end="343" title="chronostratigraphy" label="chronostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151722" start="412" end="426" title="Nicholas Steno" label="Nicholas Steno"/>
<link wikidata="Q842427" start="501" end="521" title="law of superposition" label="law of superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362281" start="527" end="562" title="principle of original horizontality" label="principle of original horizontality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645395" start="571" end="602" title="principle of lateral continuity" label="principle of lateral continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q313533" start="749" end="762" title="William Smith (geologist)" label="William Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="889" end="895" title="Stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q193842" start="995" end="1007" title="geologic map" label="geologic map"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="1101" end="1115" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q442937" start="1120" end="1140" title="Alexandre Brongniart" label="Alexandre Brongniart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538759" start="1331" end="1340" title="lithology" label="lithology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994702" start="1440" end="1466" title="sedimentary depositional environment" label="environments of deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q742139" start="1477" end="1483" title="facies" label="facies"/>
<link wikidata="Q842427" start="1821" end="1841" title="law of superposition" label="law of superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729912" start="1946" end="1963" title="Chemostratigraphy" label="Chemostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="2034" end="2041" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="2080" end="2086" title="Carbon" label="Carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2091" end="2097" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148629" start="2098" end="2111" title="isotope ratio" label="isotope ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q867343" start="2285" end="2302" title="Cyclostratigraphy" label="Cyclostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="2369" end="2376" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073138" start="2392" end="2402" title="Carbonate mineral" label="carbonates"/>
<link wikidata="Q835591" start="2447" end="2452" title="varve" label="varve"/>
<link wikidata="Q191069" start="2533" end="2546" title="paleoclimatology" label="palaeoclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="2589" end="2602" title="paleontology" label="paleontologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2628" end="2634" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319281" start="2833" end="2863" title="principle of faunal succession" label="principle of faunal succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="2947" end="2967" title="biological evolution" label="biological evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="3016" end="3026" title="speciation" label="speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="3032" end="3042" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="3046" end="3053" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="3059" end="3078" title="geologic time scale" label="geologic time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="3254" end="3272" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439798" start="3405" end="3415" title="Vail curve" label="Vail curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="3614" end="3625" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048416" start="3671" end="3688" title="petroleum geology" label="petroleum geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="3828" end="3834" title="stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q213891" start="3874" end="3890" title="geochronology" label="geochronological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884430" start="4799" end="4818" title="Magnetostratigraphy" label="Magnetostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="5287" end="5289" title="micrometre" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="5308" end="5315" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="5345" end="5372" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642424" start="5654" end="5662" title="mudstone" label="mudstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q565731" start="5665" end="5674" title="siltstone" label="siltstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="5699" end="5708" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q842763" start="5921" end="5940" title="North Magnetic Pole" label="North Magnetic Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="5950" end="5971" title="North Pole" label="North Rotational Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="6081" end="6102" title="South Pole" label="South Rotational Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980765" start="6212" end="6242" title="natural remanent magnetization" label="natural remanent magnetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808929" start="6693" end="6699" title="Assise" label="Assise"/>
<link wikidata="Q806617" start="6702" end="6715" title="Bed (geology)" label="Bed (geology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349804" start="6718" end="6742" title="Conodont biostratigraphy" label="Conodont biostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396251" start="6745" end="6756" title="Erygmascope" label="Erygmascope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019166" start="6796" end="6809" title="Harris matrix" label="Harris matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q402104" start="6812" end="6852" title="International Commission on Stratigraphy" label="International Commission on Stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770636" start="6855" end="6862" title="Key bed" label="Key bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445308" start="6865" end="6891" title="Sedimentary basin analysis" label="Sedimentary basin analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732190" start="6894" end="6915" title="Sequence stratigraphy" label="Sequence stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144545" start="6918" end="6931" title="Sadler effect" label="Sadler effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692859" start="6934" end="6953" title="Tectonostratigraphy" label="Tectonostratigraphy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182786" wikidata="Q1653031" url="?curid=182786" title="IASC">
<text>IASC may refer to:
* The UK&#x27;s Independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner
* International Accounting Standards Committee
* International Arctic Science Committee
* International Association for Statistical Computing
* International Association for the Study of the Commons
* International Association of Skateboard Companies
* the Inter-Agency Standing Committee of the United Nations for coordination of humanitarian assistance 
* International Astronomical Search Collaboration</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q123221060" start="35" end="72" title="Independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner" label="Independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258876" start="75" end="119" title="International Accounting Standards Committee" label="International Accounting Standards Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q431876" start="122" end="160" title="International Arctic Science Committee" label="International Arctic Science Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048345" start="163" end="214" title="International Association for Statistical Computing" label="International Association for Statistical Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048375" start="217" end="271" title="International Association for the Study of the Commons" label="International Association for the Study of the Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048597" start="274" end="323" title="International Association of Skateboard Companies" label="International Association of Skateboard Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360224" start="330" end="361" title="Inter-Agency Standing Committee" label="Inter-Agency Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="431" end="478" title="International Astronomical Search Collaboration" label="International Astronomical Search Collaboration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182787" wikidata="Q47089" url="?curid=182787" title="Fault (geology)">
<text>In geology, a fault is a planar fracture or discontinuity in a volume of rock across which there has been significant displacement as a result of rock-mass movements. Large faults within Earth&#x27;s crust result from the action of plate tectonic forces, with the largest forming the boundaries between the plates, such as the megathrust faults of subduction zones or transform faults. Energy release associated with rapid movement on active faults is the cause of most earthquakes. Faults may also displace slowly, by aseismic creep.

A &quot;fault plane&quot; is the plane that represents the fracture surface of a fault. A &quot;fault trace&quot; or &quot;fault line&quot; is a place where the fault can be seen or mapped on the surface. A fault trace is also the line commonly plotted on geologic maps to represent a fault.

A fault zone is a cluster of parallel faults. However, the term is also used for the zone of crushed rock along a single fault. Prolonged motion along closely spaced faults can blur the distinction, as the rock between the faults is converted to fault-bound lenses of rock and then progressively crushed.

==Mechanisms of faulting==
Due to friction and the rigidity of the constituent rocks, the two sides of a fault cannot always glide or flow past each other easily, and so occasionally all movement stops. The regions of higher friction along a fault plane, where it becomes locked, are called &quot;asperities&quot;. Stress builds up when a fault is locked, and when it reaches a level that exceeds the strength threshold, the fault ruptures and the accumulated strain energy is released in part as seismic waves, forming an earthquake.

Strain occurs accumulatively or instantaneously, depending on the liquid state of the rock; the ductile lower crust and mantle accumulate deformation gradually via shearing, whereas the brittle upper crust reacts by fracture – instantaneous stress release – resulting in motion along the fault. A fault in ductile rocks can also release instantaneously when the strain rate is too great.

==Slip, heave, throw==
&quot;Slip&quot; is defined as the relative movement of geological features present on either side of a fault plane. A fault&#x27;s &quot;sense of slip&quot; is defined as the relative motion of the rock on each side of the fault concerning the other side. In measuring the horizontal or vertical separation, the &quot;throw&quot; of the fault is the vertical component of the separation and the &quot;heave&quot; of the fault is the horizontal component, as in &quot;Throw up and heave out&quot;.
The vector of slip can be qualitatively assessed by studying any drag folding of strata, which may be visible on either side of the fault. Drag folding is a zone of folding close to a fault that likely arises from frictional resistance to movement on the fault. The direction and magnitude of heave and throw can be measured only by finding common intersection points on either side of the fault (called a piercing point). In practice, it is usually only possible to find the slip direction of faults, and an approximation of the heave and throw vector.

==Hanging wall and footwall==

The two sides of a non-vertical fault are known as the &quot;hanging wall&quot; and &quot;footwall&quot;. The hanging wall occurs above the fault plane and the footwall occurs below it. This terminology comes from mining: when working a tabular ore body, the miner stood with the footwall under his feet and with the hanging wall above him. These terms are important for distinguishing different dip-slip fault types: reverse faults and normal faults. In a reverse fault, the hanging wall displaces upward, while in a normal fault the hanging wall displaces downward. Distinguishing between these two fault types is important for determining the stress regime of the fault movement.

The problem of the hanging wall can lead to severe stresses and rock bursts, for example at Frood Mine.

==Fault types==

Faults are mainly classified in terms of the angle that the fault plane makes with the Earth&#x27;s surface, known as the dip, and the direction of slip along the fault plane.
Based on the direction of slip, faults can be categorized as:
* &quot;strike-slip&quot;, where the offset is predominantly horizontal, parallel to the fault trace;
* &quot;dip-slip&quot;, offset is predominantly vertical and/or perpendicular to the fault trace; or
* &quot;oblique-slip&quot;, combining strike-slip and dip-slip.

===Strike-slip faults===
In a strike-slip fault (also known as a &quot;wrench fault&quot;, &quot;tear fault&quot; or &quot;transcurrent fault&quot;), the fault surface (plane) is usually near vertical, and the footwall moves laterally either left or right with very little vertical motion. Strike-slip faults with left-lateral motion are also known as &quot;sinistral&quot; faults and those with right-lateral motion as &quot;dextral&quot; faults. Each is defined by the direction of movement of the ground as would be seen by an observer on the opposite side of the fault.

A special class of strike-slip fault is the &quot;transform fault&quot; when it forms a plate boundary. This class is related to an offset in a spreading center, such as a mid-ocean ridge, or, less common, within continental lithosphere, such as the Dead Sea Transform in the Middle East or the Alpine Fault in New Zealand. Transform faults are also referred to as &quot;conservative&quot; plate boundaries since the lithosphere is neither created nor destroyed.

===Dip-slip faults===
Dip-slip faults can be either &quot;normal&quot; (&quot;extensional&quot;) or &quot;reverse&quot;. The terminology of &quot;normal&quot; and &quot;reverse&quot; comes from coal mining in England, where normal faults are the most common.

With the passage of time, a regional reversal between tensional and compressional stresses (or vice-versa) might occur, and faults may be reactivated with their relative block movement inverted in opposite directions to the original movement (fault inversion). In such a way, a normal fault may therefore become a reverse fault and vice versa.

====Normal faults====

In a normal fault, the hanging wall moves downward, relative to the footwall. The dip of most normal faults is at least 60 degrees but some normal faults dip at less than 45 degrees.
=====Basin and range topography=====

A downthrown block between two normal faults dipping towards each other is a graben. A block stranded between two grabens, and therefore two normal faults dipping away from each other, is a horst. A sequence of grabens and horsts on the surface of the Earth produces a characteristic &quot;basin and range topography&quot;.
=====Listric faults=====
A listric fault is a type of normal fault that has a concave-upward shape with the upper section near Earth&#x27;s surface being steeper, becoming more horizontal with increased depth. Normal faults can evolve into listric faults with the fault plane curving into the Earth. They can also form where the hanging wall is absent (such as on a cliff), where the footwall may slump in a manner that creates multiple listric faults.
=====Detachment faults=====
The fault panes of listric faults can further flatten and evolve into a horizontal or near-horizontal plane, where slip progresses horizontally along a decollement. Extensional decollements can grow to great dimensions and form detachment faults, which are low-angle normal faults with regional tectonic significance.

Due to the curvature of the fault plane, the horizontal extensional displacement on a listric fault implies a geometric &quot;gap&quot; between the hanging and footwalls of the fault forms when the slip motion occurs. To accommodate into the geometric gap, and depending on its rheology, the hanging wall might fold and slide downwards into the gap and produce rollover folding, or break into further faults and blocks which fill in the gap. If faults form, imbrication fans or domino faulting may form.
====Reverse faults====

A reverse fault is the opposite of a normal fault—the hanging wall moves up relative to the footwall.&lt;br&gt;
Reverse faults indicate compressive shortening of the crust.
=====Thrust faults=====

A &quot;thrust fault&quot; has the same sense of motion as a reverse fault, but with the dip of the fault plane at less than 45°. Thrust faults typically form ramps, flats and fault-bend (hanging wall and footwall) folds.

A section of a hanging wall or foot wall where a thrust fault formed along a relatively weak bedding plane is known as a &quot;flat&quot; and a section where the thrust fault cut upward through the stratigraphic sequence is known as a &quot;ramp&quot;. Typically, thrust faults move &quot;within&quot; formations by forming flats and climbing up sections with ramps. This results in the hanging wall flat (or a portion thereof) lying atop the foot wall ramp as shown in the fault-bend fold diagram.

Thrust faults form nappes and klippen in the large thrust belts. Subduction zones are a special class of thrusts that form the largest faults on Earth and give rise to the largest earthquakes.

===Oblique-slip faults===
A fault which has a component of dip-slip and a component of strike-slip is termed an oblique-slip fault. Nearly all faults have some component of both dip-slip and strike-slip; hence, defining a fault as oblique requires both dip and strike components to be measurable and significant. Some oblique faults occur within transtensional and transpressional regimes, and others occur where the direction of extension or shortening changes during the deformation but the earlier formed faults remain active.

The &quot;hade&quot; angle is defined as the complement of the dip angle; it is the angle between the fault plane and a vertical plane that strikes parallel to the fault.

===Ring fault===
Ring faults, also known as caldera faults, are faults that occur within collapsed volcanic calderas and the sites of bolide strikes, such as the Chesapeake Bay impact crater. Ring faults are the result of a series of overlapping normal faults, forming a circular outline. Fractures created by ring faults may be filled by ring dikes.

===Synthetic and antithetic faults===
Synthetic and antithetic are terms used to describe minor faults associated with a major fault. Synthetic faults dip in the same direction as the major fault while the antithetic faults dip in the opposite direction. These faults may be accompanied by rollover anticlines (e.g. the Niger Delta Structural Style).

==Fault rock==


All faults have a measurable thickness, made up of deformed rock characteristic of the level in the crust where the faulting happened, of the rock types affected by the fault and of the presence and nature of any mineralising fluids. Fault rocks are classified by their textures and the implied mechanism of deformation. A fault that passes through different levels of the lithosphere will have many different types of fault rock developed along its surface. Continued dip-slip displacement tends to juxtapose fault rocks characteristic of different crustal levels, with varying degrees of overprinting. This effect is particularly clear in the case of detachment faults and major thrust faults.

The main types of fault rock include:
* Cataclasite – a fault rock which is cohesive with a poorly developed or absent planar fabric, or which is incohesive, characterised by generally angular clasts and rock fragments in a finer-grained matrix of similar composition.
** Tectonic or fault breccia – a medium- to coarse-grained cataclasite containing &gt;30% visible fragments.
** Fault gouge – an incohesive, clay-rich fine- to ultrafine-grained cataclasite, which may possess a planar fabric and containing &lt;30% visible fragments. Rock clasts may be present
*** Clay smear – clay-rich fault gouge formed in sedimentary sequences containing clay-rich layers which are strongly deformed and sheared into the fault gouge.
* Mylonite – a fault rock which is cohesive and characterized by a well-developed planar fabric resulting from tectonic reduction of grain size, and commonly containing rounded porphyroclasts and rock fragments of similar composition to minerals in the matrix
* Pseudotachylyte – ultrafine-grained glassy-looking material, usually black and flinty in appearance, occurring as thin planar veins, injection veins or as a matrix to pseudoconglomerates or breccias, which infills dilation fractures in the host rock. Pseudotachylyte likely only forms as the result of seismic slip rates and can act as a fault rate indicator on inactive faults.

==Impacts on structures and people==
In geotechnical engineering, a fault often forms a discontinuity that may have a large influence on the mechanical behavior (strength, deformation, etc.) of soil and rock masses in, for example, tunnel, foundation, or slope construction.

The level of a fault&#x27;s activity can be critical for (1) locating buildings, tanks, and pipelines and (2) assessing the seismic shaking and tsunami hazard to infrastructure and people in the vicinity. In California, for example, new building construction has been prohibited directly on or near faults that have moved within the Holocene Epoch (the last 11,700 years) of the Earth&#x27;s geological history. Also, faults that have shown movement during the Holocene plus Pleistocene Epochs (the last 2.6 million years) may receive consideration, especially for critical structures such as power plants, dams, hospitals, and schools. Geologists assess a fault&#x27;s age by studying soil features seen in shallow excavations and geomorphology seen in aerial photographs. Subsurface clues include shears and their relationships to carbonate nodules, eroded clay, and iron oxide mineralization, in the case of older soil, and lack of such signs in the case of younger soil. Radiocarbon dating of organic material buried next to or over a fault shear is often critical in distinguishing active from inactive faults. From such relationships, paleoseismologists can estimate the sizes of past earthquakes over the past several hundred years, and develop rough projections of future fault activity.

==Faults and ore deposits==
Many ore deposits lie on or are associated with faults. This is because the fractured rock associated with fault zones allow for magma ascent or the circulation of mineral-bearing fluids. Intersections of near-vertical faults are often locations of significant ore deposits.

An example of a fault hosting valuable porphyry copper deposits is northern Chile&#x27;s Domeyko Fault with deposits at Chuquicamata, Collahuasi, El Abra, El Salvador, La Escondida and Potrerillos. Further south in Chile Los Bronces and El Teniente porphyry copper deposit lie each at the intersection of two fault systems.

Faults may not always act as conduits to surface. It has been proposed that deep-seated &quot;misoriented&quot; faults may instead be zones where magmas forming porphyry copper stagnate achieving the right time for—and type of—igneous differentiation. At a given time differentiated magmas would burst violently out of the fault-traps and head to shallower places in the crust where porphyry copper deposits would be formed.

== Groundwater ==
As faults are zones of weakness, they facilitate the interaction of water with the surrounding rock and enhance chemical weathering. The enhanced chemical weathering increases the size of the weathered zone and hence creates more space for groundwater. Fault zones act as aquifers and also assist groundwater transport.

== Gallery ==
==See also==

* List of fault zones
* Anderson&#x27;s theory of faulting
* Aseismic creep
* 
* 
* 
*Paleostress inversion
* 
* Vertical displacement – Vertical movement of Earth&#x27;s crust

==References==
==Other reading==





==External links==
* Fault Motion Animations at IRIS Consortium (archived 17 February 2005)
* Aerial view of the San Andreas fault in the Carrizo Plain, Central California, from &quot;How Earthquakes Happen&quot; at USGS
* LANDSAT image of the San Andreas Fault in southern California, from &quot;What is a Fault?&quot; at USGS (archived 4 April 2008)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="3" end="10" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="14" end="19" title="Fault (geology)" label="fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307625" start="25" end="40" title="Fracture (geology)" label="planar fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="73" end="77" title="Rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="187" end="192" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="200" end="205" title="crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="232" end="246" title="Plate tectonics" label="plate tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="348" end="364" title="subduction" label="subduction zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q664573" start="368" end="383" title="transform fault" label="transform fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089248" start="435" end="447" title="active fault" label="active fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="470" end="480" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804124" start="519" end="533" title="aseismic creep" label="aseismic creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="569" end="574" title="Plane (geometry)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438168" start="632" end="643" title="fault trace" label="fault trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q193842" start="792" end="804" title="geologic map" label="geologic map"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="1169" end="1177" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750768" start="1432" end="1442" title="Asperity (faults)" label="asperities"/>
<link wikidata="Q206175" start="1450" end="1456" title="Stress (mechanics)" label="Stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q901396" start="1536" end="1544" title="Shear strength" label="strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q496309" start="1595" end="1608" title="strain energy" label="strain energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186167" start="1632" end="1644" title="seismic wave" label="seismic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="1658" end="1668" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q271707" start="1737" end="1749" title="rheology" label="liquid state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311608" start="1767" end="1774" title="Ductility (Earth science)" label="ductile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="1791" end="1797" title="Mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43606218" start="1835" end="1843" title="Shear (geology)" label="shearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105255" start="2987" end="3001" title="piercing point" label="piercing point"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="3412" end="3415" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q488996" start="3915" end="3926" title="rock bursts" label="rock bursts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506121" start="3943" end="3953" title="Frood Mine" label="Frood Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988006" start="4095" end="4098" title="Strike and dip" label="dip"/>
<link wikidata="Q664573" start="5104" end="5119" title="transform fault" label="transform fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="5142" end="5147" title="plate tectonics" label="plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215920" start="5198" end="5214" title="spreading center" label="spreading center"/>
<link wikidata="Q104698" start="5226" end="5241" title="mid-ocean ridge" label="mid-ocean ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q83296" start="5279" end="5290" title="lithosphere" label="lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064504" start="5304" end="5322" title="Dead Sea Transform" label="Dead Sea Transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="5330" end="5341" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850372" start="5349" end="5361" title="Alpine Fault" label="Alpine Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421954" start="5596" end="5607" title="extensional fault" label="extensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="5712" end="5723" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q13255585" start="5832" end="5841" title="Tension (geology)" label="tensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828108" start="5846" end="5859" title="Compression (geology)" label="compressional"/>
<link wikidata="Q206175" start="5860" end="5868" title="Stress (mechanics)" label="stresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988006" start="6228" end="6231" title="Strike and dip" label="dip"/>
<link wikidata="Q192810" start="6444" end="6450" title="graben" label="graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q212136" start="6557" end="6562" title="Horst (geology)" label="horst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474249" start="6657" end="6683" title="basin and range topography" label="basin and range topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q331927" start="7324" end="7335" title="decollement" label="decollement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213536" start="7337" end="7348" title="Extensional tectonics" label="Extensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265562" start="7400" end="7416" title="detachment fault" label="detachment fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="7467" end="7475" title="tectonics" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q271707" start="7769" end="7777" title="rheology" label="rheology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955801" start="7852" end="7868" title="Rollover anticlines" label="rollover folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q496325" start="8225" end="8237" title="thrust fault" label="thrust fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479638" start="8959" end="8964" title="nappe" label="nappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q734236" start="8970" end="8976" title="klippe" label="klippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="9005" end="9015" title="Subduction" label="Subduction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9480" end="9494" title="Shear (geology)#Transtension" label="transtensional"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9499" end="9514" title="Shear (geology)#Transpression" label="transpressional"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9710" end="9720" title="Angle#complementary angle" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="9945" end="9952" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="9971" end="9977" title="bolide" label="bolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070547" start="9999" end="10027" title="Chesapeake Bay impact crater" label="Chesapeake Bay impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583734" start="10176" end="10185" title="ring dike" label="ring dike"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955801" start="10479" end="10498" title="rollover anticlines" label="rollover anticlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="10509" end="10520" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036221" start="10771" end="10790" title="Hydrothermal circulation" label="mineralising fluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826906" start="10828" end="10836" title="Rock microstructure" label="textures"/>
<link wikidata="Q83296" start="10931" end="10942" title="lithosphere" label="lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265562" start="11211" end="11227" title="detachment fault" label="detachment fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q496325" start="11239" end="11251" title="thrust fault" label="thrust fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153716" start="11295" end="11306" title="Cataclasite" label="Cataclasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q457931" start="11381" end="11387" title="Fabric (geology)" label="fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q612133" start="11448" end="11454" title="Clastic rock" label="clasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463013" start="11493" end="11499" title="Matrix (geology)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519098" start="11539" end="11552" title="fault breccia" label="fault breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662373" start="11636" end="11647" title="Fault gouge" label="Fault gouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="11665" end="11669" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880535" start="11684" end="11693" title="Ultrafine particles" label="ultrafine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11822" end="11832" title="Clay smear" label="Clay smear"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="11867" end="11878" title="Sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q904607" start="11981" end="11989" title="Mylonite" label="Mylonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935769" start="12156" end="12169" title="porphyroclast" label="porphyroclast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="12216" end="12223" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541604" start="12241" end="12256" title="Pseudotachylyte" label="Pseudotachylyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="12320" end="12325" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q952465" start="12367" end="12372" title="Vein (geology)" label="veins"/>
<link wikidata="Q191704" start="12408" end="12427" title="Conglomerate (geology)" label="pseudoconglomerates"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="12431" end="12438" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349130" start="12661" end="12685" title="geotechnical engineering" label="geotechnical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281656" start="12709" end="12722" title="Discontinuity (Geotechnical engineering)" label="discontinuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="12815" end="12819" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="12853" end="12859" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191360" start="12861" end="12871" title="Foundation (engineering)" label="foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q961278" start="12876" end="12881" title="Slope stability analysis" label="slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q186167" start="13021" end="13028" title="Seismic wave" label="seismic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="13041" end="13048" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="13230" end="13238" title="Geologic time scale" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="13372" end="13383" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="13583" end="13587" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="13629" end="13642" title="geomorphology" label="geomorphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q777913" start="13730" end="13739" title="Carbonate rock" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916245" start="13740" end="13747" title="Nodule (geology)" label="nodules"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="13749" end="13755" title="Erosion" label="eroded"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13766" end="13770" title="Iron ore#Sources" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q945532" start="13771" end="13776" title="Oxide minerals" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="13872" end="13890" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="Radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="13894" end="13901" title="Organic compound" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501881" start="14038" end="14056" title="paleoseismology" label="paleoseismologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="14088" end="14099" title="earthquakes" label="earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q574109" start="14537" end="14560" title="porphyry copper deposit" label="porphyry copper deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579907" start="14587" end="14600" title="Domeyko Fault" label="Domeyko Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q746606" start="14618" end="14630" title="Chuquicamata" label="Chuquicamata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14632" end="14642" title="Collahuasi" label="Collahuasi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14644" end="14651" title="El Abra, Chile" label="El Abra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5352101" start="14653" end="14664" title="El Salvador mine" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q14995147" start="14666" end="14678" title="Escondida" label="La Escondida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14683" end="14694" title="Potrerillos Mine" label="Potrerillos"/>
<link wikidata="Q108130243" start="14719" end="14730" title="Los Bronces mine" label="Los Bronces"/>
<link wikidata="Q529024" start="14735" end="14746" title="El Teniente" label="El Teniente"/>
<link wikidata="Q498203" start="15050" end="15073" title="igneous differentiation" label="igneous differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="15388" end="15398" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="15507" end="15518" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="15539" end="15546" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619284" start="15618" end="15637" title="List of fault zones" label="List of fault zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q109544744" start="15640" end="15674" title="Anderson&amp;#x27;s theory of faulting" label="Anderson&amp;#x27;s theory of faulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804124" start="15677" end="15691" title="Aseismic creep" label="Aseismic creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455937" start="15702" end="15723" title="Paleostress inversion" label="Paleostress inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922828" start="15729" end="15750" title="Vertical displacement" label="Vertical displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16074398" start="15880" end="15895" title="IRIS Consortium" label="IRIS Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="16048" end="16052" title="USGS" label="USGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="16155" end="16159" title="USGS" label="USGS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182789" wikidata="Q164889" url="?curid=182789" title="Manfred, King of Sicily">
<text>Manfred (; 123226 February 1266) was the last King of Sicily from the Hohenstaufen dynasty, reigning from 1258 until his death. The natural son of the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II, Manfred became regent over the Kingdom of Sicily on behalf of his nephew Conradin in 1254. As regent he subdued rebellions in the kingdom, until in 1258 he usurped Conradin&#x27;s rule. After an initial attempt to appease Pope Innocent IV he took up the ongoing conflict between the Hohenstaufens and the papacy through combat and political alliances. He defeated the papal army at Foggia on 2 December 1254. Excommunicated by three successive popes, Manfred was the target of a Crusade (1255–66) called first by Pope Alexander IV and then by Urban IV. Nothing came of Alexander&#x27;s call, but Urban enlisted the aid of Charles of Anjou in overthrowing Manfred. Manfred was killed during his defeat by Charles at the Battle of Benevento, and Charles assumed kingship of Sicily.

==Early life==

Manfred was born in Venosa. Frederick II appears to have regarded him as legitimate, and by his will named him as Prince of Taranto. Frederick named Manfred&#x27;s half-brother Conrad IV king of Germany, Italy and Sicily, but Manfred was regent of Sicily while Conrad was in Germany. Manfred, who initially bore his mother&#x27;s surname, studied in Paris and Bologna and shared with his father a love of poetry and science.

At Frederick&#x27;s death in 1250, Manfred, although only about 18 years old, acted loyally and with vigour in the execution of his trust. The Kingdom was in turmoil, mainly due to rebellions spurred by Pope Innocent IV. Manfred was able to subdue numerous rebel cities, with the exception of Naples. Manfred attempted in 1251 to make concessions to Pope Innocent to stave off the prospect of war, but the attempt failed. When Conrad IV, Manfred&#x27;s legitimate brother, appeared in southern Italy in 1252, his authority was quickly and generally acknowledged. Conrad quickly stripped Manfred of all his fiefs by limiting his authority solely to the principality of Taranto. In October 1253, Naples fell into the hands of Conrad. Conrad made the pope the guardian of Conradin, his infant son, and named the Margrave Berthold of Hohenberg, a powerful German baron, as Conradin&#x27;s regent.

In May 1254 Conrad died of malaria at the age of twenty-six. Manfred, after refusing to surrender Sicily to Innocent IV, accepted the regency on behalf of Conradin. The pope however, having been named guardian of Conradin, excommunicated Manfred in July 1254. The regent decided to open negotiations with Innocent. As part of a treaty made in September 1254, Manfred submitted, and accepted the title of Papal vicar for southern Italy But Manfred—his suspicions aroused by the demeanour of the papal retinue and annoyed by the occupation of Campania by papal troops—fled to the Saracens at Lucera. Aided by Saracen allies, he defeated the papal army at Foggia on 2 December 1254, and soon established his authority over Sicily and the Sicilian possessions on the mainland. In that year Manfred supported the Ghibelline communes in Tuscany, in particular Siena, to which he provided a corps of German knights that was later instrumental in the defeat of Florence at the Battle of Montaperti. He thus reached the status of patron of the Ghibelline League. Also in that year Innocent died, succeeded by Alexander IV, who immediately excommunicated Manfred. In 1257, however, Manfred crushed the papal army and settled all the rebellions, imposing his firm rule of southern Italy and receiving the title of vicar from Conradin.

==Kingship==

On 10 August 1258, taking advantage of Conradin&#x27;s rumoured death, Manfred was crowned King of Sicily at Palermo. The falsehood of this report was soon manifest; but the new king, supported by the popular voice, declined to abdicate and pointed out to Conradin&#x27;s envoys the necessity for a strong native ruler. The pope, to whom the Saracen alliance was a serious offence, declared Manfred&#x27;s coronation void. Undeterred by the excommunication Manfred sought to obtain power in central and northern Italy, where the Ghibelline leader Ezzelino III da Romano had disappeared. He named vicars in Tuscany, Spoleto, Marche, Romagna and Lombardy. After Montaperti he was recognized as protector of Tuscany by the citizens of Florence, who did homage to his representative, and he was chosen &quot;Senator of the Romans&quot; by a faction in the city. His power was also augmented by the marriage of his daughter Constance in 1262 to Peter III of Aragon.

Terrified by these proceedings, the new Pope Urban IV excommunicated him. The pope first tried to sell the Kingdom of Sicily to Richard of Cornwall and his son, but in vain. In 1263 he was most successful with Charles I of Anjou, a brother of King Louis IX of France, who accepted the investiture of the kingdom of Sicily at his hands. Hearing of the approach of Charles, Manfred issued a manifesto to the Romans, in which he not only defended his rule over Italy but even claimed the imperial crown.

Charles&#x27; army, some 30,000 strong, entered Italy from the Col de Tende in late 1265. He soon reduced numerous Ghibelline strongholds in northern Italy and was crowned in Rome in January 1266, the pope being absent. On 20 January he set southwards and waded the Liri river, invading the Kingdom of Sicily. After some minor clashes, the rival armies met at the Battle of Benevento on 26 February 1266, and Manfred&#x27;s army was defeated. The king himself, refusing to flee, rushed into the midst of his enemies and was killed. Over his body, which was buried on the battlefield, a huge heap of stones was placed, but afterwards with the consent of the pope the remains were unearthed, cast out of the papal territory, and interred on the bank of the Garigliano River, outside of the boundaries of Naples and the Papal States.

At the Battle of Benevento Charles captured Helena, Manfred&#x27;s second wife, and imprisoned her. She lived five years later in captivity in the castle of Nocera Inferiore where she died in 1271. Manfred&#x27;s son-in-law Peter III eventually became King Peter I of Sicily from 1282 after the Sicilian Vespers expelled the French from the island again.

The modern city of Manfredonia was built by King Manfred between 1256 and 1263, some kilometers north of the ruins of the ancient Sipontum. The Angevines, who had defeated Manfred and stripped him of the Kingdom of Sicily, renamed it Sypontum Novellum (&quot;New Sypontum&quot;), but that name never imposed.

Manfred maintained diplomatic relations with the Mamluk sultans of Egypt through the exchange of gifts. Sultan Baybars, for example, sent him a giraffe, acquired through a tribute from Nubia, and considered one of the rarest, most dazzling gifts one could send.

==Marriages and children==
Manfred was married twice: 
* His first wife was Beatrice, daughter of Amadeus IV, count of Savoy, by whom he had a daughter, Constance, who was married to the heir to the Aragonese throne, the future King Peter III of Aragon, on 13 June 1262.
* Manfred&#x27;s second wife was Helena Angelina Doukaina, daughter of Michael II Komnenos Doukas, ruler of the despotate of Epirus, who made this marriage to ally with Manfred after being attacked by him at Thessalonica. Helena and Manfred had four children: Beatrix, Henry [Enrico], Anselm [Azzolino] and Frederick. Helena and all her children were captured by Charles of Anjou after Manfred&#x27;s death in 1266. Helena died in prison in Nocera in 1271. Her three sons with Manfred – the oldest only four years old at the time – were imprisoned in the Castel del Monte until 1299, when Charles II had them unchained and moved to the Castel dell&#x27;Ovo. Their living conditions were exceptionally miserable compared to the norm for noble prisoners. Kept in darkness, in heavy chains and with barely enough food to survive they became &quot;blind and half-mad&quot;. The stress of the move proved too much for Azzolino, who died soon after (in 1301). Henry survived another eighteen years, dying aged fifty-four on 31 October 1318, &quot;half-starved, half-mad and probably blind&quot;. Beatrix in contrast had been released on the orders of the Aragonese commander Roger of Lauria following a battle off Naples in 1284. She went on to marry Manfred IV, Marquis of Saluzzo. The eldest son, Frederick, escaped his prison and fled to Germany. He spent time in several European courts before dying in Egypt in 1312.

Manfred had at least one illegitimate child, a daughter named Flordelis (d. 27 February 1297), who married Ranieri Della Gherardesca, Count of Donoratico and Bolgheri.

==Legacy and reception==

=== Medieval reception ===
Contemporaries praised the noble and magnanimous character of Manfred, who was renowned for his physical beauty and intellectual attainments.

In the &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;, Dante Alighieri meets Manfred outside the gates of Purgatory, where the spirit explains that, although he repented of his sins &quot;&quot;, he must atone for his contumacy by waiting 30 years for each year he lived as an excommunicate, before being admitted to Purgatory proper. He then asks Dante to tell Constance about him being in Purgatory. With this statement, Manfred reveals that one&#x27;s time in Purgatory can lessen if someone still alive can pray on their behalf, anticipating one of the recurring themes in &quot;Purgatorio&quot;. Family connections, whether by blood or by marriage, are heavily referenced throughout this section of the &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;. Dante uses these relationships to demonstrate that earthly connections impede souls in Purgatory from reaching Paradise.

Dante&#x27;s placing of Manfred in Purgatory is surprising given Manfred&#x27;s excommunication by multiple popes. Manfred&#x27;s placement in Purgatory is indicative of Dante&#x27;s dislike of popes&#x27; use of excommunication as a political and policy tool. According to Dante, Manfred&#x27;s excommunication does not make it impossible for him to make it through Purgatory and, eventually, into Paradise. Dante adds to this characterization of Manfred and the Church by describing how the Church ordered Manfred&#x27;s bones unearthed after his death and thrown into a river outside the kingdom in fear that his gravesite would inspire the development of a cult around it.

Manfred&#x27;s presence in &quot;Purgatorio&quot; also holds a more general symbolic value. Robert Hollander argues that Manfred&#x27;s time in Purgatory should be seen as a symbol of hope, given that Manfred&#x27;s final statement in &quot;Purgatorio&quot;, Canto III is that &quot;hope maintains a thread of green&quot; (&quot;speranza ha fior del verde&quot;) (&quot;Purgatorio&quot; III.135), which is paraphrased as death not eliminating hope so long as even a bit of hope is there.

=== Modern reception ===
Manfred formed the subject of dramas by E.B.S. Raupach, O. Marbach and F.W. Roggee. Three letters written by Manfred were published by J. B. Carusius in &quot;Bibliotheca historica regni Siciliae&quot; (Palermo, 1732).

Manfred&#x27;s name was borrowed by the English author Horace Walpole for the main character of his short novel &quot;The Castle of Otranto&quot; (1764). Montague Summers, in his 1924 edition of this work, showed that some details of Manfred of Sicily&#x27;s real history inspired the novelist. The name was re-borrowed by Lord Byron for his dramatic poem &quot;Manfred&quot; (1817).

Inspired by Byron&#x27;s poem, &quot;Manfred&quot; was adapted musically by Robert Schumann in 1852, in a composition entitled &quot;Manfred: Dramatic Poem with Music in Three Parts&quot;, and later by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky in his Manfred Symphony (1885).

&quot;King Manfred&quot; (König Manfred), Op. 93 is a grand romantic opera in 5 acts by Carl Reinecke to libretto by Friedrich Roeber. It was composed in 1866 and staged in 1867.

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Parks, Annette, &quot;&#x27;Thy Father&#x27;s Valiancy Has Proved No Boon&quot;: The Fates of Helena Angelina Doukaina and Her Children, in 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Markus Brantl: Regesten und Itinerar König Manfreds von Sizilien, 2005 (XML-version, pdf-version, 6 MB)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q164889" start="0" end="7" title="Manfred, King of Sicily" label="Manfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q842151" start="46" end="60" title="King of Sicily" label="King of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="70" end="82" title="Hohenstaufen" label="Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="151" end="169" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="170" end="182" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q158246" start="257" end="265" title="Conradin" label="Conradin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160609" start="411" end="422" title="Innocent IV" label="Innocent IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="566" end="572" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169915" start="697" end="714" title="Pope Alexander IV" label="Pope Alexander IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q169305" start="727" end="735" title="Urban IV" label="Urban IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="806" end="822" title="Charles of Anjou" label="Charles of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q283062" start="903" end="922" title="Battle of Benevento" label="Battle of Benevento"/>
<link wikidata="Q52691" start="1001" end="1007" title="Venosa" label="Venosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="1077" end="1081" title="will (law)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078062" start="1095" end="1112" title="Principality of Taranto" label="Prince of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="1158" end="1167" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1331" end="1336" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="1341" end="1348" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q160609" start="1610" end="1626" title="Pope Innocent IV" label="Pope Innocent IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="1700" end="1706" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="1834" end="1843" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q158246" start="2176" end="2184" title="Conradin" label="Conradin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2225" end="2246" title="Berthold of Hohenberg" label="Berthold of Hohenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="2292" end="2298" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="2328" end="2335" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="2524" end="2538" title="excommunication" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="2842" end="2850" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="2879" end="2887" title="Saracens" label="Saracens"/>
<link wikidata="Q51933" start="2891" end="2897" title="Lucera" label="Lucera"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="2954" end="2960" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="3109" end="3119" title="Ghibelline" label="Ghibelline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="3155" end="3160" title="Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="3254" end="3262" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q587095" start="3270" end="3290" title="Battle of Montaperti" label="Battle of Montaperti"/>
<link wikidata="Q169915" start="3401" end="3413" title="Pope Alexander IV" label="Alexander IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q193364" start="3604" end="3609" title="vicar" label="vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="3749" end="3756" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="3868" end="3876" title="abdicate" label="abdicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q787178" start="4187" end="4209" title="Ezzelino III da Romano" label="Ezzelino III da Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829270" start="4255" end="4262" title="Duchy of Spoleto" label="Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279" start="4264" end="4270" title="Marche" label="Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q244482" start="4272" end="4279" title="Romagna" label="Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="4284" end="4292" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="4345" end="4352" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q286537" start="4559" end="4568" title="Constance of Sicily, Queen of Aragon" label="Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q312311" start="4580" end="4599" title="Peter III of Aragon" label="Peter III of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169305" start="4642" end="4655" title="Pope Urban IV" label="Pope Urban IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q314527" start="4730" end="4749" title="Richard, 1st Earl of Cornwall" label="Richard of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="4812" end="4830" title="Charles I of Anjou" label="Charles I of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="4850" end="4868" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="5008" end="5014" title="Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108953" start="5167" end="5179" title="Col de Tende" label="Col de Tende"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="5219" end="5229" title="Ghibelline" label="Ghibelline"/>
<link wikidata="Q71562" start="5370" end="5374" title="Liri" label="Liri"/>
<link wikidata="Q283062" start="5468" end="5487" title="Battle of Benevento" label="Battle of Benevento"/>
<link wikidata="Q287568" start="5859" end="5875" title="Garigliano River" label="Garigliano River"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="5921" end="5933" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q207327" start="6231" end="6247" title="Sicilian Vespers" label="Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19286" start="6311" end="6322" title="Manfredonia" label="Manfredonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973358" start="6422" end="6430" title="Sipontum" label="Sipontum"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="6651" end="6665" title="Mamluk Sultanate" label="Mamluk sultans"/>
<link wikidata="Q192960" start="6713" end="6720" title="Baybars" label="Baybars"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="6787" end="6792" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929521" start="6941" end="6949" title="Beatrice of Savoy, Marchioness of Saluzzo" label="Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q451949" start="6963" end="6973" title="Amadeus IV of Savoy" label="Amadeus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="6984" end="6989" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q286537" start="7018" end="7027" title="Constance of Sicily, Queen of Aragon" label="Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q312311" start="7098" end="7117" title="Peter III of Aragon" label="Peter III of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269904" start="7169" end="7193" title="Helena Angelina Doukaina" label="Helena Angelina Doukaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q729407" start="7207" end="7233" title="Michael II Komnenos Doukas" label="Michael II Komnenos Doukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q187684" start="7248" end="7267" title="despotate of Epirus" label="despotate of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="7344" end="7356" title="Thessalonica" label="Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637286" start="7396" end="7403" title="Beatrix of Sicily (1260–1307)" label="Beatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q81138" start="7577" end="7583" title="Nocera Inferiore" label="Nocera"/>
<link wikidata="Q215897" start="7691" end="7707" title="Castel del Monte, Apulia" label="Castel del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q314331" start="7725" end="7735" title="Charles II of Naples" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q645041" start="7772" end="7792" title="Castel dell&amp;#x27;Ovo" label="Castel dell&amp;#x27;Ovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q283466" start="8305" end="8320" title="Roger of Lauria" label="Roger of Lauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872926" start="8333" end="8350" title="Battle of the Gulf of Naples" label="battle off Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q282038" start="8381" end="8411" title="Manfred IV, Marquess of Saluzzo" label="Manfred IV, Marquis of Saluzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18288238" start="8696" end="8706" title="Donoratico" label="Donoratico"/>
<link wikidata="Q891340" start="8711" end="8719" title="Bolgheri" label="Bolgheri"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="8931" end="8944" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="8952" end="8967" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="9003" end="9012" title="Purgatory" label="Purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="9101" end="9106" title="Atonement in Christianity" label="atone"/>
<link wikidata="Q605018" start="9480" end="9490" title="Purgatorio" label="Purgatorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q67961" start="10986" end="11000" title="Ernst Benjamin Salomo Raupach" label="E.B.S. Raupach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="11149" end="11156" title="Palermo, Sicily" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q309903" start="11221" end="11235" title="Horace Walpole" label="Horace Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q548576" start="11284" end="11305" title="The Castle of Otranto" label="The Castle of Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q712220" start="11320" end="11336" title="Montague Summers" label="Montague Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="11489" end="11499" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889169" start="11528" end="11535" title="Manfred" label="Manfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="11627" end="11642" title="Robert Schumann" label="Robert Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748474" start="11684" end="11732" title="Manfred (Schumann)" label="Manfred: Dramatic Poem with Music in Three Parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="11753" end="11777" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752809" start="11785" end="11801" title="Manfred Symphony" label="Manfred Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q56254790" start="11837" end="11850" title="König Manfred" label="König Manfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q159569" start="11899" end="11912" title="Carl Reinecke" label="Carl Reinecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160879" start="11928" end="11944" title="Friedrich Roeber" label="Friedrich Roeber"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182792" wikidata="Q644943" url="?curid=182792" title="Canadian Armed Forces">
<text>The Canadian Armed Forces (CAF; , FAC) are the unified military forces of Canada, including sea, land, and air commands referred to as the Royal Canadian Navy, Canadian Army and the Royal Canadian Air Force. Under the &quot;National Defence Act&quot;, the Canadian Armed Forces are an entity separate and distinct from the Department of National Defence (the federal government department responsible for the administration and formation of defence policy), which also exists as the civilian support system for the forces.

The command-in-chief of the Canadian Armed Forces is constitutionally vested in the monarch, , who is represented by the Governor General. The chief of the Defence Staff is the professional head of the Canadian Armed Forces, who under the direction of the minister of national defence and together with the assistance of the Armed Forces Council, manages the operations of the Canadian Armed Forces.

In 2023, Canada&#x27;s military expenditure totalled approximately US$27.2 billion, or around 1.3 percent of the country&#x27;s gross domestic product (GDP) — placing it 16th for military expenditure by country. The Canadian Armed Forces are a professional volunteer force that consists of approximately 68,000 active personnel and 27,000 reserve personnel, with a sub-component of approximately 5,000 Canadian Rangers.

Canada&#x27;s peacekeeping role during the 20th century has played a major role in its positive global image. Canada has long been reluctant to participate in military operations that are not sanctioned by the United Nations (UN), such as the Vietnam War or the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Since the 21st century, Canadian direct participation in UN peacekeeping efforts greatly declined, with its military participation reallocated to UN-sanctioned operations through the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). 

The CAF operates several other commands, including Canadian Forces Intelligence Command, Canadian Joint Operations Command, and Canadian Special Operations Forces Command. Personnel may belong to either the Regular Force or the Reserve Force, which has four sub-components: the Primary Reserve, Supplementary Reserve, Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service, and the Canadian Rangers.

==History==

===Origins and establishment===
Prior to Confederation in 1867, residents of the colonies in what is now Canada served as regular members of French and British forces and in local militia groups. The latter aided in the defence of their respective territories against attacks by other European powers, Indigenous peoples, and later American forces during the American Revolutionary War and War of 1812, as well as in the Fenian raids, Red River Rebellion, and North-West Rebellion. Consequently, the lineages of some Canadian Army units stretch back to the late 18th century, when militia units were formed to assist in the defence of British North America against invasion by the United States.

The responsibility for military command remained with the British Crown-in-Council, with a commander-in-chief for North America stationed in Halifax until the final withdrawal of British Army and Royal Navy units from the city in 1906. Thereafter, the Royal Canadian Navy was formed, and, with the advent of military aviation, the Royal Canadian Air Force. These forces were organized under the Department of Militia and Defence, and split into the Permanent and Non-Permanent Active Militiasfrequently shortened to simply &quot;The Militia.&quot; By 1923, the department was merged into the Department of National Defence.

The first significant overseas deployment of Canadian military forces occurred during the Second Boer War when several units were raised to serve under British command. Similarly, when the United Kingdom entered into conflict with Germany in the First World War, Canadian troops were called to participate in European theatres. Battles that are particularly notable to the Canadian military include the Second Battle of Ypres, the Battle of the Somme, the Battle of Vimy Ridge, the Second Battle of Passchendaele, as well as a series of attacks undertaken by the Canadian Corps during the Hundred Days Offensive.

During this period, a distinctly Canadian army and navy were established, followed by an air force, that, because of the constitutional arrangements at the time, remained effectively under the control of the British government until Canada gained legislative independence from the United Kingdom in 1931, in part due to the distinguished achievement and sacrifice of the Canadian Corps in the First World War. In November 1940, the Canadian militia was formally renamed the Canadian Army. However, in the 1950s, Reserve Army forces were once again referred to in official documentation as &quot;Militia&quot;, which, although rare, is still used to refer to part-time members.

Canadian Forces entered the Second World War in September 1939, after the Canadian Crown-in-Council declared war on Nazi Germany. Battles and campaigns during the Second World War that was particularly notable to the Canadian military include the Battle of the Atlantic, the Battle of Britain, the Battle of Hong Kong, the Dieppe Raid, the invasion of Sicily and Italy, Operation Overlord, the Siegfried Line Campaign, Operation Veritable, as well as the strategic bombing of German cities.

At the end of the Second World War, Canada possessed the fourth-largest air force and fifth-largest naval surface fleet in the world. Conscription for overseas service was introduced only near the end of the war, and only 2,400 conscripts made it into battle. Originally, Canada was thought to have had the third-largest navy in the world, but with the fall of the Soviet Union, new data based on Japanese and Soviet sources found that to be incorrect.

Since 1947, Canadian military units have participated in more than 200 operations worldwide, and completed 72 international operations. Canadian soldiers, sailors, and aviators came to be considered world-class professionals through conspicuous service during these conflicts and the country&#x27;s integral participation in NATO during the Korean War, First Gulf War, Kosovo War, and in United Nations Peacekeeping operations, such as the Suez Crisis, Golan Heights, Cyprus, Croatia, Bosnia, Afghanistan, and Libya. Canada maintained an aircraft carrier from 1957 to 1970 during the Cold War, which never saw combat but participated in patrols during the Cuban Missile Crisis.

===Since unification===

The current iteration of the Canadian Armed Forces dates from 1 February 1968, when the Royal Canadian Navy, Canadian Army, and Royal Canadian Air Force were merged into a unified structure and superseded by elemental commands, known as Air Command, Land Force, and Maritime Command. On 16 August 2011, the names for the three elemental commands were reverted to their historical predecessor, although the unified structure of the Canadian Armed Forces was maintained.

Deployment of Land Forces during this period has included NATO efforts in Europe, peacekeeping operations within United Nations-sanctioned conflicts and combat missions. The Canadian Forces deployed in Afghanistan until 2011, under the NATO-led United Nations International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), at the request of the Government of Afghanistan.

The Forces have also deployed domestically to provide aid during emergencies and natural disasters. Over 8,500 military personnel were sent to Manitoba after the 1997 Red River flood to help with evacuation, building dikes, and other flood-fighting efforts. The operation was considered a &quot;public relations bonanza&quot; for the military. The Forces were also deployed after the North American ice storm of 1998, with relief efforts beginning on 8 January, after the provinces of New Brunswick, Ontario, and Quebec requested aid. Over 16,000 troops were deployed, making it the largest deployment of troops ever to serve on Canadian soil in response to a natural disaster, and the largest operational deployment of Canadian military personnel since the Korean War. The Forces were also deployed to British Columbia from 3 August to 16 September 2003, as a part of Operation Peregrine. The operation was conducted after the province was overwhelmed by 800 separate forest fires, and the provincial government requested federal aid. Over 2,200 soldiers were mobilized, and at its height, more than 2,600 military personnel participated in the 45-day operation.

====Early 2000s modernization efforts====
The Constitution of Canada gives the federal government exclusive responsibility for national defence, and expenditures are thus outlined in the federal budget. For the 2007–2010 fiscal year, the amount allocated for defence spending was CA$6.15 billion which is 1.4 percent of the country&#x27;s GDP. This regular funding was augmented in 2005 with an additional CA$12.5 billion over five years, as well as a commitment to increasing regular force troop levels by 5,000 persons, and the primary reserve by 4,500 over the same period. It was further augmented in 2010, with another CA$5.3 billion over five years being provided to allow for 13,000 more regular force members, and 10,000 more primary reserve personnel, as well as for the purchase of new trucks for the Canadian Army, transport aircraft and helicopters for the Royal Canadian Air Force, and joint support ships for the Royal Canadian Navy.

In 2008, the Government of Canada began efforts, through the &quot;Canada First Defence Strategy&quot;, to modernize the Forces, through the purchase of new equipment, improved training and readiness, as well as the establishment of the Canadian Special Operations Regiment. More funds were also put towards recruitment, which had been dwindling throughout the 1980s and 1990s, possibly because the Canadian populace had come to perceive the Forces as peacekeepers rather than as soldiers, as shown in a 2008 survey conducted by the Department of National Defence. The poll found that nearly two-thirds of Canadians agreed with the country&#x27;s participation in the invasion of Afghanistan, and that the military should be stronger, but also that the purpose of the forces should be different, such as more focused on responding to natural disasters. Then Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) Walter Natynczyk said later that year that, while recruiting has become more successful, the Forces was facing a problem with its rate of loss of existing members, which increased between 2006 and 2008 from 6% to 9.2% annually.

Renewal and re-equipment efforts have resulted in the acquisition of specific equipment (main battle tanks, artillery, unmanned air vehicles and other systems) to support the mission in Afghanistan. It has also encompassed initiatives to renew certain so-called &quot;core capabilities&quot; (such as the air force&#x27;s medium-range transport aircraft fleet—the C-130 Hercules—and the army&#x27;s truck and armoured vehicle fleets). In addition, new systems (such as C-17 Globemaster III strategic transport aircraft and CH-47 Chinook heavy-lift helicopters) have also been acquired for the Forces.

===Peacekeeping===

===Role of women===
In the 1950s, the recruitment of women was open to roles in medicine, communication, logistics, and administration. The roles of women in the CAF began to expand in 1971 after the department reviewed the recommendations of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women, at which time it lifted the ceiling of 1,500 women personnel, and gradually expanded employment opportunities into the non-traditional areas—vehicle drivers and mechanics, aircraft mechanics, air-traffic controllers, military police, and firefighters.

The department further reviewed personnel policies in 1978 and 1985, after Parliament passed the &quot;Canadian Human Rights Act&quot; and the &quot;Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms&quot;. As a result of these reviews, the department changed its policies to permit women to serve at sea in replenishment ships and a diving tender, with the army service battalions, in military police platoons and field ambulance units, and most air squadrons.

In 1987, occupations and units with the primary role of preparing for direct involvement in combat on the ground or at sea were still closed to women: infantry, armoured corps, field artillery, air defence artillery, signals, field engineers, and naval operations. On 5 February 1987, the minister of national defence created an office to study the impact of employing men and women in combat units. These trials were called Combat-Related Employment of Women.

All military occupations were open to women in 1989, except submarine service, which opened in 2000. Throughout the 1990s, the introduction of women into the combat arms increased the potential recruiting pool by about 100 percent. Women were fully integrated into all occupations and roles by the government of Jean Chrétien, and by 8 March 2000, even allowed to serve on submarines.

All equipment must be suitable for a mixed-gender force. Combat helmets, rucksacks, combat boots, and flak jackets are designed to ensure women have the same level of protection and comfort as their male colleagues. Women&#x27;s uniforms are similar in design to men&#x27;s uniforms, but conform to the female figure, and are functional and practical. Women are also provided with an annual financial entitlement for the purchase of bras.

In 2019, the &quot;National Post&quot; columnist Christie Blatchford reported, per an anonymous source, that the CAF had been fulfilling employment equity targets for internal job postings by secretly rejecting applications from white males, and by not requiring Indigenous candidates to either write or pass, the Canadian Forces Aptitude Test. However, Brigadier-General Virginia Tattersall (commander of military forces generation, including the Canadian Forces Recruiting Group [CFRG]) said, &quot;There are no occupations that we restrict based on gender&quot;, though &quot;diversity is a consideration&quot; and near the end of the recruiting year, &quot;We will look at diversity applicants first.&quot;

In March 2021, Lieutenant-Colonel Eleanor Taylor resigned citing sexual misconduct among the top brass. Since then, the CAF has been under pressure over allegations of sexual misconduct. Former justice Louise Arbour, who was tasked to lead a probe into military harassment and sexual misconduct claims in CAF in 2021, issued 48 recommendations to change the culture of the CAF. She said that she saw no basis for the CAF to retain the jurisdiction over sexual offences as it has not improved efficiency, discipline and morale.

== Structure ==
The Crown has long occupied a central position in the Canadian Armed Forces. The &quot;National Defence Act&quot; states that &quot;the Canadian Forces are the armed forces of Her Majesty raised by Canada, consisting of one service called the Canadian Armed Forces&quot; and the &quot;Constitution Act, 1867&quot;, vests command-in-chief of the Forces in the country&#x27;s sovereign, who, since 1904, has authorized his or her viceroy, the governor general, to exercise the duties ascribed to the post of commander-in-chief and, since 1905, hold the associated title. All troop deployment and disposition orders, including declarations of war, fall within the royal prerogative and are issued as orders-in-Council, which must be signed by either the monarch or governor general. Under the Westminster system&#x27;s parliamentary customs and practices, however, the monarch and viceroy must generally follow the advice of his or her ministers in Cabinet, including the prime minister and minister of national defence, who are accountable to the elected House of Commons.

The Canadian Forces&#x27; 92,600 personnel are divided into a hierarchy of numerous ranks of officers and non-commissioned members. The governor general appoints, on the advice of the prime minister, the chief of the Defence Staff (CDS) as the highest-ranking commissioned officer in the Armed Forces and its commander. In this role, the CDS heads the Armed Forces Council, which also includes the vice chief of the Defence Staff and the commanders of the Royal Canadian Navy, Canadian Army, Royal Canadian Air Force, Canadian Joint Operations Command, Canadian Special Operations Forces Command, as well as certain other designated personnel. The Armed Forces Council generally operates from National Defence Headquarters (NDHQ) in Ottawa, Ontario. The sovereign and most other members of the Canadian Royal Family also act as colonels-in-chief, honorary air commodores, air commodores-in-chief, admirals, and captains-general of Canadian Forces units, though these positions are ceremonial.

The Canadian Forces operate out of 27 Canadian Forces bases (CFB) across the country, including NDHQ. This number has been gradually reduced since the 1970s with bases either being closed or merged. Both officers and non-commissioned members receive their basic training at the Canadian Forces Leadership and Recruit School in Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu. Officers will generally either directly enter the Canadian Armed Forces with a degree from a civilian university or receive their commission upon graduation from the Royal Military College of Canada. Specific element and trade training is conducted at a variety of institutions throughout Canada, and to a lesser extent, the world.

As of 2013, the Canadian Forces have 68,000 Regular Force members and 27,000 reservists, bringing the total force to approximately 95,000. These individuals serve on numerous Canadian Forces bases in all regions of the country and are governed by the &quot;Queen&#x27;s Regulations and Orders&quot; and the &quot;National Defence Act&quot;.

===Royal Canadian Navy===
The Royal Canadian Navy (RCN), headed by the commander of the Royal Canadian Navy, includes 28 warships and submarines deployed in two fleets: Maritime Forces Pacific (MARPAC) at CFB Esquimalt on the west coast, and Maritime Forces Atlantic (MARLANT) at CFB Halifax on the east coast, as well as one formation: the Naval Reserve Headquarters (NAVRESHQ) at Quebec City, Quebec. The fleet is augmented by various aircraft and supply vessels. The RCN participates in NATO exercises and operations, and ships are deployed all over the world in support of multinational deployments.

===Canadian Army===
The Canadian Army is headed by the commander of the Canadian Army and is administered through four divisions—the 2nd Canadian Division, the 3rd Canadian Division, the 4th Canadian Division and the 5th Canadian Division—the Canadian Army Doctrine and Training System and the Canadian Army Headquarters.

Currently, the Regular Force component of the Army consists of three field-ready brigade groups: 1 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group, at CFB Edmonton and CFB Shilo; 2 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group, at CFB Petawawa and CFB Gagetown; and 5 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group, at CFB Valcartier and Quebec City. Each contains one regiment of artillery, armour, and combat engineers, three battalions of infantry (all scaled in the British fashion), one battalion for logistics, a squadron for headquarters/signals, and several smaller support organizations. A tactical helicopter squadron and a field ambulance are co-located with each brigade but do not form part of the brigade&#x27;s command structure.

The 2nd, 3rd and 4th Canadian Divisions each have a Regular Force brigade group, and each division except the 1st has two to three Reserve Force brigades groups. In total, there are ten Reserve Force brigade groups. The 5th Canadian Division and the 2nd Canadian Division each have two Reserve Force brigade groups, while the 4th Canadian Division and the 3rd Canadian Division each have three Reserve Force brigade groups. Major training and support establishments exist at CFB Gagetown, CFB Montreal and CFB Wainwright.

===Royal Canadian Air Force===
The Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) is headed by the commander of the Royal Canadian Air Force. The commander of 1 Canadian Air Division and Canadian NORAD Region, based in Winnipeg, is responsible for the operational command and control of Air Force activities throughout Canada and worldwide. 1 Canadian Air Division operations are carried out through eleven wings located across Canada. The commander of 2 Canadian Air Division is responsible for training and support functions. 2 Canadian Air Division operations are carried out at two wings. 3 Canadian Space Division is responsible for delivering space power effects in support of Canadian Armed Forces operations, including space domain awareness, space-based support of military operations, and defending and protecting military space capabilities. Wings represent the grouping of various squadrons, both operational and support, under a single tactical commander reporting to the operational commander and vary in size from several hundred personnel to several thousand.

Major air bases are in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Newfoundland and Labrador, while administrative and command and control facilities are in Winnipeg and North Bay. A Canadian component of the NATO Airborne Early Warning Force is also based at NATO Air Base Geilenkirchen near Geilenkirchen, Germany.

The RCAF and Joint Task Force (North) (JTFN) also maintain at various points throughout Canada&#x27;s northern region a chain of forward operating locations, each capable of supporting fighter operations. Elements of CF-18 squadrons periodically deploy to these airports for short training exercises or Arctic sovereignty patrols.

===Canadian Joint Operations Command===
Canadian Joint Operations Command is an operational element established in October 2012 with the merger of Canada Command, Canadian Expeditionary Force Command and Canadian Operational Support Command. The new command, created as a response to the cost-cutting measures in the 2012 federal budget, combines the resources, roles and responsibilities of the three former commands under a single headquarters.

===Canadian Special Operations Forces Command===
Canadian Special Operations Forces Command (CANSOFCOM) is a formation capable of operating independently but primarily focused on generating special operations forces (SOF) elements to support CJOC. The command includes Joint Task Force 2 (JTF2), the Canadian Joint Incident Response Unit (CJIRU) based at CFB Trenton, as well as the Canadian Special Operations Regiment (CSOR) and 427 Special Operations Aviation Squadron (SOAS) based at CFB Petawawa.

===Information Management Group===
Among other things, the Information Management Group is responsible for the conduct of electronic warfare and the protection of the Armed Forces&#x27; communications and computer networks. Within the group, this operational role is fulfilled by the Canadian Forces Information Operations Group, headquartered at CFS Leitrim in Ottawa, which operates the following units: the Canadian Forces Information Operations Group Headquarters (CFIOGHQ), the Canadian Forces Electronic Warfare Centre (CFEWC), the Canadian Forces Network Operations Centre (CFNOC), the Canadian Forces Signals Intelligence Operations Centre (CFSOC), the Canadian Forces Station (CFS) Leitrim, and the 764 Communications Squadron. In June 2011 the Canadian Armed Forces Chief of Force Development announced the establishment of a new organization, the Directorate of Cybernetics, headed by a Brigadier-General, the Director General Cyber (DG Cyber). Within that directorate, the newly established CAF Cyber Task Force has been tasked to design and build cyber warfare capabilities for the Canadian Armed Forces.

===Royal Canadian Medical Service===
The Royal Canadian Medical Service is a personnel branch of the CAF, consisting of all members of medical occupations.

===Royal Canadian Dental Corps===
The Royal Canadian Dental Corps is a personnel branch of the CAF.

===Canadian Forces Health Services Group===

The Health Services Group is a joint formation that includes over 120 general or specialized units and detachments providing health services to the Canadian Armed Forces. With few exceptions, all elements are under command of the Commander, who may also be appointed Surgeon General when the position is filled by a medical officer, for domestic support and force generation, or temporarily assigned under command of a deployed Joint Task Force through Canadian Joint Operations Command.

===Canadian Armed Forces Cyber Command===
On 26 September 2024, Canadian Armed Forces Cyber Command (CAFCYBERCOM) was established.

==Canadian Armed Forces Reserve Force==

The Canadian Armed Forces have a total reserve force of approximately 50,000 primary and supplementary that can be called upon in times of national emergency or threat. For the components and sub-components of the Canadian Armed Forces Reserve Force, the order of precedence follows:
*(1) Primary Reserve (26,000),
*(2) Supplementary Reserve (11,000) Prior to 2002 this consisted of:
** (a) Supplementary Ready Reserve, and
** (b) Supplementary Holding Reserve,
after 2002 there is no sub-division of the Supplementary Reserve.
*(3) Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service (7,500), and
*(4) Canadian Rangers (5,000).

===Primary Reserve===
Approximately 26,000 soldiers, sailors, and airmen, trained to the level of and interchangeable with their Regular Force counterparts, and posted to CAF operations or duties on a casual or ongoing basis, make up the Primary Reserve. This group is represented, though not commanded, at NDHQ by the chief of Reserves and Employer Support, who is usually a major-general or rear-admiral, and is divided into four components that are each operationally and administratively responsible to its corresponding environmental command in the Regular Force—the Naval Reserve (NAVRES), Land Force Reserve (LFR), and Air Reserve (AIRRES)—in addition to one force that does not fall under an environmental command, the Health Services Reserve under the Canadian Forces Health Services Group.

===Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service===
The Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service (COATS) consists of officers and non-commissioned members who conduct training, safety, supervision and administration of nearly 60,000 cadets aged 12 to 18 years in the Canadian Cadet Organization. The majority of members in COATS are officers of the Cadet Instructors Cadre (CIC) branch of the CAF. Members of the Reserve Force Sub-Component COATS who are not employed part-time (Class A) or full-time (Class B) may be held on the &quot;Cadet Instructor Supplementary Staff List&quot; (CISS List) in anticipation of employment in the same manner as other reservists are held as members of the Supplementary Reserve.

===Canadian Rangers===
The Canadian Rangers, who provide surveillance and patrol services in Canada&#x27;s arctic and other remote areas, are an essential reserve force component used for Canada&#x27;s exercise of sovereignty over its northern territory.

== Defence policy ==
Since the Second World War, Canadian defence policy has consistently stressed three overarching objectives:
* The defence of Canada itself;
* The defence of North America in co-operation with US forces;
* Contributing to broader international security.

During the Cold War, a principal focus of Canadian defence policy was contributing to the security of Europe in the face of the Soviet military threat. Toward that end, Canadian ground and air forces were based in Europe from the early 1950s until the early 1990s.

However, since the end of the Cold War, as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has moved much of its defence focus &quot;out of area&quot;, the Canadian military has also become more deeply engaged in international security operations in various other parts of the world—most notably in Afghanistan from 2002 to 2014.

The basis for current Canadian defence capability objectives was originally set in the Canada First Defence Strategy, introduced by the former Harper Government in 2008 but is now updated through the Liberal Government&#x27;s 2017 defence strategy, Strong, Secure and Engaged (SSE). The SSE pledged greater funding to support the Canadian military (particularly in relation to the National Shipbuilding Procurement Strategy) in its primary tasks related to the defence of Canada, the defence of North America and contributing to global security.

In addition to its core missions, the Canadian Armed Forces also contribute to the conduct of Canadian defence diplomacy through a range of activities, including the deployment of Canadian Defence Attachés, participation in bilateral and multilateral military forums (e.g. the System of Cooperation Among the American Air Forces), ship and aircraft visits, military training and cooperation, and other such outreach and relationship-building efforts.

===Military expenditures===
The Constitution of Canada gives the federal government exclusive responsibility for national defence, and expenditures are thus outlined in the federal budget. DND’s Main Estimates for 2023-24 total $26. 5 billion, including various votes and statutory funding. Operating ($17. 9 billion), Capital ($6. 1 billion), and Grants and Contributions ($320 million). Most of the budget is allocated to Personnel (34%), Operating (34%), and Capital (22%).

The federal government now factors in military-related spending from departments such as Veterans Affairs, Public Works, and the Treasury Board when calculating &quot;defence spending&quot;. It is believed that this move was made to improve Canada&#x27;s defence-related NATO reporting metrics.

In 2024 the Canadian Federal government announced plans to increase defence spending by 77 billon dollars over the next twenty years at a rate of 1.76% of GDP. The funds are to be allocated toward new submarines (twelve are planned) and overall force modernisation.

== Ranks ==
==Uniforms==
Although the Canadian Armed Forces are a single service, there are four similar but distinctive environmental uniforms (DEUs): navy blue (which is actually black) for the navy, rifle green for the army, light blue for the air force, and khaki for special operations. CAF members in operational occupations generally wear the DEU to which their occupation &quot;belongs.&quot; CAF members in non-operational occupations (the &quot;purple&quot; trades) are allocated a uniform according to the &quot;distribution&quot; of their branch within the CAF, the association of the branch with one of the former services, and the individual&#x27;s initial preference. Therefore, on any given day, in any given CAF unit, multiple coloured uniforms may be seen.

The uniforms of the CAF are sub-divided into five orders of dress:
* Ceremonial dress, including regimental full dress, patrol dress, naval high-collar whites, and service-dress uniforms with ceremonial accoutrements such as swords, white web belts, gloves, etc.
* Mess dress, which ranges from full mess kit with mess jacket, cummerbund, or waistcoat, etc., to service dress with bow tie
* Service dress, also called a &quot;walking-out&quot; or &quot;duty uniform&quot;, is the military equivalent of the business suit, with an optional white summer uniform for naval CF members
* Operational dress, an originally specialized uniform for wear in an operational environment, is now for everyday wear on base or in garrison
* Occupational dress, which is specialized uniform articles for particular occupations (e.g., medical, dental, firefighter)

Only service dress is suitable for CAF members to wear on any occasion, barring &quot;dirty work&quot; or combat. With gloves, swords, and medals (No. 1 or 1A), it is suitable for ceremonial occasions and &quot;dressed down&quot; (No. 3 or lower), it is suitable for daily wear. Generally, after the elimination of base dress (although still defined for the Air Force uniform), the operational dress is now the daily uniform worn by most members of the CF, unless service dress is prescribed (such as at the NDHQ, on parades, at public events, etc.). Approved parkas are authorized for winter wear in cold climates and a light casual jacket is also authorized for cooler days. 

Units of the Canadian Army, Royal Canadian Air Force, and cadets of the Royal Military College of Canada also wear full-dress uniforms. The Army&#x27;s universal full-dress uniforms includes a scarlet tunic, midnight blue trousers with a scarlet trouser stripe. However, many regiments in the Canadian Army maintain authorized regimental differences from the Army&#x27;s universal full dress, most notably for its armoured units, Scottish regiments, and Voltigeur/Rifle regiments. The full-dress uniform for cadets at Royal Military College is similar to the Army&#x27;s universal full dress uniform. Full dress uniforms for units of the Royal Canadian Air Force include a blue tunic, and blue trousers and facings. Naval full dress includes a navy blue tunic and trousers with white facings, although the Canadian Forces dress instructions state that naval full dress is no longer worn.

Authorized headdresses for the Canadian Armed Forces is the: beret, wedge cap, ballcap, Yukon cap, and tuque (toque). Each is coloured according to the distinctive uniform worn: navy (white or navy blue), army (rifle green or &quot;regimental&quot; colour), and air force (light blue). Adherents of the Sikh faith may wear uniform turbans (dastar) (or patka, when operational) and Muslim women may wear uniform tucked hijabs under their authorized headdress. Jews may wear yarmulke under their authorized headdress and when bareheaded. The beret is probably the most widely worn headgear and is worn with almost all orders of dress (with the exception of the more formal orders of Navy and Air Force dress), and the colour of which is determined by the wearer&#x27;s environment, branch, or mission. Naval personnel, however, seldom wear berets, preferring either service caps or authorized ballcaps (shipboard operational dress), which only the Navy wear. Air Force personnel, particularly officers, prefer the wedge cap to any other form of headdress. There is no naval variant of the wedge cap. The Yukon cap and tuque are worn only with winter dress, although clearance and combat divers may wear tuques year-round as a watch cap. Soldiers in Highland, Scottish, and Irish regiments generally wear an alternative headdress, including the glengarry, balmoral, tam o&#x27;shanter, and caubeen instead of the beret. The officer cadets of both Royal Military Colleges wear gold-braided &quot;pillbox&quot; (cavalry) caps with their ceremonial dress and have a unique fur &quot;Astrakhan&quot; for winter wear. The CAF wears the CG634 helmet.

==Symbolism and honours==
The Canadian Forces have derived many of their traditions and symbols from the Navy, Army, and Air Force of the United Kingdom, including those with royal elements. Contemporary icons and rituals, however, have evolved to include elements reflective of Canada and the Canadian monarchy. Members of the country&#x27;s royal family maintain personal relationships with the forces&#x27; divisions and regiments.

The monarch is regarded as the fount of honour and the Canadian system of orders, decorations, and medals includes numerous specifically for the military, such as the Victoria Cross, Order of Military Merit, Cross of Valour, Star of Courage, and Medal of Bravery. The Victoria Cross is the highest honour in Canada. The British version was presented to 94 Canadians and two Newfoundlanders between its creation in 1856 and 1993, when the Canadian Victoria Cross was instituted. No Canadian has received either honour since 1945.

During the unification of the forces in the 1960s, a renaming of the branches took place, resulting in the loss of the &quot;royal&quot; designations for the Navy and Air Force. On 16 August 2011, the federal Cabinet announced that Air Command was re-assuming the Air Force&#x27;s original name, &quot;Royal Canadian Air Force&quot;; Land Force Command the name &quot;Canadian Army&quot;; and Maritime Command the name &quot;Royal Canadian Navy&quot;. The government stated that the change was made to better reflect Canada&#x27;s military heritage and align Canada with other Commonwealth realms whose militaries use the &quot;royal&quot; designation, while political opponents claimed the changes were more politically motivated and designed to appeal to monarchists in the Conservative party.

==Military families==

The portrait of military families in Canada from the 2021 Census had 345,180 military families, making up 3. 4% of all families in the country. This group included 53,510 active military families. Among these, 74. 1% were couple families with one partner serving and the other having no military experience, 11. 8% had both partners serving, 7. 5% had one partner serving and the other a Veteran, and 6. 6% were one-parent families with a serving parent. The majority, 291,670, were Veteran families, mainly consisting of couple families where one spouse was a Veteran and the other had no military experience at 87. 6%. Additionally, 6. 5% were one-parent Veteran families and 6. 0% had both partners as Veterans. 

More than 80% of military families in Canada were identified as Veteran families, while the remaining percentage was active.The report also highlighted the distribution of active military, Veteran, and non-military families. In Ottawa–Gatineau, 11. 1% were active military families, 7. 8% were Veteran families, and 3. 8% were non-military families. Similar proportions were observed in Halifax and Québec. 

Active military families were more likely than Veteran and non-military families to have moved to a different province or territory in the past five years. The report detailed that 24. 1% of couple families and 15. 4% of one-parent families in the active category lived in a different province compared to 4. 0% and 1. 9%, respectively, for Veteran families, and 2. 4% and 1. 9% for non-military families.

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==
*Beaudet, Normand (1993). &quot;Le Mythe de la défense canadienne&quot;. Montréal: Éditions Écosociété. 
*Rennick, Joanne Benham (2013). &quot;Canadian Values and Military Operations in the Twenty-First Century,&quot; Armed Forces &amp; Society 39, No. 3, pp. 511–30
*Leuprecht, Christian &amp; Sokolsky, Joel. (2014). &quot;Defense Policy &quot;Walmart Style&quot; Canadian Lessons in &quot;not so grand&quot; Grand Strategy.&quot; Armed Forces &amp; Society Journal Online First.
* 
*Faces of War at Library and Archives Canada
== External links ==
* Combat Camera – Official CF photo website
* Canadian Military Documentary channel on YouTube</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="4" end="25" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="27" end="30" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="CAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="34" end="37" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="FAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="55" end="70" title="Military" label="military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="74" end="80" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="139" end="158" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="160" end="173" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="182" end="206" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258596" start="224" end="244" title="National Defence Act" label="National Defence Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191463" start="323" end="353" title="Department of National Defence (Canada)" label="Department of National Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="359" end="388" title="Government of Canada" label="federal government department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985714" start="528" end="573" title="Commander-in-Chief of the Canadian Armed Forces" label="command-in-chief of the Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="608" end="615" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="645" end="661" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961996" start="667" end="693" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (Canada)" label="chief of the Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315114" start="780" end="808" title="Minister of National Defence (Canada)" label="minister of national defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993815" start="849" end="869" title="Armed Forces Council (Canada)" label="Armed Forces Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1053" end="1075" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="1104" end="1135" title="List of countries by military expenditures" label="military expenditure by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q828787" start="1182" end="1197" title="Volunteer military" label="volunteer force"/>
<link wikidata="Q125700293" start="1346" end="1377" title="Canadian peacekeeping" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s peacekeeping role"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029467" start="1589" end="1600" title="Canada and the Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029462" start="1608" end="1629" title="Canada and the Iraq War" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952590" start="1814" end="1848" title="List of NATO operations" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712149" start="1910" end="1946" title="Canadian Forces Intelligence Command" label="Canadian Forces Intelligence Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985745" start="1948" end="1981" title="Canadian Joint Operations Command" label="Canadian Joint Operations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032368" start="1987" end="2029" title="Canadian Special Operations Forces Command" label="Canadian Special Operations Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076915" start="2066" end="2079" title="Regular Force" label="Regular Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402243" start="2137" end="2152" title="Primary Reserve" label="Primary Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030040" start="2154" end="2175" title="Canadian Forces Supplementary Reserve" label="Supplementary Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016438" start="2177" end="2232" title="Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service" label="Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q887690" start="2242" end="2258" title="Canadian Rangers" label="Canadian Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="2315" end="2328" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148422" start="2448" end="2468" title="Colonial militia in Canada" label="local militia groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="2576" end="2594" title="Aboriginal peoples in Canada" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="2606" end="2621" title="United States Armed Forces" label="American forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2633" end="2659" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="2664" end="2675" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996302" start="2695" end="2707" title="Fenian raids" label="Fenian raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q765499" start="2709" end="2728" title="Red River Rebellion" label="Red River Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506788" start="2734" end="2754" title="North-West Rebellion" label="North-West Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="2909" end="2930" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="3029" end="3042" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="British Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="3043" end="3053" title="Queen-in-Council" label="in-Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152172" start="3062" end="3098" title="Commander-in-Chief, North America" label="commander-in-chief for North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="3112" end="3119" title="City of Halifax" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="3150" end="3162" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="3167" end="3177" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="3223" end="3242" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="3302" end="3326" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315306" start="3366" end="3399" title="Department of Militia and Defence (Canada)" label="Department of Militia and Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169205" start="3420" end="3429" title="Permanent Active Militia" label="Permanent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048787" start="3434" end="3462" title="Non-Permanent Active Militia" label="Non-Permanent Active Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314135" start="3500" end="3511" title="Canadian militia" label="The Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191463" start="3563" end="3593" title="Department of National Defence (Canada)" label="Department of National Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="3686" end="3701" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3842" end="3857" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q233219" start="3999" end="4021" title="Second Battle of Ypres" label="Second Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="4027" end="4046" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q393299" start="4052" end="4072" title="Battle of Vimy Ridge" label="Battle of Vimy Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443105" start="4078" end="4108" title="Second Battle of Passchendaele" label="Second Battle of Passchendaele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094970" start="4123" end="4151" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Hundred Days" label="series of attacks undertaken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665617" start="4159" end="4173" title="Canadian Corps" label="Canadian Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130507" start="4185" end="4207" title="Hundred Days Offensive" label="Hundred Days Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4418" end="4436" title=" Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="4457" end="4481" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="legislative independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4916" end="4932" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="4962" end="4987" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="Canadian Crown-in-Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5004" end="5016" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="5135" end="5157" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="Battle of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="5163" end="5180" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q697059" start="5186" end="5205" title="Battle of Hong Kong" label="Battle of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="5211" end="5222" title="Dieppe Raid" label="Dieppe Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="5228" end="5246" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q714777" start="5251" end="5256" title="Allied invasion of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="5258" end="5276" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q714274" start="5282" end="5305" title="Allied advance from Paris to the Rhine" label="Siegfried Line Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q708235" start="5307" end="5326" title="Operation Veritable" label="Operation Veritable"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="5343" end="5377" title="Strategic bombing during World War II" label="strategic bombing of German cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="5514" end="5526" title="Conscription" label="Conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q910177" start="5552" end="5591" title="Conscription Crisis of 1944" label="introduced only near the end of the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5745" end="5757" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565882" start="5931" end="5968" title="List of Canadian military operations" label="completed 72 international operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="6159" end="6163" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="6175" end="6185" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="6187" end="6201" title="Gulf War" label="First Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="6203" end="6213" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="6237" end="6249" title="Peacekeeping" label="Peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="6274" end="6285" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="6287" end="6300" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="6490" end="6510" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="6626" end="6645" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="6647" end="6660" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="6666" end="6690" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="7268" end="7307" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="International Security Assistance Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592748" start="7528" end="7548" title="1997 Red River flood" label="1997 Red River flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090886" start="7750" end="7782" title="North American ice storm of 1998" label="North American ice storm of 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="8026" end="8042" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="8124" end="8134" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097383" start="8235" end="8254" title="Operation Peregrine" label="Operation Peregrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030766" start="8718" end="8732" title="Canadian federal budget" label="federal budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="8752" end="8763" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="8811" end="8814" title="Canadian dollar" label="CA$"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269418" start="9430" end="9449" title="Joint Support Ship Project" label="joint support ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031970" start="9547" end="9576" title="Canada First Defence Strategy" label="Canada First Defence Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057564" start="9717" end="9753" title="Canadian Special Operations Regiment" label="Canadian Special Operations Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144024" start="10108" end="10171" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s role in the invasion of Afghanistan" label="the country&amp;#x27;s participation in the invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="10314" end="10330" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420414" start="10367" end="10383" title="Walter Natynczyk" label="Walter Natynczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q182027" start="10960" end="10974" title="C-130 Hercules" label="C-130 Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q211369" start="11065" end="11085" title="C-17 Globemaster III" label="C-17 Globemaster III"/>
<link wikidata="Q209613" start="11119" end="11132" title="CH-47 Chinook" label="CH-47 Chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374049" start="11465" end="11504" title="Royal Commission on the Status of Women" label="Royal Commission on the Status of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030142" start="11862" end="11887" title="Canadian Human Rights Act" label="Canadian Human Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="11908" end="11947" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q128543" start="12985" end="12998" title="Jean Chrétien" label="Jean Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812075" start="13518" end="13531" title="National Post" label="National Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110660" start="13548" end="13567" title="Christie Blatchford" label="Christie Blatchford"/>
<link wikidata="Q239235" start="14413" end="14426" title="Louise Arbour" label="Louise Arbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721135" start="14759" end="14830" title="Monarchy of Canada and the Canadian Armed Forces" label="Crown has long occupied a central position in the Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q868884" start="15040" end="15062" title="Constitution Act, 1867" label="Constitution Act, 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985714" start="15076" end="15106" title="Commander-in-Chief of the Canadian Armed Forces" label="command-in-chief of the Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="15114" end="15138" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="country&amp;#x27;s sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="15183" end="15190" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="15196" end="15212" title="Governor General of Canada" label="governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249469" start="15379" end="15398" title="Declaration of war by Canada" label="declarations of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="15416" end="15433" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="15452" end="15469" title="Order-in-Council" label="orders-in-Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="15545" end="15563" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="15667" end="15673" title="Advice (constitutional)" label="advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315109" start="15688" end="15697" title="Minister of the Crown" label="ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="15701" end="15708" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="15724" end="15738" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="15808" end="15824" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462915" start="15887" end="15916" title="Canadian Armed Forces ranks and insignia" label="a hierarchy of numerous ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="15920" end="15928" title="Officer&amp;#x27;s commission" label="officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314178" start="15933" end="15956" title="non-commissioned member" label="non-commissioned member"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="16087" end="16107" title="Officer&amp;#x27;s commission" label="commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993815" start="16179" end="16199" title="Armed Forces Council (Canada)" label="Armed Forces Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985745" start="16345" end="16378" title="Canadian Joint Operations Command" label="Canadian Joint Operations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032368" start="16380" end="16422" title="Canadian Special Operations Forces Command" label="Canadian Special Operations Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769283" start="16520" end="16549" title="National Defence Headquarters" label="National Defence Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="16560" end="16566" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16621" end="16642" title="Monarchy of Canada#Canada&amp;#x27;s royal family and house" label="Canadian Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q460238" start="16655" end="16672" title="Colonel-in-Chief" label="colonels-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="16683" end="16697" title="Air Commodore" label="air commodores"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697819" start="16699" end="16722" title="air commodores-in-chief" label="air commodores-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886620" start="16859" end="16879" title="Canadian Forces base" label="Canadian Forces base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030032" start="17099" end="17144" title="Canadian Forces Leadership and Recruit School" label="Canadian Forces Leadership and Recruit School"/>
<link wikidata="Q141977" start="17148" end="17172" title="Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu" label="Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565941" start="17340" end="17372" title="Royal Military College of Canada" label="Royal Military College of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088231" start="17584" end="17594" title="Military reserve" label="reservists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886620" start="17682" end="17702" title="Canadian Forces base" label="Canadian Forces base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270092" start="17764" end="17799" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Regulations and Orders for the Canadian Forces" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Regulations and Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152214" start="17920" end="17956" title="commander of the Royal Canadian Navy" label="commander of the Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077033" start="18018" end="18041" title="Maritime Forces Pacific" label="Maritime Forces Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023450" start="18054" end="18067" title="CFB Esquimalt" label="CFB Esquimalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077030" start="18091" end="18115" title="Maritime Forces Atlantic" label="Maritime Forces Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023453" start="18129" end="18140" title="CFB Halifax" label="CFB Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="18231" end="18242" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="18339" end="18343" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961992" start="18509" end="18539" title="commander of the Canadian Army" label="commander of the Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815839" start="18587" end="18608" title="2nd Canadian Division" label="2nd Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816553" start="18614" end="18635" title="3rd Canadian Division" label="3rd Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477391" start="18641" end="18662" title="4th Canadian Division" label="4th Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477376" start="18671" end="18692" title="5th Canadian Division" label="5th Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076915" start="18792" end="18805" title="Regular Force" label="Regular Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q746938" start="18858" end="18871" title="brigade group" label="brigade group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813533" start="18874" end="18909" title="1 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group" label="1 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q652085" start="18914" end="18926" title="CFB Edmonton" label="CFB Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023452" start="18931" end="18940" title="CFB Shilo" label="CFB Shilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q682938" start="18942" end="18977" title="2 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group" label="2 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q922628" start="18982" end="18994" title="CFB Petawawa" label="CFB Petawawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023449" start="18999" end="19011" title="CFB Gagetown" label="CFB Gagetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817814" start="19017" end="19052" title="5 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group" label="5 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023457" start="19057" end="19071" title="CFB Valcartier" label="CFB Valcartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="19076" end="19087" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="19119" end="19128" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q568312" start="19130" end="19136" title="armoured warfare" label="armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="19142" end="19158" title="combat engineering" label="combat engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="19166" end="19175" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="19180" end="19188" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q163059" start="19244" end="19253" title="military logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q252280" start="19257" end="19265" title="squadron (army)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540126" start="19270" end="19282" title="military headquarters" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736535" start="19283" end="19290" title="military communications" label="signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="19357" end="19365" title="squadron (aviation)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477376" start="19704" end="19725" title="5th Canadian Division" label="5th Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815839" start="19734" end="19755" title="Land Force Quebec Area" label="2nd Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477391" start="19810" end="19831" title="4th Canadian Division" label="4th Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816553" start="19840" end="19861" title="3rd Canadian Division" label="3rd Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023449" start="19959" end="19971" title="CFB Gagetown" label="CFB Gagetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q386030" start="19973" end="19985" title="CFB Montreal" label="CFB Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836901" start="19990" end="20004" title="CFB Wainwright" label="CFB Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961993" start="20091" end="20132" title="commander of the Royal Canadian Air Force" label="commander of the Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20151" end="20174" title="Royal Canadian Air Force#1 Canadian Air Division" label="1 Canadian Air Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20179" end="20200" title="North American Aerospace Defense Command#Canadian NORAD Region" label="Canadian NORAD Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="20211" end="20219" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="20256" end="20275" title="command and control" label="command and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q45364" start="20399" end="20404" title="Wing (military aviation unit)" label="wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867902" start="20445" end="20468" title="2 Canadian Air Division" label="2 Canadian Air Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867902" start="20585" end="20610" title="3 Canadian Space Division" label="3 Canadian Space Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="20885" end="20894" title="squadron (aviation)" label="squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="20941" end="20949" title="military tactics" label="tactical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="21092" end="21108" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="21119" end="21131" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="21143" end="21150" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="21160" end="21171" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="21177" end="21202" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q912253" start="21280" end="21289" title="North Bay, Ontario" label="North Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q329095" start="21370" end="21397" title="NATO Air Base Geilenkirchen" label="NATO Air Base Geilenkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q205050" start="21403" end="21416" title="Geilenkirchen" label="Geilenkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076912" start="21441" end="21465" title="Joint Task Force (North)" label="Joint Task Force (North)"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="21651" end="21660" title="squadron (aviation)" label="squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031938" start="21907" end="21921" title="Canada Command" label="Canada Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q788577" start="21923" end="21959" title="Canadian Expeditionary Force Command" label="Canadian Expeditionary Force Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q179019" start="21964" end="22000" title="Canadian Operational Support Command" label="Canadian Operational Support Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="22398" end="22423" title="special operations forces" label="special operations forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143059" start="22477" end="22495" title="Joint Task Force 2" label="Joint Task Force 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550862" start="22508" end="22545" title="Canadian Joint Incident Response Unit" label="Canadian Joint Incident Response Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057564" start="22591" end="22627" title="Canadian Special Operations Regiment" label="Canadian Special Operations Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715012" start="22639" end="22679" title="427 Special Operations Aviation Squadron" label="427 Special Operations Aviation Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023506" start="23372" end="23409" title="CFS Leitrim" label="Canadian Forces Station (CFS) Leitrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480517" start="23871" end="23901" title="Royal Canadian Medical Service" label="Royal Canadian Medical Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373892" start="24025" end="24052" title="Royal Canadian Dental Corps" label="Royal Canadian Dental Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646182" start="24400" end="24415" title="Surgeon General (Canada)" label="Surgeon General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985745" start="24586" end="24619" title="Canadian Joint Operations Command" label="Canadian Joint Operations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q132645091" start="24686" end="24721" title="Canadian Armed Forces Cyber Command" label="Canadian Armed Forces Cyber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402243" start="25084" end="25099" title="Primary Reserve" label="Primary Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030040" start="25115" end="25136" title="Canadian Forces Supplementary Reserve" label="Supplementary Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="25805" end="25818" title="Major-General" label="major-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="25822" end="25834" title="rear-admiral" label="rear-admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030034" start="26001" end="26014" title="Canadian Naval Reserve" label="Naval Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030028" start="26190" end="26227" title="Canadian Forces Health Services Group" label="Canadian Forces Health Services Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016438" start="26296" end="26351" title="Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service" label="Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326613" start="26522" end="26549" title="Canadian Cadet Organization" label="Canadian Cadet Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932769" start="26604" end="26627" title="Cadet Instructors Cadre" label="Cadet Instructors Cadre"/>
<link wikidata="Q887690" start="26998" end="27014" title="Canadian Rangers" label="Canadian Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="27185" end="27196" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="27258" end="27274" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="27405" end="27418" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="27440" end="27449" title="United States Armed Forces" label="US forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="27513" end="27521" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="27604" end="27610" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="27630" end="27636" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="27815" end="27849" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="28065" end="28076" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031970" start="28184" end="28213" title="Canada First Defence Strategy" label="Canada First Defence Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28346" end="28372" title="Strong, Secure and Engaged" label="Strong, Secure and Engaged"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978423" start="28478" end="28520" title="National Shipbuilding Procurement Strategy" label="National Shipbuilding Procurement Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251284" start="28747" end="28764" title="Defence Diplomacy" label="defence diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962181" start="28921" end="28972" title="System of Cooperation Among the American Air Forces" label="System of Cooperation Among the American Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="29128" end="29150" title="Constitution of Canada" label="Constitution of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030766" start="29269" end="29283" title="Canadian federal budget" label="federal budget"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30246" end="30280" title="Uniforms of the Canadian Armed Forces#distinctive environmental uniforms" label="distinctive environmental uniforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q28978167" start="31021" end="31031" title="full dress" label="full dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278236" start="31178" end="31188" title="Mess dress" label="Mess dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192826" start="31240" end="31250" title="cummerbund" label="cummerbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q958210" start="31255" end="31264" title="waistcoat" label="waistcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455748" start="31304" end="31317" title="Service dress" label="Service dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q567688" start="32322" end="32327" title="parka" label="parka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196168" start="32634" end="32647" title="red coat (military uniform)" label="scarlet tunic"/>
<link wikidata="Q947638" start="32649" end="32662" title="midnight blue" label="midnight blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438113" start="32871" end="32889" title="Scottish regiments" label="Scottish regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383994" start="32895" end="32904" title="Voltigeur" label="Voltigeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146090" start="32905" end="32919" title="Rifle regiment" label="Rifle regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975887" start="33185" end="33194" title="navy blue" label="navy blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852226" start="33391" end="33396" title="Military beret" label="beret"/>
<link wikidata="Q645919" start="33398" end="33407" title="Garrison cap" label="wedge cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q639686" start="33409" end="33416" title="Baseball cap" label="ballcap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030834" start="33418" end="33427" title="Canadian military fur wedge cap" label="Yukon cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q795738" start="33433" end="33438" title="tuque" label="tuque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460567" start="33661" end="33667" title="turban" label="turban"/>
<link wikidata="Q192392" start="33670" end="33676" title="dastar" label="dastar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16669132" start="33682" end="33687" title="patka" label="patka"/>
<link wikidata="Q172317" start="33748" end="33753" title="hijab" label="hijab"/>
<link wikidata="Q215459" start="33803" end="33811" title="yarmulke" label="yarmulke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321936" start="34672" end="34681" title="glengarry" label="glengarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q285487" start="34683" end="34691" title="balmoral bonnet" label="balmoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038222" start="34693" end="34711" title="Tam o&amp;#x27;shanter (hat)" label="tam o&amp;#x27;shanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921150" start="34717" end="34724" title="caubeen" label="caubeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28978167" start="34862" end="34878" title="Full dress" label="ceremonial dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030834" start="34901" end="34922" title="Canadian military fur wedge cap" label="&amp;quot;Astrakhan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q731268" start="34958" end="34963" title="CG634" label="CG634"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="35267" end="35284" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="Canadian monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35297" end="35328" title="Monarchy of Canada#Royal family and house" label="the country&amp;#x27;s royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884636" start="35440" end="35455" title="fount of honour" label="fount of honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545795" start="35464" end="35514" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Canada" label="Canadian system of orders, decorations, and medals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003418" start="35576" end="35590" title="Victoria Cross (Canada)" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q94454" start="35592" end="35615" title="Order of Military Merit (Canada)" label="Order of Military Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q794362" start="35617" end="35632" title="Cross of Valour (Canada)" label="Cross of Valour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592496" start="35634" end="35649" title="Star of Courage (Canada)" label="Star of Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332350" start="35655" end="35671" title="Medal of Bravery (Canada)" label="Medal of Bravery"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="36516" end="36534" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="36715" end="36733" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792960" start="38571" end="38597" title="Armed Forces &amp;amp; Society" label="Armed Forces &amp;amp; Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182795" wikidata="Q256968" url="?curid=182795" title="Florence Lawrence">
<text>Florence Lawrence (born Florence Annie Bridgwood; January 2, 1886 – December 28, 1938) was a Canadian-American stage performer and film actress. She is often referred to as the &quot;first movie star&quot;, and was long thought to be the first film actor to be named publicly until evidence published in 2019 indicated that the first named film star was French actor Max Linder. At the height of her fame in the 1910s, she was known as the &quot;Biograph Girl&quot; for work as one of the leading ladies in silent films from the Biograph Company. She appeared in almost 300 films for various motion picture companies throughout her career.

==Early life==
Born Florence Annie Bridgwood in Hamilton, Ontario, she was youngest of three children of George Bridgwood, an English-born carriage builder and Charlotte &quot;Lotta&quot; Bridgwood (née Dunn), a vaudeville actress. Charlotte Bridgwood had emigrated to Canada from Ireland after the Great Famine with her family as a child. She was known professionally as Lotta Lawrence and was the leading lady and director of the Lawrence Dramatic Company. At the age of three, Lawrence made her debut onstage with her mother in a song and dance routine. When she was old enough to memorize lines of dialogue, she performed with her mother and other members of the Lawrence Dramatic Company in dramatic plays. After performing tear-jerking dramas like &quot;Dora Thorne&quot; and &quot;East Lynne&quot; began to depress Lawrence, her mother dropped them from the company&#x27;s repertoire. While Lawrence performed on stage at the behest of her mother, she recalled that she enjoyed the work but did not like the traveling that all vaudeville performers were required to do. By the age of six, Lawrence had earned the nickname &quot;Baby Flo, the Child Wonder&quot;.

On February 18, 1898, George Bridgwood died from accidental coal gas poisoning at his home in Hamilton (Lawrence&#x27;s parents had been separated since she was four years old). Lotta Lawrence moved the family from Hamilton to Buffalo, New York to live with her mother Ann Dunn. She chose to stop bringing her children along for stage performances and for the first time, Florence was enrolled in school. After graduating, Lawrence rejoined her mother&#x27;s dramatic company. However, her mother disbanded the Lawrence Dramatic Company shortly thereafter; the two moved to New York City around 1906.

==Early career: film and stage==
Lawrence was one of several Canadian pioneers in the film industry who were attracted by the rapid growth of the fledgling motion picture business. In 1906, she appeared in her first motion picture. The next year, she appeared in 38 movies for the Vitagraph film company. During the spring and summer of 1906, Lawrence auditioned for a number of Broadway productions, but she did not have success. However, on December 27, 1906, she was hired by the Edison Manufacturing Company to play Daniel Boone&#x27;s daughter in &quot;Daniel Boone; or, Pioneer Days in America&quot;. She got the part because she knew how to ride a horse. Both she and her mother received parts and were paid five dollars per day for two weeks of outdoor filming in freezing weather. 

In 1907, she went to work for the Vitagraph Company in Brooklyn, New York, acting as Moya, an Irish peasant girl in a one-reel version of Dion Boucicault&#x27;s &quot;The Shaughraun&quot;. She returned briefly to stage acting, playing the leading role in a road show production of Melville B. Raymond&#x27;s &quot;Seminary Girls&quot;. Her mother played her last role in this production. After touring with the roadshow for a year, Lawrence resolved that she would &quot;never again lead that gypsy life&quot;. In 1908, she returned to Vitagraph where she played the lead role in &quot;The Dispatch Bearer&quot;. Largely as a result of her equestrian skills, she received parts in 11 films in the next five months. 

===Biograph Studios===

Also at Vitagraph was a young actor, Harry Solter, who was looking for &quot;a young, beautiful equestrian girl&quot; to star in a film to be produced by the Biograph Studios under the direction of D. W. Griffith. Griffith, the most prominent producer-director at Biograph Studios, had noticed the beautiful blonde-haired woman in one of Vitagraph&#x27;s films. Because the film&#x27;s actors received no mention, Griffith had to make discreet inquiries to learn she was Florence Lawrence and to arrange a meeting. Griffith had intended to give the part to Florence Turner, Biograph&#x27;s leading lady, but Lawrence managed to convince Solter and Griffith that she was the best suited for the starring role in &quot;The Girl and the Outlaw&quot;. With the Vitagraph Company, she had been earning $20 per week, working also as a costume seamstress over and above acting. Griffith offered her a job, acting only, for $25 per week. 
After her success in this role, she appeared as a society belle in &quot;Betrayed by a Handprint&quot; and as an Indian in &quot;The Red Girl&quot;. In total, she had parts in most of the 60 films directed by Griffith in 1908. Toward the end of 1908, Lawrence married Harry Solter. Lawrence gained much popularity, but because her name never was publicized, fans began writing to the studio asking to know her identity. Even after she had gained wide recognition, particularly after starring in the comedy series &quot;Mr. and Mrs. Jones&quot; and the highly successful &quot;Resurrection&quot;, Biograph Studios refused to publicly announce her name and fans simply called her the &quot;Biograph Girl&quot;. During cinema&#x27;s formative years, silent screen actors were not named because studio owners feared that fame might lead to demands for higher wages and because many actors were embarrassed to be performing pantomime in motion pictures. She continued to work for Biograph in 1909. Her demand to be paid by the week rather than daily was met, and she received double the normal rate. 

===Independent Moving Pictures Company===

Finding themselves &#x27;at liberty&#x27;, Lawrence and Solter in 1909 were able to join the Independent Moving Pictures Company of America (IMP). The company, founded by Carl Laemmle, the owner of a film exchange (who later absorbed IMP into Universal Pictures, of which he was founder and president), was looking for experienced filmmakers and actors. Needing a star, he lured Lawrence away from Biograph by promising to give her a marquee. First, Laemmle organized a publicity stunt by starting a rumor that Lawrence had been killed by a street car in New York City. Then, after gaining much media attention, he placed ads in the newspapers that announced &quot;We nail a lie&quot; and included a photo of Lawrence. The ad declared she is alive and well and making &quot;The Broken Oath&quot;, a new movie for his IMP Film Company to be directed by Solter.

Laemmle had Lawrence make a personal appearance in St. Louis, Missouri in March 1910 with her leading man to show her fans that she was very much alive, making her one of the early performers not already famous in another medium to be identified by name by her studio.

===Lubin Studios===
By late 1910, Lawrence left IMP to work for Lubin Studios, advising her fellow Canadian, the 18-year-old Mary Pickford, to take her place as IMP&#x27;s star.

===Victor Film Company===

In 1912, Lawrence and Solter made a deal with Carl Laemmle, forming their own company. Laemmle gave them complete artistic freedom in the company, named Victor Film Company, and paid Lawrence $500 per week as the leading lady, and Solter $200 per week as director. They established a film studio in Fort Lee, New Jersey and made a number of films starring Lawrence and Owen Moore, then sold to Universal Pictures in 1913. With this new prosperity, Florence was able to realize a &#x27;lifelong dream,&#x27; buying a estate in River Vale, New Jersey. In August 1912, she had a fight with her husband, in which he &quot;made cruel remarks about his mother-in-law&quot;. He left and went to Europe. However, he wrote &quot;sad&quot; letters to her every day, telling her of his plans to commit suicide. His letters &quot;softened her feelings&quot;, and they were re-united in November 1912. Lawrence announced her intention to retire. 
She was persuaded to return to work in 1914 for her company (Victor Film Company), which had been acquired by Universal Studios. During the filming of &quot;Pawns of Destiny&quot; in 1915, a staged fire got out of control. Lawrence was burned, her hair was singed, and she suffered a serious fall which fractured her spine. She went into shock for months. She returned to work, but collapsed after the film was completed. To add to her problems, Universal refused to pay her medical expenses, leaving Lawrence feeling betrayed. In mid-1916, she returned to work for Universal and completed &quot;Elusive Isabel&quot;. However, the strain of working took its toll on her, and she suffered a serious relapse. She was completely paralyzed for four months. In 1921, she traveled to Hollywood to attempt a comeback, but had little success. She received a leading role in a minor melodrama (&quot;The Unfoldment&quot;), and then two supporting roles. All her film work after 1924 was in uncredited bit parts.

==Automotive inventions==

Besides her film career, Lawrence is credited with designing the first &quot;auto signaling arm&quot;, a predecessor of the modern turn signal, along with the first mechanical brake signal. She did not patent these inventions, however, and as a result she received no credit for, nor profit from, either one.

==Personal life==

Lawrence was married three times and had no children. Her first marriage was to actor, screenwriter and director Harry Solter in 1908. They remained married until Solter&#x27;s death in 1920. She then married automobile salesman Charles Byrne Woodring in 1921. They separated in 1929; Lawrence was granted an interlocutory divorce in February 1931, which was finalized the following year. During the 1920s, Lawrence and Woodring opened a cosmetics store in Los Angeles called Hollywood Cosmetics. The store sold theatrical makeup and also sold a line of cosmetics that Lawrence developed. They continued their partnership after their separation in 1929, but the store was forced to close in 1931.

In 1933, Lawrence wed for the third and final time, to Henry Bolton, who turned out to be an abusive alcoholic and beat her severely. The union lasted five months.

==Later years ==
By the late 1920s, Lawrence&#x27;s popularity had declined and she suffered several personal losses. She was devastated when her mother, to whom she was close, died suddenly in August 1929. Four months later, she separated from her second husband, Charles Woodring. While Lawrence earned a small fortune during her film career, she made many poor business decisions. She lost much of her fortune after the stock market crash in October 1929 and ensuing Great Depression. The cosmetics store that she and her second husband opened in Los Angeles also lost business because of the Depression, and the couple was forced to close its doors in 1931.

By the early 1930s, Lawrence&#x27;s acting career consisted solely of extra and bit parts which were often uncredited. In 1936, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer studio head Louis B. Mayer began giving extra and bit parts to former silent film actors for $75 per week. Lawrence, along with other &quot;old timers&quot; from the silent era whose careers had all but ended when sound films replaced silent films, signed with M-G-M. Lawrence remained with the studio until her death.

In mid-1937, Lawrence was diagnosed with what her doctor described as &quot;a bone disease which produces anemia and depression.&quot; The disease was likely myelofibrosis, a rare bone marrow disease, or agnogenic myeloid metaplasia, both of which were incurable at the time. Due to her poor health and chronic pain, Lawrence became depressed but attempted to keep working. Around this time she moved into a home on Westbourne Drive in West Hollywood, with a studio worker named Robert &quot;Bob&quot; Brinlow and his sister.

==Death==
At 1 p.m. on December 28, 1938, Lawrence phoned the offices of M-G-M where she was to report to work that afternoon, claiming that she was ill. Sometime later in the afternoon, Lawrence ingested ant poison and cough syrup at her home in West Hollywood. Accounts differ as to how Lawrence was discovered; some media reports stated her neighbor Marian Menzer heard her screams, while others say that Lawrence called Menzer stating that she poisoned herself. Menzer called an ambulance, and Lawrence was rushed to Beverly Hills Emergency Hospital. Doctors were unable to save Lawrence, who died at 2:45 p.m. Lawrence left a suicide note in her home addressed to her housemate Bob Brinlow, stating:

Dear Bob, 
:Call Dr. Wilson. I am tired. Hope this works. Good bye, my darling. They can&#x27;t cure me, so let it go at that. 
:Lovingly, Florence – P.S. You&#x27;ve all been swell guys. Everything is yours.

Lawrence&#x27;s death was ruled a &quot;probable suicide&quot; owing to her &quot;ill health&quot;. The Motion Picture &amp; Television Fund paid for Lawrence&#x27;s funeral, held on December 30, and for her unmarked grave in the Hollywood Cemetery (now Hollywood Forever Cemetery) in Hollywood. Her grave remained unmarked until 1991, when an anonymous British actor paid for a memorial marker for her. It reads: &quot;The Biograph Girl/The First Movie Star&quot;. The date of birth on Lawrence&#x27;s headstone is given as 1890. This inaccuracy was also stated on her death certificate filled out by the coroner. Lawrence&#x27;s biographer, Kelly R. Brown, owed this mistake to &quot;Lawrence&#x27;s own brand of fiction&quot; as she routinely subtracted years off her age. The mistake was repeated by the Pierce Brothers Mortuary, where Lawrence&#x27;s funeral was held, although most obituaries printed her correct year of birth: 1886.

==Cultural references==
In William J. Mann&#x27;s novel &quot;The Biograph Girl&quot; (2000), Mann blends the facts of Lawrence&#x27;s life with fiction. Instead of fading into oblivion and committing suicide, Lawrence, with the help of a doctor, fools the public into thinking she committed suicide. A journalist discovers Lawrence at the nursing home where she has lived secretly, and he decides to write a biography of her.

==Filmography==
===Short subject===
===Features===
==See also==

* Canadian pioneers in early Hollywood

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
==Bibliography==
*

==External links==
* Florence Lawrence at Women Film Pioneers Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q256968" start="0" end="17" title="Florence Lawrence" label="Florence Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q256968" start="24" end="48" title="Florence Lawrence" label="Florence Annie Bridgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q152764" start="367" end="377" title="Max Linder" label="Max Linder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914862" start="446" end="459" title="Biograph Girl" label="Biograph Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q465832" start="529" end="545" title="Biograph Company" label="Biograph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q56616478" start="801" end="838" title="Charlotte Bridgwood" label="Charlotte &amp;quot;Lotta&amp;quot; Bridgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="853" end="863" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="940" end="952" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030854" start="2474" end="2512" title="Canadian pioneers in early Hollywood" label="Canadian pioneers in the film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418400" start="2694" end="2716" title="Vitagraph Studios" label="Vitagraph film company"/>
<link wikidata="Q21022090" start="2896" end="2924" title="Edison Manufacturing Company" label="Edison Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013770" start="2971" end="3012" title="Daniel Boone (1907 film)" label="Daniel Boone; or, Pioneer Days in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q582694" start="3343" end="3358" title="Dion Boucicault" label="Dion Boucicault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763712" start="3372" end="3386" title="The Shaughraun" label="The Shaughraun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197385" start="3983" end="3995" title="Harry Solter" label="Harry Solter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914861" start="4104" end="4120" title="Biograph Studios" label="Biograph Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q51123" start="4144" end="4158" title="D. W. Griffith" label="D. W. Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975914" start="4503" end="4518" title="Florence Turner" label="Florence Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206911" start="4663" end="4686" title="The Girl and the Outlaw" label="The Girl and the Outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202910" start="4950" end="4973" title="Betrayed by a Handprint" label="Betrayed by a Handprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209845" start="5006" end="5018" title="The Red Girl" label="The Red Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q125700278" start="5396" end="5414" title="Mr. and Mrs. Jones" label="Mr. and Mrs. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933553" start="5453" end="5465" title="Resurrection (1909 film)" label="Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914862" start="5565" end="5578" title="Biograph Girl" label="Biograph Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q60648" start="6110" end="6137" title="Independent Moving Pictures" label="Independent Moving Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q61074" start="6188" end="6200" title="Carl Laemmle" label="Carl Laemmle"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="6260" end="6278" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986120" start="6791" end="6806" title="The Broken Oath" label="The Broken Oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q116439" start="7212" end="7225" title="Lubin Studios" label="Lubin Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q104109" start="7273" end="7286" title="Mary Pickford" label="Mary Pickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q60300" start="7507" end="7526" title="Victor Studios" label="Victor Film Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013261" start="7653" end="7673" title="Fort Lee, New Jersey" label="Fort Lee, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q966972" start="7723" end="7733" title="Owen Moore" label="Owen Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="7748" end="7766" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="8398" end="8415" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367959" start="8884" end="8898" title="Elusive Isabel" label="Elusive Isabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q86753921" start="9179" end="9193" title="The Unfoldment" label="The Unfoldment"/>
<link wikidata="Q964912" start="9450" end="9461" title="turn signal" label="turn signal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9495" end="9507" title="Automotive lighting#Stop lights (brake lights)" label="brake signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197385" start="9761" end="9773" title="Harry Solter" label="Harry Solter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047174" start="9957" end="9978" title="Interlocutory" label="interlocutory divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q475000" start="10934" end="10946" title="stock market" label="stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="10981" end="10997" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="11302" end="11321" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q319682" start="11334" end="11348" title="Louis B. Mayer" label="Louis B. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="11748" end="11754" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752571" start="11800" end="11813" title="myelofibrosis" label="myelofibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="11822" end="11833" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752571" start="11846" end="11874" title="agnogenic myeloid metaplasia" label="agnogenic myeloid metaplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917748" start="13189" end="13225" title="Motion Picture &amp;amp; Television Fund" label="Motion Picture &amp;amp; Television Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624932" start="13339" end="13365" title="Hollywood Forever Cemetery" label="Hollywood Forever Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q263562" start="14053" end="14068" title="William J. Mann" label="William J. Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030854" start="14521" end="14557" title="Canadian pioneers in early Hollywood" label="Canadian pioneers in early Hollywood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182796" wikidata="Q327742" url="?curid=182796" title="Relay race">
<text>A relay race is a racing competition where members of a team take turns completing parts of racecourse or performing a certain action. Relay races take the form of professional races and amateur games. Relay races are common in running, orienteering, swimming, cross-country skiing, biathlon, or ice skating (usually with a baton in the fist). In the Olympic Games, there are several types of relay races that are part of track and field, each consisting of a set number of stages (legs) (usually four), each leg run by different members of a team. The runner finishing one leg is usually required to pass the next runner a stick-like object known as a &quot;baton&quot; while both are running in a marked exchange zone. In most relays, team members cover equal distances: Olympic events for both men and women are the 400-metre (4 × 100-metre) and 1,600-metre (4 × 400-metre) relays. Some non-Olympic relays are held at distances of 800 m, 3,200 m, and 6,000 m. In the less frequently run medley relays, however, the athletes cover different distances in a prescribed order—as in a sprint medley of 200, 200, 400, 800 metres or a distance medley of 1,200, 400, 800, 1,600 metres.

==Relays in swimming==

A swimming relay of four swimmers usually follows this strategy: second-fastest, third-fastest, slowest, then fastest (anchor). However, it is not uncommon to see either the slowest swimmer racing in the second slot (creating an order of second-fastest, slowest, third-fastest, and then fastest), or an order from slowest to fastest (an order of slowest, third-fastest, second-fastest, fastest).

FINA rules require that a foot of the second, third or fourth swimmer must be contacting the platform while (and before) the incoming teammate is touching the wall; the starting swimmer may already be in motion, however, which saves 0.6–1.0 seconds compared to a regular start. Besides, many swimmers perform better in a relay than in an individual race owing to a team spirit atmosphere. As a result, relay times are typically 2–3 seconds faster than the sum of best times of individual swimmers.

In medley swimming, each swimmer uses a different stroke (in this order): backstroke, breaststroke, butterfly, and freestyle, with the added limitation that the freestyle swimmer cannot use any of the first three strokes. At competitive levels, essentially all freestyle swimmers use the front crawl. Note that this order is different from that for the individual medley, in which a single swimmer swims butterfly, backstroke, breaststroke, and freestyle in a single race, in that order.

The three standard relays raced at the Olympics are the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay, 4 × 200 m freestyle relay and 4 × 100 m medley relay.

Mixed-gendered relays were introduced at the 2014 FINA World Swimming Championships (25 m) (4 × 50 m freestyle and medley) and the 2015 World Aquatics Championships (4 × 100 m freestyle and medley). The event debuted at the 2020 Summer Olympics (4 × 100 m medley).

In open water swimming, mixed-gendered relays were introduced at the 2011 World Aquatics Championships (4 × 1250 m).

==Relays in athletics==

In athletics, the two standard relays are the 4 × 100 metres relay and the 4 × 400 metres relay. 4 × 200, 4 × 800, and 4 × 1500 m relays exist as well, but they are rarer. Mixed-gendered 4 × 400 metres relays were introduced at the 2017 IAAF World Relays, repeated at the 2018 Asian Games, the 2019 World Championships in Athletics and were added to the 2020 Summer Olympics. In addition, a 2 × 2 × 400 m and shuttle hurdles mixed relay races were introduced at the 2019 IAAF World Relays.

Traditionally, the 4 × 400 m relay finals are the last event of a track meet, and is often met with a very enthusiastic crowd, especially if the last leg is a close race. It is hard to measure exact splits in a 4 × 400 (or a 4 × 100) relay. For example, if a team ran a 3-minute 4 × 400, it does not mean every runner on the team has to run a 45-second open 400, because a person starts accelerating before they have the baton, therefore allowing for slightly slower overall open 400 times. A 4 × 400 relay generally starts in lanes for the first leg, including the handoff. The second leg then proceeds to run in lanes for the first 100 metres, after which point the runners are allowed to break into the first lane on the backstretch, as long as they do not interfere with other runners. A race organizer then puts the third-leg runners into a line depending on the order in which they are running (with the first place closest to the inside). The faster teams pass first, while the slower teams have to slide in to the inside lanes as they come available.

According to the IAAF rules, world records in relays can only be set if all team members have the same nationality. Several superior marks were established by teams from a mixture of countries and were thus never ratified.

Major USA Track and Field events, f.e. the Penn Relays, Drake Relays, Kansas Relays, Mt. SAC Relays, Modesto Relays, Texas Relays, West Coast Relays, include different types of relays.

===Rules and strategy===
Each runner must hand off the baton to the next runner within a certain zone, usually marked by triangles on the track. In sprint relays, runners typically use a &quot;blind handoff&quot;, where the second runner stands on a spot predetermined in practice and starts running when the first runner hits a visual mark on the track (usually a smaller triangle). The second runner opens their hand behind them after a few strides, by which time the first runner should be caught up and able to hand off the baton. Usually a runner will give an auditory signal, such as &quot;Stick!&quot; repeated several times, for the recipient of the baton to put out his hand. In middle-distance relays or longer, runners begin by jogging while looking back at the incoming runner and holding out a hand for the baton.
A team may be disqualified from a relay for:

* Losing the baton (dropping the baton shall not result in disqualification. See IAAF rule no. 170.6)
* Making an improper baton pass, especially when not passing in the exchange zone
* False starting (usually once but sometimes twice)
* Improperly overtaking another competitor
* Preventing another competitor from passing
* Wilfully impeding, improperly crossing the course, or in any other way interfering with another competitor

Based on the speed of the runners, the generally accepted strategy used in setting up a four-person relay team is: second-fastest, third-fastest, slowest, then fastest (anchor); however some teams (usually middle school or young high school) use second-fastest, slowest, third-fastest, then the fastest (anchor). But if a runner is better in the starting blocks than the others, they may be moved to the first spot because it is the only spot that uses starting blocks.

===Competitions===
The largest relay event in the world is the Norwegian Holmenkollstafetten, 2,944 teams of 15 starting and ending at Bislett Stadium in Oslo which had a total of 44,160 relay-competitors on May 10, 2014.

Another large relay event is the Penn Relays, which attracts over 15,000 competitors annually on the high-school, collegiate and professional levels, and over its three days attracts upwards of 100,000 spectators. It is credited with popularizing relay racing in the sport of track &amp; field.

===Long-distance relays===
Long-distance relays have become increasingly popular with runners of all skill levels. These relays typically have 5 to 36 legs, each usually between long, though sometimes as long as .

The IAAF World Road Relay Championships was held from 1986 to 1998, with six-member teams covering the classic marathon distance.

Races under are run in a day, with each runner covering one or two legs. Longer relays are run overnight, with each runner typically covering three legs.

The world&#x27;s longest relay race was Japan&#x27;s Prince Takamatsu Cup Nishinippon Round-Kyūshū Ekiden, which begins in Nagasaki and continues for .

=== Cross-country relays===
For the 2017 IAAF World Cross Country Championships, a mixed relay race was added (4 × 2 km).

The Crusader Team Sprint Cross Country Relay Race is a fun and unique venue specifically designed to get runners familiar with distance running and excited for the rest of the cross country season.  Teams will be pairs of runners.  The team will run four loops of a 1-mile course.  Runner “A” will run loop 1 and hand off to Runner “B.”  Runner “B” will run the same loop and hand off back to Runner “A.”  “A” runs one more loop, hands off to “B,” and “B” finishes. 3 race categories: boys, girls, and co-ed.  Awards will be given in each of the three categories.

===Shuttle hurdle relay===
The Shuttle hurdle relay is a Men&#x27;s and Women&#x27;s competition that is part of Relay meetings like Drake Relays or Penn Relays. A mixed version was introduced at the 2019 IAAF World Relays, it consist of a race in which two men and two women on each team, are running a 110 m hurdles.

===Medley relay===
Medley relay events are also occasionally held in track meets, usually consisting of teams of four runners running progressively longer distances. The distance medley relay consists of four legs run at distances of 1200, 400, 800, and 1,600 metres, in that order. The sprint medley relay usually consists of four legs run at distances of 400, 200, 200, and 800 metres, though a more uncommon variant of 200, 100, 100 and 400 metres (sometimes called a short sprint medley) also exists. See also Swedish relay.

===Relays on coinage===
Relay race events have been selected as a main motif in numerous collectors&#x27; coins. One of the recent samples is the €10 Greek Relays commemorative coin, minted in 2003 to commemorate the 2004 Summer Olympics. In the obverse of the coin three modern athletes run, holding their batons while in the background three ancient athletes are shown running a race known as the dolichos (a semi-endurance race of approximately 3,800 metres&#x27; distance).

==Relays in skiing==

===Cross-country skiing===
The FIS Nordic World Ski Championships features a relay race since 1933, and a women&#x27;s race since 1954. Each team has four skiers, each of whom must complete 10 kilometres / 6.2 miles (men) or 5 kilometres / 3.1 miles (women).

===Biathlon===
In biathlon, the relay race features a mass start, with teams consist of four biathletes. Each competitor must complete 7.5 kilometres / 4.66 miles (men) or 6.0 kilometres / 3.73 miles (women). Each leg is held over three laps, with two shooting rounds; one prone, one standing.

A mixed biathlon relay race was first held at the Biathlon World Championships 2005 in Khanty-Mansiysk, and it was added to the 2014 Winter Olympics.

==Relays in orienteering==

There are two major relays in orienteering:
*Tiomila in April/May in Sweden
*Jukola and Venla relay in June in Finland

There are other relays in autumn with requirements about the age and gender distributions:
*Halikko relay, near Salo, Finland
*25-manna, near Stockholm, Sweden

==Other relays==
The World Triathlon Mixed Relay Championships is a mixed-gendered relay triathlon race held since 2009. Previously, the Triathlon Team World Championships were held in 2003, 2006 and 2007. Also, the triathlon at the Youth Olympic Games has a mixed relay race since 2010, and the event was introduced at the 2020 Summer Olympics. As in standard triathlons, each triathlon competitor must do a segment of swimming, cycling and running.

The madison is a track cycling event where two riders take turns to complete the race. Riders can alternate at any moment by touching the partner with the hand. The madison is featured at the UCI Track Cycling World Championships since 1995 and the Olympics since 2000. The format has been used in six-day racing. In road racing, the Duo Normand is a two-man time trial relay held annually in Normandy, France. In mountain biking, the UCI Mountain Bike World Championships has a mixed team relay race since 1999.

The game show &quot;Triple Threat&quot; had a bonus round called the &quot;Triple Threat Relay Round&quot; which was played like a relay race. The winning team had to take turns matching song titles to its corresponding musical artists.

==See also==

* 4 × 100 metres relay
* 4 × 400 metres relay
* Anchor leg
* Ekiden
* Relay (disambiguation)
* River to River Relay

== Notes and references ==

==External links==

*IAAF list of relay-records in XML</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q327742" start="2" end="12" title="Relay race" label="relay race"/>
<link wikidata="Q878123" start="18" end="24" title="racing" label="racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777138" start="92" end="102" title="Race track" label="racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q105674" start="228" end="235" title="running" label="running"/>
<link wikidata="Q29358" start="237" end="249" title="orienteering" label="orienteering"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="251" end="259" title="swimming (sport)" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q179687" start="261" end="281" title="cross-country skiing (sport)" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q166788" start="283" end="291" title="biathlon" label="biathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q779272" start="296" end="307" title="ice skating" label="ice skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="351" end="364" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="422" end="437" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q189289" start="1603" end="1607" title="FINA" label="FINA"/>
<link wikidata="Q657196" start="2105" end="2120" title="medley swimming" label="medley swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q275115" start="2176" end="2186" title="backstroke" label="backstroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q326163" start="2188" end="2200" title="breaststroke" label="breaststroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q245249" start="2202" end="2211" title="butterfly stroke" label="butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q31987" start="2217" end="2226" title="freestyle swimming" label="freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q828185" start="2390" end="2401" title="front crawl" label="front crawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630219" start="2774" end="2819" title="2014 FINA World Swimming Championships (25 m)" label="2014 FINA World Swimming Championships (25 m)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886437" start="2860" end="2893" title="2015 World Aquatics Championships" label="2015 World Aquatics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="2953" end="2973" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q631004" start="2998" end="3017" title="open water swimming" label="open water swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q330343" start="3064" end="3097" title="2011 World Aquatics Championships" label="2011 World Aquatics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="3141" end="3150" title="athletics (sport)" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q230061" start="3184" end="3204" title="4 × 100 metres relay" label="4 × 100 metres relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q230057" start="3213" end="3233" title="4 × 400 metres relay" label="4 × 400 metres relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q21935553" start="3370" end="3392" title="2017 IAAF World Relays" label="2017 IAAF World Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209909" start="3410" end="3426" title="2018 Asian Games" label="2018 Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q15694436" start="3432" end="3469" title="2019 World Championships in Athletics" label="2019 World Championships in Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="3492" end="3512" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q56312646" start="3604" end="3626" title="2019 IAAF World Relays" label="2019 IAAF World Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q334734" start="3982" end="3990" title="400 metres" label="open 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374756" start="4956" end="4967" title="Penn Relays" label="Penn Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038905" start="4969" end="4981" title="Drake Relays" label="Drake Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q11510366" start="4983" end="4996" title="Kansas Relays" label="Kansas Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q11510349" start="4998" end="5012" title="Mt. SAC Relays" label="Mt. SAC Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889237" start="5014" end="5028" title="Modesto Relays" label="Modesto Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519348" start="5030" end="5042" title="Texas Relays" label="Texas Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q15713145" start="5044" end="5061" title="West Coast Relays" label="West Coast Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q624482" start="5247" end="5253" title="Sprint (running)" label="sprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q162991" start="6158" end="6169" title="False start" label="False start"/>
<link wikidata="Q185451" start="6464" end="6472" title="strategy" label="strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752704" start="6575" end="6581" title="Anchor leg" label="anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="6940" end="6949" title="Norwegians" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q866409" start="7012" end="7027" title="Bislett Stadium" label="Bislett Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="7031" end="7035" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374756" start="7133" end="7144" title="Penn Relays" label="Penn Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q11783510" start="7615" end="7650" title="IAAF World Road Relay Championships" label="IAAF World Road Relay Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370961" start="7983" end="8002" title="Round-Kyūshū Ekiden" label="Round-Kyūshū Ekiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="8020" end="8028" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q18589967" start="8086" end="8129" title="2017 IAAF World Cross Country Championships" label="2017 IAAF World Cross Country Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861840" start="8769" end="8789" title="Shuttle hurdle relay" label="Shuttle hurdle relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038905" start="8871" end="8883" title="Drake Relays" label="Drake Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374756" start="8887" end="8898" title="Penn Relays" label="Penn Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q56312646" start="8938" end="8960" title="2019 IAAF World Relays" label="2019 IAAF World Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q170004" start="9042" end="9055" title="110 m hurdles" label="110 m hurdles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282867" start="9228" end="9249" title="distance medley relay" label="distance medley relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581309" start="9345" end="9364" title="sprint medley relay" label="sprint medley relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532187" start="9572" end="9585" title="Swedish relay" label="Swedish relay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9744" end="9769" title="Euro gold and silver commemorative coins (Greece)#2003 coinage" label="Relays commemorative coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="9805" end="9825" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q937571" start="10120" end="10154" title="FIS Nordic World Ski Championships" label="FIS Nordic World Ski Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q166788" start="10367" end="10375" title="biathlon" label="biathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q674770" start="10694" end="10727" title="Biathlon World Championships 2005" label="Biathlon World Championships 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052026" start="10772" end="10792" title="Biathlon at the 2014 Winter Olympics – Mixed relay" label="2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117327" start="10868" end="10875" title="Tiomila" label="Tiomila"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="10892" end="10898" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q259977" start="10900" end="10922" title="Jukola relay" label="Jukola and Venla relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="10934" end="10941" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11035" end="11048" title="Angelniemen Ankkuri#Halikko relay" label="Halikko relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q210987" start="11055" end="11059" title="Salo, Finland" label="Salo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="11085" end="11094" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975008" start="11125" end="11166" title="World Triathlon Mixed Relay Championships" label="World Triathlon Mixed Relay Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q10980" start="11193" end="11202" title="triathlon" label="triathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48835839" start="11320" end="11356" title="triathlon at the Youth Olympic Games" label="triathlon at the Youth Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q65242368" start="11428" end="11448" title="Triathlon at the 2020 Summer Olympics – Mixed relay" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596614" start="11560" end="11567" title="madison (cycling)" label="madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q221635" start="11573" end="11586" title="track cycling" label="track cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q639244" start="11748" end="11785" title="UCI Track Cycling World Championships" label="UCI Track Cycling World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141075" start="11854" end="11868" title="six-day racing" label="six-day racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266381" start="11890" end="11901" title="Duo Normand" label="Duo Normand"/>
<link wikidata="Q185948" start="11915" end="11925" title="time trial" label="time trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="11949" end="11957" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11959" end="11965" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q936619" start="11991" end="12028" title="UCI Mountain Bike World Championships" label="UCI Mountain Bike World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383287" start="12035" end="12056" title="UCI Mountain Bike &amp;amp; Trials World Championships – Team relay" label="mixed team relay race"/>
<link wikidata="Q230061" start="12324" end="12344" title="4 × 100 metres relay" label="4 × 100 metres relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q230057" start="12347" end="12367" title="4 × 400 metres relay" label="4 × 400 metres relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752704" start="12370" end="12380" title="Anchor leg" label="Anchor leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202167" start="12383" end="12389" title="Ekiden" label="Ekiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q407002" start="12392" end="12414" title="Relay (disambiguation)" label="Relay (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338047" start="12417" end="12437" title="River to River Relay" label="River to River Relay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182797" wikidata="Q5030854" url="?curid=182797" title="Canadian pioneers in early Hollywood">
<text>Motion pictures have been a part of the culture of Canada since the industry began.

==History==
Around 1910, the East Coast filmmakers began to take advantage of the mild California winter climates, and after Nestor Studios, run by Canadian Al Christie, built the first permanent movie studio in Hollywood, a number of the movie companies expanded or relocated to the new Hollywood. At the same time, because there was no sound in movies, several French filmmakers had their motion pictures distributed in the United States.

==List of Canadian film pioneers in Hollywood==
Among those Canadians who took part in the early years of Hollywood were:
* Maud Allan (1873-1956), actress and dancer, popularizer of the Salome (play) role later played by Theda Bara and Alla Nazimova 
* Allakariallak (1890s–1924?), Inuit actor and subject of &quot;Nanook of the North&quot;
* Charles Arling (1880–1922), actor
* Earl W. Bascom (1906-1995), actor, artist, worked with Roy Rogers, worked on Louis B. Mayer&#x27;s ranch in Perris, California
* William Bertram (1880–1933), actor, director
* Ben Blue (1901–1975), actor, comedian
* Raymond Burr (1917–1993), actor; Perry Mason, Ironside
* Jack Carson (1910–1963), actor
* Peggy Cartwright (1912-2001), actress in Our Gang comedy series and with Harold Lloyd
* Al Christie (1881–1951), co-founder of Christie Film Company, director/producer/screenwriter
* Charles Christie (1880–1955), co-founder of Christie Film Company; builder of Hollywood&#x27;s first luxury hotel
* Berton Churchill (1876–1940), actor
* Yvonne De Carlo (1922–2007), actor
* Joe De Grasse (1873–1940), director
* Sam De Grasse (1875–1953), actor
* Fifi D&#x27;Orsay (1904–1983), actress
* Marie Dressler (1869–1934), Academy Award for Best Actress
* Douglass Dumbrille (1889–1974), moving and television actor
* Deanna Durbin (1921–2013), actress, singer
* Allan Dwan (1885–1981), director, producer, screenwriter
* Edward Earle (1882–1972), actor
* Rockliffe Fellowes (1883–1950), actor
* Glenn Ford (1916–2006), actor
* John Harvey Gahan (1888–1958), as Oscar Gahan, actor, musician, composer; Canada&#x27;s child prodigy violinist, aka Arvé
* Huntley Gordon (1887–1956), actor
* Lorne Greene (1915–1987), actor; played Ben Cartwight, Commander Adama
* June Havoc (1912-2010), actress
* Harry Hayden (1882–1955), actor
* Del Henderson (1883–1956), actor, director, writer
* Walter Huston (1884–1950), Academy Award winning actor
* May Irwin (1862–1938), comedy actress, first screen kiss in 1896
* Victor Jory (1902–1982), actor
* Ruby Keeler (1909–1993), dancer, actress
* Barbara Kent (1907–2011), actress
* Florence La Badie (1888–1917), actress
* Florence Lawrence (1886–1938), &quot;America&#x27;s first movie star&quot;
* Rosina Lawrence (1912-1997), actress
* Beatrice Lillie (1894–1989), actress
* Gene Lockhart (1891–1957), actor
* Guy Lombardo (1902-1977), band leader who appeared in musicals
* Del Lord (1894–1970), comedy director
* Wilfred Lucas (1871–1940), director, screenwriter, actor
* Henry MacRae (1876–1944), director, producer, screenwriter, actor
* David Manners (1900–1998), actor
* Raymond Massey (1896–1983), actor
* Louis B. Mayer (1885–1957), co–founder of Metro Goldwyn Mayer Motion Picture Studios
* Bob Nolan (1908–1980), singer/actor in western musicals as leader of &quot;The Sons of the Pioneers&quot;
* Sidney Olcott (1872–1949), director
* Jack Pickford (1896–1933), actor, Hollywood&#x27;s first &quot;Bad Boy&quot;
* Lottie Pickford (1893–1936), actress
* Mary Pickford (1892–1979), &quot;America&#x27;s Sweetheart,&quot; Academy Award for Best Actress, co–founder of United Artists
* Walter Pidgeon (1897–1984), actor
* Marie Prevost (1896–1937), actress
* John Qualen (1899-1987), actor
* William Quinn (1884–1965), actor
* Mack Sennett (1880–1960), director, known as the &quot;King of Comedy&quot;
* Athole Shearer (1900–1985), actress, wife of director Howard Hawks
* Douglas Shearer (1899–1971), sound director/designer, winner of seven Academy Awards
* Norma Shearer (1902–1983), Academy Award for Best Actress
* Nell Shipman (1892–1970), actress, writer, producer
* Jay Silverheels (1912–1980), actor known for his portrayal of Tonto, sidekick to the Lone Ranger
* Alexis Smith (1921–1993), actor
* Ned Sparks (1883–1957), actor
* Richard Travers (1885–1935), actor
* Jack L. Warner (1892–1978), co-founder of Warner Brothers
* Marjorie White (1904–1935), actress
* Joseph Wiseman (1918–2009), actor
* Fay Wray (1907-2004), actress

==Canadian scene in Hollywood==
In his book &quot;Stardust and Shadows: Canadians in Early Hollywood&quot;, Charles Foster recounted his experiences meeting some of these Canadians while on leave from the Royal Air Force during World War II. Foster visited Hollywood where he was introduced to Canadian and silent movie director Sidney Olcott. Through Olcott he learned of Hollywood&#x27;s Canadian community. Although total strangers, young Foster was welcomed with open arms. This social gathering of &quot;Canucks&quot; also included Walter Pidgeon, Deanna Durbin, Fifi D&#x27;Orsay, and others who worked in the movie business.

Several of these Canadian pioneers achieved enormous wealth and worldwide fame, such as Louis B. Mayer and Mary Pickford who were, in their day, two of the most powerful personalities in Hollywood. From the late 1920s to the mid-1930s, Canadian female actresses were amongst the greatest box office draws. The Academy Award for Best Actress was won by Canadian women three years in a row:
* 1929 - Mary Pickford in &quot;Coquette&quot;
* 1930 - Norma Shearer in &quot;The Divorcee&quot;
* 1931 - Marie Dressler in &quot;Min and Bill&quot;

Foster recounts the feelings and deep loyalty of Louis B. Mayer. Although he had become a naturalized American citizen, Mayer was known to hire Canadian compatriots on the spot, as Saint John, New Brunswick native Walter Pidgeon later recalled:
Several Canadian expatriates also saw their careers decline and died before the age of 55. Florence Lawrence, the &quot;first real movie star&quot;, the Biograph Girl in Hollywood history, who appeared in more than 270 movies, committed suicide at the age of 52. She is buried in unmarked grave in the Hollywood Cemetery. Marie Prevost, who was a leading lady during the mid-1920s, suffered from depression after the death of her mother in 1926. In 1937, she died of acute alcoholism and malnutrition at the age of 38. Florence La Badie died of injuries she sustained in a car accident in August 1917 at the age of 29. Jack Pickford, Mary Pickford&#x27;s younger brother, died at age 36 from what was then known as multiple neuritis, while his sister Lottie died of a heart attack at age 43.

==References==

==Further reading==
* Charles Foster, &quot;Stardust and Shadows: Canadians in Early Hollywood&quot;, 2000, Dundurn Press </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="0" end="15" title="Film" label="Motion pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103954" start="40" end="57" title="culture of Canada" label="culture of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="114" end="124" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="172" end="182" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338476" start="210" end="224" title="Nestor Studios" label="Nestor Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q115450193" start="242" end="253" title="Al Christie" label="Al Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q375336" start="281" end="293" title="movie studio" label="movie studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="297" end="306" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="448" end="454" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q273161" start="651" end="661" title="Maud Allan" label="Maud Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149498" start="714" end="727" title="Salome (play)" label="Salome (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q234615" start="749" end="759" title="Theda Bara" label="Theda Bara"/>
<link wikidata="Q234795" start="764" end="777" title="Alla Nazimova" label="Alla Nazimova"/>
<link wikidata="Q918401" start="781" end="794" title="Allakariallak" label="Allakariallak"/>
<link wikidata="Q918401" start="843" end="862" title="Nanook of the North" label="Nanook of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666334" start="871" end="885" title="Charles Arling" label="Charles Arling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326138" start="907" end="921" title="Earl W. Bascom" label="Earl W. Bascom"/>
<link wikidata="Q367129" start="962" end="972" title="Roy Rogers" label="Roy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q319682" start="984" end="1005" title="Louis B. Mayer" label="Louis B. Mayer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005494" start="1036" end="1051" title="William Bertram (actor)" label="William Bertram"/>
<link wikidata="Q765767" start="1083" end="1091" title="Ben Blue" label="Ben Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q336877" start="1123" end="1135" title="Raymond Burr" label="Raymond Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393256" start="1180" end="1191" title="Jack Carson" label="Jack Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q600710" start="1213" end="1229" title="Peggy Cartwright" label="Peggy Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218784" start="1254" end="1262" title="Our Gang" label="Our Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q104340" start="1286" end="1298" title="Harold Lloyd" label="Harold Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q115450193" start="1301" end="1312" title="Al Christie" label="Al Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110670" start="1340" end="1361" title="Christie Film Company" label="Christie Film Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q115450193" start="1396" end="1412" title="Charles Christie" label="Charles Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q828391" start="1512" end="1528" title="Berton Churchill" label="Berton Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q286339" start="1550" end="1565" title="Yvonne De Carlo" label="Yvonne De Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373209" start="1587" end="1600" title="Joe De Grasse" label="Joe De Grasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q350905" start="1625" end="1638" title="Sam De Grasse" label="Sam De Grasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071582" start="1660" end="1677" title="Fifi D&amp;#x27;Orsay" label="Fifi D&amp;#x27;Orsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q253282" start="1701" end="1715" title="Marie Dressler" label="Marie Dressler"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="1729" end="1759" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038059" start="1762" end="1780" title="Douglass Dumbrille" label="Douglass Dumbrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q236987" start="1824" end="1837" title="Deanna Durbin" label="Deanna Durbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q959677" start="1869" end="1879" title="Allan Dwan" label="Allan Dwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342719" start="1928" end="1940" title="Edward Earle" label="Edward Earle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355487" start="1962" end="1980" title="Rockliffe Fellowes" label="Rockliffe Fellowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212048" start="2002" end="2012" title="Glenn Ford" label="Glenn Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238150" start="2034" end="2051" title="John Harvey Gahan" label="John Harvey Gahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143371" start="2158" end="2172" title="Huntley Gordon" label="Huntley Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q550784" start="2194" end="2206" title="Lorne Greene" label="Lorne Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q239864" start="2267" end="2277" title="June Havoc" label="June Havoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127832" start="2301" end="2313" title="Harry Hayden" label="Harry Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021715" start="2335" end="2348" title="Del Henderson" label="Del Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q162621" start="2388" end="2401" title="Walter Huston" label="Walter Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="2415" end="2428" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q273716" start="2445" end="2454" title="May Irwin" label="May Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367933" start="2512" end="2523" title="Victor Jory" label="Victor Jory"/>
<link wikidata="Q272092" start="2545" end="2556" title="Ruby Keeler" label="Ruby Keeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q260305" start="2588" end="2600" title="Barbara Kent" label="Barbara Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368238" start="2624" end="2641" title="Florence La Badie" label="Florence La Badie"/>
<link wikidata="Q256968" start="2665" end="2682" title="Florence Lawrence" label="Florence Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442671" start="2742" end="2757" title="Rosina Lawrence" label="Rosina Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q292791" start="2781" end="2796" title="Beatrice Lillie" label="Beatrice Lillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370701" start="2820" end="2833" title="Gene Lockhart" label="Gene Lockhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q467087" start="2855" end="2867" title="Guy Lombardo" label="Guy Lombardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021400" start="2920" end="2928" title="Del Lord" label="Del Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477748" start="2960" end="2973" title="Wilfred Lucas" label="Wilfred Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059335" start="3019" end="3031" title="Henry MacRae" label="Henry MacRae"/>
<link wikidata="Q359463" start="3087" end="3100" title="David Manners" label="David Manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q531461" start="3122" end="3136" title="Raymond Massey" label="Raymond Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q319682" start="3158" end="3172" title="Louis B. Mayer" label="Louis B. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="3200" end="3242" title="MGM" label="Metro Goldwyn Mayer Motion Picture Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q888168" start="3245" end="3254" title="Bob Nolan" label="Bob Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414335" start="3320" end="3344" title="The Sons of the Pioneers" label="The Sons of the Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q543630" start="3353" end="3366" title="Sidney Olcott" label="Sidney Olcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677170" start="3391" end="3404" title="Jack Pickford" label="Jack Pickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070442" start="3470" end="3485" title="Lottie Pickford" label="Lottie Pickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q104109" start="3509" end="3522" title="Mary Pickford" label="Mary Pickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="3575" end="3605" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="3621" end="3635" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q350640" start="3638" end="3652" title="Walter Pidgeon" label="Walter Pidgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q446120" start="3674" end="3687" title="Marie Prevost" label="Marie Prevost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364339" start="3711" end="3722" title="John Qualen" label="John Qualen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017166" start="3744" end="3757" title="William Quinn (actor)" label="William Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q317574" start="3779" end="3791" title="Mack Sennett" label="Mack Sennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4815644" start="3857" end="3871" title="Athole Shearer" label="Athole Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581" start="3911" end="3923" title="Howard Hawks" label="Howard Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8651" start="3926" end="3941" title="Douglas Shearer" label="Douglas Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="3996" end="4010" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q95019" start="4013" end="4026" title="Norma Shearer" label="Norma Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="4040" end="4070" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337906" start="4073" end="4085" title="Nell Shipman" label="Nell Shipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q981630" start="4127" end="4142" title="Jay Silverheels" label="Jay Silverheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821701" start="4189" end="4194" title="Tonto" label="Tonto"/>
<link wikidata="Q242482" start="4226" end="4238" title="Alexis Smith" label="Alexis Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q539170" start="4260" end="4270" title="Ned Sparks" label="Ned Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431278" start="4292" end="4307" title="Richard Travers" label="Richard Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q72614" start="4329" end="4343" title="Jack L. Warner" label="Jack L. Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="4371" end="4386" title="Warner Brothers" label="Warner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468428" start="4389" end="4403" title="Marjorie White" label="Marjorie White"/>
<link wikidata="Q448271" start="4427" end="4441" title="Joseph Wiseman" label="Joseph Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q266694" start="4463" end="4471" title="Fay Wray" label="Fay Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077744" start="4602" end="4616" title="Charles Foster (writer)" label="Charles Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="4699" end="4714" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4722" end="4734" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q543630" start="4823" end="4836" title="Sidney Olcott" label="Sidney Olcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292793" start="5003" end="5009" title="Canuck" label="Canuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q236987" start="5047" end="5060" title="Deanna Durbin" label="Deanna Durbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="5437" end="5467" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q570506" start="5548" end="5556" title="Coquette (film)" label="Coquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q917469" start="5595" end="5607" title="The Divorcee" label="The Divorcee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089809" start="5647" end="5659" title="Min and Bill" label="Min and Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q203403" start="5848" end="5858" title="Saint John, New Brunswick" label="Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="5860" end="5873" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q256968" start="6003" end="6020" title="Florence Lawrence" label="Florence Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337738" start="6043" end="6053" title="movie star" label="movie star"/>
<link wikidata="Q465832" start="6065" end="6078" title="American Mutoscope and Biograph Company" label="Biograph Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624932" start="6214" end="6232" title="Hollywood Forever Cemetery" label="Hollywood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q446120" start="6234" end="6247" title="Marie Prevost" label="Marie Prevost"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="6385" end="6395" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368238" start="6431" end="6448" title="Florence La Badie" label="Florence La Badie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677170" start="6531" end="6544" title="Jack Pickford" label="Jack Pickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502312" start="6627" end="6644" title="Polyneuropathy" label="multiple neuritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070442" start="6663" end="6669" title="Lottie Pickford" label="Lottie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="182802" wikidata="Q183599" url="?curid=182802" title="Halva">
<text>Halva (also halvah, halwa, halua, and other spellings; Bhojpuri:𑂯𑂪𑂳𑂄, , , ) is a type of confectionery that is widely spread throughout the Middle East and North Africa, the Balkans, Central Asia, and South Asia. The name is used for a broad variety of recipes, generally a thick paste made from flour, butter, liquid oil, saffron, rosewater, milk, turmeric powder, and sweetened with sugar.

==Etymology==

The word &quot;halva&quot; entered the English language between 1840 and 1850 from Romanian, which came from , itself ultimately derived from , a sweet confection. The root in , means &quot;sweet&quot;. The original name for the confection was , meaning &quot;oil food&quot;.

==History==
The origin of halva is disputed, some say that it dates back to Arabia where a reference to &quot;halvah&quot; appeared in the 7th century, referring to a mixture of mashed dates with milk. others claim that it originated in Persia (modern day Iran). By the 9th century, the term was applied to numerous kinds of sweets, including the now-familiar sweetened cooked semolina or flour paste.

The first recipes of halva were documented in the 13th century Arabic cookbook &quot;Kitab al-Tabikh&quot; (&quot;The Book of Dishes&quot;), as well as an anonymous cookbook from 13th-century Al-Andalus. Halva was adopted by the Ottoman Turks, including a sesame-based version, and spread throughout their empire.

==Types==
Most types of halva are relatively dense confections sweetened with sugar or honey. Their textures, however, vary. For example, semolina-based halva&#x27;s texture can be like a very buttery, moist clumpy couscous to something gelatinous and translucent, while sesame-based halva is drier and more crumbly.

=== Grain-based halva ===

Grain-based halva is made by toasting flour or cornstarch in oil, mixing it into a roux, and then cooking it with a sugary syrup. Corn is rarely used.

Dishes made from wheat semolina include Suji ka Halva in India, Pakistan and &quot;&quot; in Turkey. In both dishes, semolina is toasted in fat, either oil or butter, and then mixed with water or milk and sugar to achieve the desired flavor and consistency. 
Wheat-based &quot;Sōhan&quot; &quot;halvā&quot; in Northern India and Pakistan is a renowned delicacy made by combining wheat flour with milk, sugar, clarified butter, cardamom, saffron, and nuts such as almonds and pistachios. The mixture is slow-cooked, allowing the sugar to caramelize, which gives &quot;Sōhan&quot; &quot;halvā&quot; its unique firm and brittle texture. Multani halvā () from Pakistan is another wheat flour-based halva, but with a soft and moist texture.

Dairy-based rice flour halva, known as Pathein halawa, is considered a Burmese delicacy native to the city of Pathein.

===Sesame===
Sesame halva is popular in the Balkans, Poland, the Middle East, and other areas surrounding the Mediterranean Sea. It is also enjoyed in some regions of Pakistan, where it is locally referred to as &quot;Tahini Halvā&quot; (). 

The primary ingredients in this confection are sesame butter or paste (tahini), and sugar, glucose or honey. Soapwort (called &quot;‘erq al halaweh&quot; in Arabic; &quot;&quot; in Turkish), or egg white are added in some recipes to stabilize the oils in the mixture or create a distinctive texture for the resulting confection. Other ingredients and flavorings, such as pistachio nuts, cocoa powder, orange juice, vanilla, or chocolate are often added to the basic tahini and sugar base. 

===Sunflower===

Sunflower halva is popular in the countries of the former Soviet Union as well as in Bulgaria and Romania. It is made of roasted ground sunflower seeds instead of sesame. It may include other ingredients, such as nuts, cocoa powder, or vanilla. In 1996 around 4–5 thousand tonnes of sunflower halva were being produced by Ukraine annually.

===Peanuts===
In Argentina, Greek immigrants at the beginning of the 20th century created a kind of halva called &quot;mantecol&quot; from peanut butter, currently marketed under the name of Mantecol and also Nucrem. Such a product is widely consumed in the country.

=== Carrots ===
Gājar kā halvā is a popular halva in India and Pakistan  . It is made by slow-cooking grated carrots with milk, sugar, and ghee (clarified butter), often flavored with cardamom and garnished with nuts such as almonds, pistachios, or cashews. Sometimes, khoya (reduced milk solids) or condensed milk is added to enhance its richness and flavor.

===Other===

====Floss halva====
&quot;Pişmaniye&quot; (Turkish) or &quot;floss halva&quot; is a traditional sweet, prepared in Kocaeli, Turkey, made by flossing thin strands of halva into a light confection. Made primarily of wheat flour and sugar, the strands are continuously wrapped into a ball shape and then compressed. The result is a halva with a light consistency, similar to cotton candy. Floss halva can be found in regular and pistachio flavors, and there are brands with halal or kosher certifications.
In Chinese cuisine, a floss-like candy similar to &quot;pişmaniye&quot; or &quot;pashmak halva&quot;, known as &quot;dragon beard candy&quot;, is eaten as a snack or dessert.

A raw version of halva also has become popular among proponents of raw food diets. In this version, a mixture of raw sesame tahini, raw almonds, raw agave nectar and salt are blended together and frozen to firm.

==== Egg Halva ====
Anday ka halvā, or Egg Halva, is a traditional dessert from Pakistan that is prepared using eggs, sugar, clarified butter, and cardamom as the primary ingredients. The dish has a rich, creamy texture, and is garnished with saffron and nuts like almonds or pistachios.

== Cultural and national variations==

===Azerbaijan===

One regional variant is from Sheki where &quot;Şəki halvası&quot; halva refers to a layered bakhlava style pastry filled with spiced-nut mix and topped by crisscrossed patterns of a red syrup made from saffron, dried carrot and beetroot.

===Greece===
Halva is a traditional fasting food among Greek Orthodox who traditionally have food restrictions, especially from meat, on Wednesdays and Fridays throughout the year, for all of Great Lent and other fasting periods.

===India===
India has many types of halva, some unique to particular regions of the country. It is one of the popular sweets of India usually made from semolina.

The town of Bhatkal in Coastal Karnataka is famous for its unique banana halwa which is infused with either whole cashews, pistachio or almonds. This type of authentic halwa is a specialty of the Muslims of this town. The Udupi cuisine has halwa made from banana, wheat, ashgourd, and jackfuit.

It is speculated that halva (or halwa) is associated with Indian traditions and culture. Written records of sweets from Mānasollāsa mention a sweet called &quot;shali-anna&quot;, a type of semolina halwa which is today known as kesari in South India.

Tirunelveli in Tamil Nadu is known for its wheat halwa. Its preparation is a laborious process that &quot;is slowly seeing this sweet disappear.&quot; Unlike other sweets, the extra ghee is not drained out but forms an outer layer. This increases the shelf life of the halwa. Locals attribute the unique taste of the halwa to the water of the Thamirabarani.

The history of Kozhikode Halwa in Kerala could trace back to Zamorin era. Zamorin invited chefs from Gujarat to prepare halwa for their royal feast. They were also granted places to stay beside royal kitchen. This settlement later evolved as sweet sellers street, nowadays known as SM (Sweet Meat) Street or Mittayitheruvu. Kozhikode halwa is made of pure coconut oil, not from ghee. Kozhikode halwa also builds religious harmony; Ayyappa devotees from neighboring states Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh buy halwa and chips like prasadam (sacred food). They distribute them among their neighbors and friends, who consume them with a religious zeal.

===Iran===
In Iran, &quot;halva&quot; () usually refers to a related confection made from wheat flour and butter and flavored with saffron and rose water. The final product has a yellow, brown, or dark brown color. The halva is spread thin on a plate and left until it dries into a paste. Halva usually is served at wedding celebrations, religious ceremonies and funerals.

&quot;Halva Ardeh&quot; is the Iranian term for tahini-based halva, and may or may not include whole pistachios. &quot;Ardeh&quot; is processed sesame in the form of paste, usually sweetened with syrup.

===Israel===

Tahini halvah () is very popular in Israel and among Jews in the diaspora. Israeli halvah is made from sesame tahini and sugar. It is generally sold in slabs, with or without nuts. Vanilla, or vanilla with chocolate swirls are perhaps the most common, but there are many different varieties. Halvah is parve. It is often served as a breakfast component at Israeli hotels, and even used in specialty ice cream.

===Myanmar (Burma)===

In Myanmar (Burma), &quot;halawa&quot; () generally refers to Pathein halawa (), a Burmese confection or &quot;mont&quot; made with glutinous rice flour, rice flour, milk, and coconut shavings originating from the Irrawaddy delta town of Pathein. Another popular semolina-based confection, which is known as sooji halawa in India, is called sanwin makin in Myanmar.

===Turkey===
In Turkey halva is served for special occasions such as births, circumcisions, weddings and religious gatherings. The tradition is for semolina halva to be served at funerals, when someone leaves or returns from Hajj, and during Ramadan.

For this reason, flour (&quot;un&quot;) halva is also called in Turkish , meaning &quot;halva of the dead&quot;. The expression &quot;roasting halva for someone&quot; suggests that the person referred to has died.

===United States===
Halva can be found in ethnic Indian, Jewish, Arab, Persian, Greek, Balkan community stores and delicatessens as well as natural food stores. Besides being imported, it is manufactured in the United States, with the largest producer being Brooklyn-originated Joyva.

==See also==
* List of desserts
* Aluwa
* Barfi
* Gajar ka halwa
* Mahim halwa
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183599" start="0" end="5" title="Halva" label="Halva"/>
<link wikidata="Q183599" start="12" end="18" title="Halva" label="halvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q183599" start="20" end="25" title="Halva" label="halwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q183599" start="27" end="32" title="Halva" label="halua"/>
<link wikidata="Q33268" start="55" end="63" title="Bhojpuri language" label="Bhojpuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="89" end="102" title="confectionery" label="confectionery"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="140" end="168" title="Middle East and North Africa" label="Middle East and North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="174" end="181" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="183" end="195" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="201" end="211" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25292" start="870" end="875" title="date (fruit)" label="dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426160" start="922" end="928" title="Name of Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="941" end="945" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1151" end="1157" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="1280" end="1290" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="1317" end="1330" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="1490" end="1495" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q381350" start="1541" end="1549" title="semolina" label="semolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q746427" start="1831" end="1835" title="roux" label="roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q381350" start="1923" end="1931" title="semolina" label="semolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789594" start="2309" end="2325" title="clarified butter" label="clarified butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="2337" end="2344" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q73185" start="2437" end="2447" title="Caramelization" label="caramelize"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792397" start="2676" end="2690" title="Pathein halawa" label="Pathein halawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q870103" start="2747" end="2754" title="Pathein" label="Pathein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763698" start="2770" end="2776" title="Sesame" label="Sesame"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2810" end="2816" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q383389" start="3071" end="3077" title="tahini" label="tahini"/>
<link wikidata="Q156841" start="3109" end="3117" title="Common Soapwort" label="Soapwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q36071" start="3371" end="3380" title="pistachio" label="pistachio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062396" start="3387" end="3399" title="cocoa powder" label="cocoa powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q219059" start="3401" end="3413" title="orange juice" label="orange juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="3415" end="3422" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="3508" end="3517" title="Sunflower" label="Sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="3542" end="3578" title="Post-Soviet states" label="countries of the former Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="3593" end="3601" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="3606" end="3613" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076906" start="3644" end="3658" title="sunflower seed" label="sunflower seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053178" start="3968" end="3976" title="mantecol" label="mantecol"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4170" end="4175" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4180" end="4189" title="Pakistan " label="Pakistan "/>
<link wikidata="Q839910" start="4517" end="4526" title="Pişmaniye" label="Pişmaniye"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="4534" end="4541" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q83965" start="4606" end="4613" title="Kocaeli Province" label="Kocaeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q49737" start="4863" end="4875" title="cotton candy" label="cotton candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="4962" end="4967" title="halal" label="halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="4971" end="4977" title="kosher" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q13466069" start="5111" end="5129" title="dragon beard candy" label="dragon beard candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q383389" start="5294" end="5300" title="tahini" label="tahini"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="5306" end="5313" title="almonds" label="almonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q392001" start="5319" end="5331" title="agave nectar" label="agave nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789594" start="5508" end="5524" title="clarified butter" label="clarified butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q234783" start="5758" end="5763" title="Shaki, Azerbaijan" label="Sheki"/>
<link wikidata="Q55700816" start="5776" end="5788" title="Sheki Halva" label="Şəki halvası"/>
<link wikidata="Q187495" start="5821" end="5829" title="bakhlava" label="bakhlava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751046" start="6160" end="6170" title="Great Lent" label="Great Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q759255" start="6374" end="6381" title="Bhatkal" label="Bhatkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010684" start="6385" end="6402" title="Karavali" label="Coastal Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110851" start="6778" end="6789" title="Manasollasa" label="Mānasollāsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394873" start="6886" end="6892" title="kesari bat" label="kesari"/>
<link wikidata="Q15200" start="6910" end="6921" title="Tirunelveli district" label="Tirunelveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429232" start="7253" end="7266" title="Thamirabarani River" label="Thamirabarani"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="7284" end="7299" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode Halwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="7303" end="7309" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122988" start="7330" end="7341" title="Zamorin of Calicut" label="Zamorin era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="7370" end="7377" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387232" start="7551" end="7573" title="S. M. Street" label="SM (Sweet Meat) Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387232" start="7577" end="7591" title="S. M. Street" label="Mittayitheruvu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477202" start="7700" end="7707" title="Ayyappan" label="Ayyappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="7741" end="7750" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="7755" end="7769" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="7930" end="7934" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="8047" end="8054" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q900450" start="8059" end="8069" title="rose water" label="rose water"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584340" start="8486" end="8491" title="syrup" label="syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763698" start="8611" end="8617" title="sesame" label="sesame"/>
<link wikidata="Q383389" start="8618" end="8624" title="tahini" label="tahini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753167" start="8810" end="8815" title="parve" label="parve"/>
<link wikidata="Q19572039" start="8907" end="8916" title="Halva Ice Cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="8945" end="8952" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792397" start="9004" end="9018" title="Pathein halawa" label="Pathein halawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13072946" start="9053" end="9057" title="mont (food)" label="mont"/>
<link wikidata="Q115443" start="9074" end="9094" title="glutinous rice flour" label="glutinous rice flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269205" start="9096" end="9106" title="rice flour" label="rice flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705234" start="9156" end="9171" title="Irrawaddy delta" label="Irrawaddy delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q870103" start="9180" end="9187" title="Pathein" label="Pathein"/>
<link wikidata="Q381350" start="9205" end="9213" title="semolina" label="semolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q20613177" start="9283" end="9295" title="sanwin makin" label="sanwin makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="9325" end="9331" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="9534" end="9538" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q178915" start="9551" end="9558" title="Sawm" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297846" start="10054" end="10059" title="Joyva" label="Joyva"/>
<link wikidata="Q517211" start="10077" end="10093" title="List of desserts" label="List of desserts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16489253" start="10096" end="10101" title="Aluwa" label="Aluwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187319" start="10104" end="10109" title="Barfi" label="Barfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317729" start="10112" end="10126" title="Gajar ka halwa" label="Gajar ka halwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q24945597" start="10129" end="10140" title="Mahim halwa" label="Mahim halwa"/>
</links>
</doc>
