<doc id="795034" wikidata="Q348120" url="?curid=795034" title="Amphibious warfare">
<text>Amphibious warfare is a type of offensive military operation that today uses naval ships to project ground and air power onto a hostile or potentially hostile shore at a designated landing beach. Through history the operations were conducted using ship&#x27;s boats as the primary method of delivering troops to shore. Since the Gallipoli Campaign, specialised watercraft were increasingly designed for landing troops, material and vehicles, including by landing craft and for insertion of commandos, by fast patrol boats, zodiacs (rigid inflatable boats) and from mini-submersibles. The term &quot;amphibious&quot; first emerged in the United Kingdom and the United States during the 1930s with introduction of vehicles such as Vickers-Carden-Loyd Light Amphibious Tank or the Landing Vehicle Tracked.

Amphibious warfare includes operations defined by their type, purpose, scale and means of execution. In the British Empire at the time these were called combined operations which were defined as &quot;...operations where naval, military or air forces in any combination are co-operating with each other, working independently under their respective commanders, but with a common strategic object.&quot; All armed forces that employ troops with special training and equipment for conducting landings from naval vessels to shore agree to this definition. Since the 20th century an amphibious landing of troops on a beachhead is acknowledged as the most complex of all military maneuvers. The undertaking requires an intricate coordination of numerous military specialties, including air power, naval gunfire, naval transport, logistical planning, specialized equipment, land warfare, tactics, and extensive training in the nuances of this maneuver for all personnel involved.

In essence, amphibious operations consist of the phases of strategic planning and preparation, operational transit to the intended theatre of operations, pre-landing rehearsal and disembarkation, troop landings, beachhead consolidation and conducting inland ground and air operations. Historically, within the scope of these phases a vital part of success was often based on the military logistics, naval gunfire and close air support. Another factor is the variety and quantity of specialised vehicles and equipment used by the landing force that are designed for the specific needs of this type of operation. Amphibious operations can be classified as tactical or operational raids such as the Dieppe Raid, operational landings in support of a larger land strategy such as the Kerch–Eltigen Operation, and a strategic opening of a new Theatre of Operations, for example the &quot;Operation Avalanche&quot;. The purpose of amphibious operations is usually offensive, except in cases of amphibious withdrawals, but is limited by the plan and terrain. Landings on islands less than in size are tactical, usually with the limited objectives of neutralising enemy defenders and obtaining a new base of operation. Such an operation may be prepared and planned in days or weeks, and would employ a naval task force to land less than a division of troops.

The intent of operational landings is usually to exploit the shore as a vulnerability in the enemy&#x27;s overall position, forcing redeployment of forces, premature use of reserves, and aiding a larger allied offensive effort elsewhere. Such an operation requiring weeks to months of preparation and planning, would use multiple task forces, or even a naval fleet to land corps-size forces, including on large islands, for example &quot;Operation Chromite&quot;. A strategic landing operation requires a major commitment of forces to invade a national territory in the archipelagic, such as the Battle of Leyte, or continental, such as Operation Neptune. Such an operation may require multiple naval and air fleets to support the landings, and extensive intelligence gathering and planning of over a year. Although most amphibious operations are thought of primarily as beach landings, they can exploit available shore infrastructure to land troops directly into an urban environment if unopposed. In this case non-specialised ships can offload troops, vehicles and cargo using organic or facility wharf-side equipment. Tactical landings in the past have utilised small boats, small craft, small ships and civilian vessels converted for the mission to deliver troops to the water&#x27;s edge.

== Preparation and planning ==

A naval landing operation requires vessels to troops and equipment and might include amphibious reconnaissance. Military intelligence services obtain information on the opponent. Amphibious warfare goes back to ancient times. The Sea Peoples menaced the Egyptians from the reign of Akhenaten as captured on the reliefs at Medinet Habu and Karnak. The Hellenic city states routinely resorted to amphibious assaults upon each other&#x27;s shores, which they reflected upon in their plays and other art. The landing at Marathon by the Persians on 9 September 490 BC was the largest amphibious operation until the landings at the Battle of Gallipoli.

== Marines ==
In 1537 Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Spain, decided to train and assign amphibious-assault skilled units to the Royal Armada specifically for fighting on and from ships. The Spanish Marines were born under the name &quot;Compañías Viejas del Mar de Nápoles&quot; (&quot;All-Spanish Sea Companies of Naples&quot;). The idea was to set up a permanent assignation of land troops to the Royal Spanish Navy that would be available for the Crown.

The first &quot;professional&quot; marine units were already task-trained amphibious troops, but instead of being disbanded, they were kept for the Spanish Crown&#x27;s needs. Their first actions took place all along the Mediterranean Sea, where the Turks and pirate settlements were risks for commerce and navigation: Algiers, Malta and Gelves.

In 1565, the island of Malta was invaded by the Ottoman Turks during the Great Siege of Malta, forcing its defenders to retreat to the fortified cities. A strategic choke point in the Mediterranean Sea, its loss would have been so menacing for the kingdoms of Western Europe that forces were urgently raised to relieve the island. It took four months to train, arm and move a 5,500-man amphibious force to lift the siege.

Other countries adopted the idea and subsequently raised their own early marine forces as well.

==Development==

From the 15th to the 20th centuries, several European countries established and expanded overseas colonies. Amphibious operations mostly aimed to settle colonies and to secure strong points along navigational routes. Amphibious forces were fully organized and devoted to this mission, although the troops not only fought ashore, but on board ships.

By their nature amphibious assaults involve highly complex operations, demanding the coordination of disparate elements; when accomplished properly a paralyzing surprise to the enemy can be achieved. However, when there is a lack of preparation and/or coordination, often because of hubris, disastrous results can ensue.

===Ottoman-Habsburg wars===
During the Ottoman–Habsburg wars, all sides employed numerous and well-trained marine infantry and a combination of naval and land force. However, where Ottomans would favor disembarking their troops aside from their targets and initiating land attacks, Spanish and Genoese fleets made a breakthrough by investing in quick, direct disembarks protected by artillery, which often startled their enemies. Andrea Doria and Alfonso d&#x27;Avalos performed one such assault to relieve the Siege of Nice, surprising the French and Ottoman troops by bombarding the shore and landing the Spanish &quot;tercios&quot; directly. During the Capture of Mahdia, the Ottoman approach proved its when Dragut landed a relief army away from the imperial position and was cut short by their contravallation.

===Terceras Landing===
Álvaro de Bazán, Marquis of Santa Cruz, was an early developer of amphibious warfare. The &quot;Terceras Landing&quot; in the Azores Islands on 25 May 1583, was a military feat as Bazán and the rest of commanders decided to make a fake landing to distract the defending forces (5,000 Portuguese, English and French soldiers). Special seagoing barges were also arranged to unload cavalry horses and 700 artillery pieces on the beach; special rowing boats were armed with small cannons to support the landing boats; special supplies were readied to be unloaded and support the 11,000-man landing force strength. The total strength of the amphibious force was 15,000 men, including an armada of 90 ships. The operation resulted in complete victory.

===Queen Anne&#x27;s War===
A superb example of successful combined operations, of both military branches and different imperial units, is the Siege of Port Royal (1710). The siege was a combined arms, British/Colonial American amphibious assault upon the Acadian Provincial capital Port-Royal (Acadia) of French Canada, during Queen Anne&#x27;s War (the name of the American theater of the War of the Spanish Succession). The battle is known as the seminal moment in the conquest of Acadia. The siege resulted in the British imperial Force conquering French Arcadia and renaming Port Royal, Annapolis Royal.

===The War of Jenkin&#x27;s Ear===
One famous instance of a failed amphibious assault was in 1741 at the Battle of Cartagena de Indias in New Granada, when a large British amphibious assault force commanded by Admiral Edward Vernon, and including a contingent of 200 Virginia &quot;Marines&quot;(not originally meant to be so) commanded by Lawrence Washington (older half brother of George Washington), failed to overcome a much smaller, but very heavily fortified Spanish defence force and were forced to retreat back to the ships and call off the operation.

===King George&#x27;s War===
The Siege of Louisbourg (1745) took place in 1745 when a New England colonial force aided by a small British fleet captured Louisbourg, the capital of the French province of Île-Royale (present-day Cape Breton Island) during the War of the Austrian Succession, known as King George&#x27;s War in the British colonies.

The northern British colonies regarded Louisbourg as a menacers, calling it the &quot;American Dunkirk&quot; due to its use as a base for privateers. There was regular, intermittent warfare between the French and the Wabanaki Confederacy on one side and the northern New England colonies on the other (&quot;See the Northeast Coast Campaigns of 1688, 1703, 1723, 1724&quot;). For the French, the Fortress of Louisbourg also protected the chief entrance to Canada, as well as the nearby French fisheries. The French government had spent 25 years in fortifying it, and the cost of its defenses was reckoned at thirty million livres.
Although the fortress&#x27;s construction and layout was acknowledged as having superior seaward defences, a series of low rises behind them made it vulnerable to a land attack. The low rises provided attackers places to erect siege batteries. The fort&#x27;s garrison was poorly paid and supplied, and its inexperienced leaders mistrusted them. The colonial attackers were also lacking in experience, but ultimately succeeded in gaining control of the surrounding defences. The defenders surrendered in the face of an imminent assault.

Louisbourg was an important bargaining chip in the peace negotiations to end the war, since it represented a major British success. Factions within the British government were opposed to returning it to the French as part of any peace agreement, but these were eventually overruled, and Louisbourg was returned, over the objections of the victorious British North Americans, to French control after the 1748 Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, in return for French concessions elsewhere.

===French and Indian War===
The Siege of Louisbourg (1758) was a pivotal operation of the British military in 1758 (which included Colonial American Provincial and Ranger units) during the Seven Years&#x27; War (known in the United States as the French and Indian War), a war that ended the French colonial era in Atlantic Canada and led to the subsequent British campaign to capture all of French North America by the war&#x27;s end.

Another major amphibious landing took place during the Seven Years&#x27; War, the Siege of Quebec in 1759. The British, in addition to colonial American Ranger units, had raised experimental light infantry units to integrate aspects of the ranger ideal into the regular army. They also produced the first specially designed landing-craft in order to enable their troops to cross the Saint Lawrence River in force. After considering and rejecting a number of plans for landings on the north shore of the river, Major General James Wolfe and his brigadiers decided in late August to land upriver of the city.

The British prepared for their risky deployment upstream. Troops had already been aboard landing ships and drifting up and down the river for several days when on 12 September Wolfe made a final decision on the British landing site, selecting L&#x27;Anse-au-Foulon. Wolfe&#x27;s plan of attack depended on secrecy and surprise—a key element of a successful amphibious operation—a small party of men would land by night on the north shore, climb the tall cliff, seize a small road, and overpower the garrison that protected it, allowing the bulk of his army (5,000 men) to ascend the cliff by the small road and then deploy for battle on the plateau. The operation proved a success, leading to the surrender of the city, and heavily influenced subsequent engagements.

In 1762 a British force, with a small colonial American ranger contingent, successfully landed at Havana in Cuba, besieged the city and captured it after a two-month campaign thanks to improved coordination of land and sea forces.
In the same year, 1762, British Royal Navy sailors and marines succeed in taking the capital of the East Indies: Manila in the Philippines as well.

===American Revolutionary War===
In 1776 Samuel Nicholas and the Continental Marines, the &quot;progenitor&quot; of the United States Marine Corps, made a first successful landing in the Raid of Nassau in the Bahamas.
In 1782 The British rebuffed a long Franco-Spanish attempt to seize Gibraltar by water-borne forces. In 1783 a Franco-Spanish force invaded the British-held island of Minorca.

===The Second British Empire===
In 1798 Minorca experienced yet another of its many changes of sovereignty when captured by a British landing.

As the British Empire expanded worldwide, four colonies (Halifax, in Nova Scotia; Bermuda; Gibraltar; and Malta) were designated Imperial fortresses, from which Britain&#x27;s domination of the oceans and the Mediterranean and Caribbean seas was maintained, including its ability to deny safe passage to enemy naval and merchant vessels while protecting its own merchant trade, as well as to its ability to project superior naval and military force anywhere on the planet.

This was demonstrated during the American War of 1812, when the ships of the North America Station of the Royal Navy and military forces of the British Army, Board of Ordnance, and Royal Marines, maintained a blockade of much of the Atlantic seaboard of the United States of America, carried out amphibious raids such as the 22 June 1813 Battle of Craney Island, and then launched the Chesapeake Campaign (defeating American forces in the Battle of Bladensburg, capturing and burning Washington, DC, and raiding Alexandria, Virginia), from Bermuda.

The point is further reinforced by Britain&#x27;s poor showing during the war in the battles upon the Great Lakes and Lake Champlain. Without great naval fortresses or forward reinforced ports the Royal Navy was unable to hold and command the lakes, or stop amphibious raiding into Canada, such as the many raids on York (now Toronto) during the conflict. However, the strategic situation changed with the construction of HMS St Lawrence which was manned by Royal Navy sailors, rather than the landsman that had hitherto been used to complement the somewhat ad hoc flottilas used in the skirmishes on the lakes. Concurrently, the British would inflict the single biggest maritime loss of either side during the war by landing a force of 136 Royal Marines and sailors at the privateer base in Pettipaug, Connecticut. In this amphibious action, more akin to a &quot;Commando&quot; raid, they destroyed 26 vessels, capturing 2 and blowing up warehouses storing ammunition and supplies; under the noses of the American regulars and militia tasked with guarding the important base.

===Industrial era===
In the Mexican–American War, US forces under Winfield Scott launched the first major amphibious assault in US history, and its largest amphibious assault until WWII, in the 1847 Siege of Veracruz.

During the Crimean War of 1853–1856 the anti-Russian alliance launched an Anglo-French amphibious operation against Russia at Bomarsund, Finland on 8 August 1854.

During the American Civil War of 1861–1865 the United States made several amphibious assaults along the coastlines of the Confederate States. Actions at Hatteras Inlet (August 1861) and at Port Royal, South Carolina were the first of many attacks, others occurring on Roanoke Island, NC; Galveston, TX; Fort Sumter, Morris Island and James Island, SC; and several more. The largest such clash happened in January 1865 at Fort Fisher—the largest and most powerful fort in the world at the time—which protected the entrance of Wilmington, North Carolina. The assaulting force consisted of over 15,000 men and 70 warships with over 600 guns.

During the American Civil War, the Mississippi Marine Brigade was established to act swiftly against Confederate forces operating near the Mississippi River and its tributaries. The unit consisted of artillery, cavalry and infantry with the United States Ram Fleet used as transportation.

Amphibious warfare during the War of the Pacific of 1879 to 1883 saw coordination of army, navy and specialized units. The first amphibious assault of this war took place during the Battle of Pisagua when 2,100 Chilean troops successfully took Pisagua from 1,200 Peruvian and Bolivian defenders on 2 November 1879. Chilean Navy ships bombarded beach defenses for several hours at dawn, followed by open, oared boats landing army infantry and sapper units into waist-deep water, under enemy fire. An outnumbered first landing-wave fought at the beach; the second and third waves in the following hours succeeded in overcoming resistance and moving inland. By the end of the day, an expeditionary army of 10,000 had disembarked at the captured port.
In 1881 Chilean ships transported approximately 30,000 men, along with their mounts and equipment, in order to attack Lima. Chilean commanders commissioned purpose-built, flat-bottomed landing craft that would deliver troops in shallow water closer to the beach, possibly the first purpose-built amphibious landing-craft in history: &quot;These [36 shallow draft, flat-bottomed] boats would be able to land three thousand men and twelve guns in a single wave&quot;.

Neutral military observers closely studied landing tactics and operations during the War of the Pacific: two Royal Navy ships monitored the Battle of Pisagua; United States Navy observer Lt. Theodorus B. M. Mason included an account in his report &quot;The War on the Pacific Coast of South America&quot;. The with Alfred Thayer Mahan in command, was stationed at Callao, Peru, protecting American interests during the final stages of the War of the Pacific. He formulated his concept of sea power while reading a history book in an English gentleman&#x27;s club in Lima, Peru. This concept became the foundation for his celebrated &quot;The Influence of Sea Power upon History&quot; (1890).

An amphibious assault took place on the beaches of Veracruz, Mexico in 1914, when the United States Navy attacked and occupied the city as result of the Tampico Affair.

==Modern operations==
World War I marked the beginning of the first modern amphibious warfare operations. However, tactics and equipment were still rudimentary and required much improvisation.

At the time, British Royal Marine Light Infantry (merged with the Royal Marine Artillery in the 1920s to form the Royal Marines) were used primarily as naval parties onboard Royal Navy warships to maintain discipline and man ships&#x27; guns. The RMLI joined a new Royal Navy division, the Royal Naval Division, formed in 1914 (out of those not needed on ships) to fight on land; however, throughout the conflict, army units were depended upon to provide the bulk, if not all, of troops used in amphibious landings.

The first amphibious assault of the war was the Battle of Bita Paka (11 September 1914) was fought south of Kabakaul, on the island of New Britain, and was a part of the invasion and subsequent occupation of German New Guinea by the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force (AN&amp;MEF) shortly after the outbreak of the First World War. The first British amphibious assault of the war ended in disaster in November 1914. A large British Indian Army force was directed to launch an amphibious assault on Tanga, German East Africa. British actions prior to the assault, however, alerted the Germans to prepare to repel an invasion. The Indian forces suffered heavy casualties when they advanced on the city, forcing them to withdraw back to their boats, leaving much of their equipment behind.

A plan was devised to land British heavy tanks from pontoons in support of the Third Battle of Ypres, but this was abandoned.

The Imperial Russian Army and Navy also grew adept to amphibious warfare in the Black Sea, conducting many raids and bombardments on Ottoman positions.

On 11 October 1917, German land and naval forces launched an amphibious assault, code named Operation Albion, on the islands of Saaremaa (Ösel), Hiiumaa (Dagö) and Muhu (Moon); they controlled the entrance to the Gulf of Riga. By the end of the month German forces had successfully overrun the islands forcing the Russians to abandon them with the loss of some 20,000 troops, 100 guns and the pre-dreadnought battleship &quot;Slava&quot;. The capture of the islands opened a route for German naval forces into the Gulf of Finland threatening the city of Petrograd, a fact that contributed to the cessation of hostilities on the Eastern front.

===Gallipoli===

The first large scale amphibious operations, ones that were to heavily influence theorists in the decades to come, were conducted as part of the Battle of Gallipoli in 1915 against the Ottoman Empire during World War I. The Gallipoli peninsula forms the northern bank of the Dardanelles, a strait that provided a sea route to what was then the Russian Empire, one of the Allied powers during the war. Intending to secure it, Russia&#x27;s allies Britain and France launched a naval attack followed by an amphibious landing on the peninsula with the eventual aim of capturing the Ottoman capital of Constantinople (modern-day Istanbul). Although the naval attack was repelled and the land campaign failed, the campaign was the first modern amphibious landing, and featured air support, specialized landing craft and a naval bombardment.

The seaplane tender supported the landings under the command of Commander Robert Clark-Hall. Seaplanes were used for aerial reconnaissance, ground support for the troops landing at Anzac Cove and the bombing of fortifications. &quot;Ark Royal&quot; was augmented by a squadron from the No. 3 Squadron of the Royal Naval Air Service, operating from a nearby island.

Initial landings, starting on 25 April, took place in unmodified rowing boats that were extremely vulnerable to attack from the shore defences. The first purpose-built landing craft were built for the campaign. SS &quot;River Clyde&quot;, built as a collier, was adapted to be a landing ship for the Landing at Cape Helles. Openings were cut in her steel hull as sally ports from which troops would emerge onto gangways and then to a bridge of smaller boats from the ship to the beach. Boiler plate and sandbags were mounted on her bow, and behind them a battery of 11 machine guns was installed. The machine gun battery was manned by Royal Naval Air Service men. Work began on painting &quot;River Clyde&quot;″s hull sandy yellow as camouflage, but this was incomplete by the time of the landing.
It was soon clear that the Turkish defence was equipped with rapid-fire weapons, which meant that ordinary landing boats were inadequate for the task. In February 1915, orders had been placed for the design of purpose built landing craft. A design was created in four days resulting in an order for 200 &#x27;X&#x27; &quot;Lighters&quot; (or X-lighters) with a spoon-shaped bow to take shelving beaches and a drop down frontal ramp.

The first use took place after they had been towed to the Aegean and performed successfully in the 6 August landing at Suvla Bay of IX Corps, commanded by Commander Edward Unwin.
&#x27;X&#x27; &quot;Lighters&quot;, known to the soldiers as &#x27;Beetles&#x27;, carried about 500 men, displaced 200 tons (or 160 tons according to some sources) and were based on London barges being long, wide, and deep. The engines mainly ran on heavy oil and ran at a maximal speed of approximately . The sides of the ships were bullet proof, and was designed with a ramp on the bow for disembarkation.
The lessons of the Gallipoli campaign had a significant impact upon the development of amphibious operational planning, and have since been studied by military planners prior to operations such as the Normandy Landings in 1944 and during the Falklands War in 1982. The campaign also influenced US Marine Corps amphibious operations during the Pacific War, and continues to influence US amphibious doctrine.

During the interwar period the campaign &quot;became a focal point for the study of amphibious warfare&quot; in the United Kingdom and United States, because it involved the four types of amphibious operations: the raid, demonstration, assault and withdrawal. Analysis of the campaign before World War II led to a belief among many armed forces that amphibious assaults could not succeed against modern defences. The perception continued until the Normandy Landings in June 1944, despite some successful examples of amphibious operations earlier in the war, such as those in Italy, and at Tarawa and in the Gilbert Islands in the Pacific. Although the negative perception prevailed among Allied planners in the interwar years, the war situation after 1940 meant that such operations had to be considered. However, despite early successes in North Africa and Italy, it was not until Normandy that the belief that opposed landings could not succeed was completely excised.

===Interwar developments===
One of the first amphibious landings involving armour was conducted by the Irish National Army in 1922, during the Irish Civil War. Landings against Republican rebels at Westport, Fenit and Cork all involved armour cars. The Westport and Fenit landings involved light armoured cars and 18-pounder artillery guns being hoisted off the ships by crane. Heavier armoured cars were used at Cork, resulting in some difficulty. While Irish troops could reach the coast in small boats from naval vessels offshore, the ships had to dock to unload the heavy vehicles and artillery guns. These operations were a major success for the Irish government forces, mainly due to the element of surprise and the use of armoured vehicles and artillery. Government forces were able to capture all the major towns and cities in southern Ireland.

The Alhucemas landing on 8 September 1925, performed by a Spanish-French coalition against rebel Berber tribesmen in the north of Morocco, was an amphibious landing where tanks were used for the first time and massive aerial and naval gunfire support was employed by the landing forces, directed by spotting personnel with communication devices.

Floating depots were organized with medical, water, ammunition and food supplies, to be dispatched ashore when needed. The barges used in this landing were the surviving &quot;K&quot; boats from Gallipoli, upgraded in Spanish shipyards.

In 1938, Japanese forces attacked Chinese defenders over the Yangtze River at the Battle of Wuhan. Soon, the Japanese would later further improve its techniques upon seaborne assaults by the Second Sino-Japanese War. By World War II, marines such as the Special Naval Landing Force used amphibious landings to attack and sweep across territories in South East Asia. Their technique of surprise landings with naval support inspired the British and American landings in World War II such as D-Day and the Pacific Campaign.

====Britain====

During the inter-war period, the combination of the negative experience at Gallipoli and economic stringency contributed to the delay in procuring equipment and adopting a universal doctrine for amphibious operations in the Royal Navy.

The costly failure of the Gallipoli campaign coupled with the emerging potential of airpower satisfied many in naval and military circles that the age of amphibious operations had come to a close. Still, throughout the 1920s and 1930s, animated discussion in Staff Colleges in Britain and the Indian Army Staff College at Quetta surrounded the strategic potential of the Dardanelles campaign compared with the strategic stalemate of the Western Front. The economic austerity of the worldwide economic depression and the government&#x27;s adoption of the Ten Year Rule assured that such theoretical talk would not result in the procurement of any large scale equipment.

Despite this outlook, the British produced the &quot;Motor Landing Craft&quot; in 1920, based on their experience with the early &#x27;Beetle&#x27; armoured transport. The craft could put a medium tank directly onto a beach. From 1924, it was used with landing boats in annual exercises in amphibious landings. It was later called &quot;Landing Craft, Mechanized&quot; (&quot;LCM&quot;) and was the predecessor of all Allied landing craft mechanised (LCM).

The Army and Royal Navy formed a landing craft committee to &quot;recommend... the design of landing craft&quot;. A prototype motor landing craft, designed by J. Samuel White of Cowes, was built and first sailed in 1926. It weighed 16 tons and had a box-like appearance, having a square bow and stern. To prevent fouling of the propellers in a craft destined to spend time in surf and possibly be beached, a crude waterjet propulsion system was devised by White&#x27;s designers. A Hotchkiss petrol engine drove a centrifugal pump which produced a jet of water, pushing the craft ahead or astern, and steering it, according to how the jet was directed. Speed was 5–6 knots and its beaching capacity was good. By 1930, three MLC were operated by the Royal Navy.
For a short journey, from shore to shore, the cargo could be rolled or carried into the boat over its ramp. On longer journeys, ship to shore, a derrick would lower the MLC into the sea from the transporting vessel. The derrick would then lower the vehicle or cargo load. Upon touching down on shore, soldiers or vehicles exited by the bow ramp.

Although there was much official apathy toward amphibious operations, this began to change in the late 1930s. The Royal Naval Staff College at Greenwich, drafted a document detailing combined operations requirements and submitted it to the Chiefs of Staff in 1936. The document recommended the establishment of an inter-service &#x27;Training and Development Centre&#x27;, with a permanent force of Royal Marines attached to it. Its functions were to &quot;train in all methods for the seizure of defended beaches; develop the materiel necessary for such methods, with special regard to protection of troops, speed of landing, and the attainment of surprise; and develop methods and materiel for the destruction or neutralization of enemy defenses, including bombardment and aircraft co-operation.

The Inter-Service Training and Development Centre was established at Fort Cumberland, near Portsmouth in 1938, and brought together representatives from the Royal Navy, Army, and Royal Air Force convened with the portfolio of developing methods and equipment to use in Combined Operations.

The Centre examined certain specific problems, including craft for landing tanks, beach organisation, floating piers, headquarters ships, amphibian tanks, underwater obstacles, the landing of water and petrol and the use of small craft in amphibious raids By the end of 1939 the ISTDC had codified a policy for landings, and defended it at Staff College discussions. Operational experience during the Second World War introduced modifications to this landing policy, but it was essentially the policy used in the Torch and Husky landings four years later.

The essential shape of this landing policy is described by Bernard Fergusson in &quot;The Watery Maze&quot;, 

Among the many tactical innovations introduced by the centre, codified in the &quot;Manual on Combined Operations&quot; and the &quot;Standard Naval Bombardment Code&quot;, was the use of Floating Piers (pontoons) to bridge the water gap, the creation of Smoke Generating devices to obscure the assault and the use of infrared directional beacons for landing accuracy. The centre also played a role in the development of the first specialized landing crafts, including the Assault Landing Craft, the Mechanized Landing Craft (LCM(1)), the Landing Craft Tank (Mk. 1), Support Landing Craft LCS(1), LCS(2) and Landing Ship Infantry.

Divisional-sized amphibious landing exercises were carried out by the British Army in the 1930s.

====United States====

In contrast to the British attitude, the U.S. military, especially the Marine Corps remained enthusiastic at the possibilities of amphibious warfare. The Marine Corps was searching for an expanded mission after World War I, during which it had merely been used as a junior version of the Army infantry. During the 1920s, it found a new mission—to be a fast-reacting, light infantry fighting force carried rapidly to far off locations by the US Navy. Its special role would be amphibious landings on enemy-held islands, but it took years to figure out how to do that. The Mahanian notion of a decisive fleet battle required forward bases for the Navy close to the enemy. After the Spanish–American War the Marines gained the mission of occupying and defending those forward bases, and began a training program on Culebra Island, Puerto Rico.

As early as 1900 the General Board of the United States Navy considered building advance bases for naval operations in the Pacific and the Caribbean. The Marine Corps was given this mission in 1920, but the challenge was to avoid another disaster like Gallipoli. The conceptual breakthrough came in 1921 when Major &quot;Pete&quot; Ellis wrote &quot;Advanced Base Operations in Micronesia&quot; a secret 30,000-word manifesto that proved inspirational to Marine strategists and highly prophetic. To win a war in the Pacific, the Navy would have to fight its way through thousands of miles of ocean controlled by the Japanese—including the Marshall, Caroline, Marianas and Ryukyu island chains. If the Navy could land Marines to seize selected islands, they could become forward bases.
Ellis argued that with an enemy prepared to defend the beaches, success depended on high-speed movement of waves of assault craft, covered by heavy naval gunfire and attack from the air. He predicted that the decisive action would take place on the beach itself, so the assault teams would need not just infantry but also machine gun units, light artillery, light tanks, and combat engineers to defeat beach obstacles and defenses. Assuming the enemy had its own artillery, the landing craft would have to be specially built to protect the landing force. The failure at Gallipoli came because the Turks could easily reinforce the specific landing sites. The Japanese would be unable to land new forces on the islands under attack.

Not knowing which of the many islands would be the American target, the Japanese would have to disperse their strength by garrisoning many islands that would never be attacked. An island like Eniwetok in the Marshall Islands, would, Ellis estimated, require two regiments, or 4,000 Marines. Guided by Marine observer aircraft, and supplemented by Marine light bombers, warships would provide enough firepower so that Marines would not need any heavy artillery (in contrast to the Army, which relied heavily on its artillery). Shelling defended islands was a new mission for warships. The Ellis model was officially endorsed in 1927 by the Joint Board of the Army and Navy (a forerunner of the Joint Chiefs of Staff).

However, actual implementation of the new mission took another decade because the Marine Corps was preoccupied in Central America and the Navy was slow to start training in how to support the landings. The prototype advanced base force officially evolved into the Fleet Marine Force (FMF) in 1933. In 1939, during the annual Fleet Landing Exercises, the FMF became interested in the military potential of Andrew Higgins&#x27;s design of a powered, shallow-draught boat. These LCVPs, dubbed the &#x27;Higgins Boats&#x27;, were reviewed and passed by the U.S. Naval Bureau of Construction and Repair. Soon, the Higgins boats were developed to a final design with a ramp, and were produced in large numbers.

===Second World War===

By the Second World War tactics and equipment had moved on. The first use of British landing craft in an opposed landing in the Second World War, saw the disembarkation of French Foreign Legionnaires of the 13th Demi-Brigade and supporting French Hotchkiss H39 tanks on the beach at Bjerkvik, eight miles (13 km) above Narvik, on 13 May during the Norwegian campaign.

The first major and successful amphibious operation was Operation Ironclad, a British campaign to capture Vichy French-controlled Madagascar. The naval contingent consisted of over 50 vessels, drawn from Force H, the British Home Fleet and the British Eastern Fleet, commanded by Rear Admiral Edward Neville Syfret.
The fleet included the aircraft carrier &quot;Illustrious&quot;, her sister ship &quot;Indomitable&quot; and the aging battleship &quot;Ramillies&quot; to cover the landings. The first wave of the British 29th Infantry Brigade and No. 5 Commando landed in assault craft on 5 May 1942, follow-up waves were by two brigades of the 5th Infantry Division and Royal Marines. Air cover was provided mainly by Fairey Albacore and Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers which attacked Vichy shipping.

Purpose-built landing craft were among the vessels used at the evacuation from Dunkirk (Operation Dynamo) and an amphibious operation was tried out at Dieppe in 1942. The operation proved a costly failure, but the lessons, hard learned, were used later. Many small-scale operations were conducted by the Allies on the Axis-held coast of Europe, including raids on the Lofoten Islands, St Nazaire and Bruneval.

====Specialized infantry landing craft====

In the run up to World War II, many specialized landing craft, both for infantry and vehicles, were developed. In November 1938, the Inter-Service Training and Development Centre proposed a new type of landing craft. Its specifications were to weigh less than ten long tons, to be able to carry the thirty-one men of a British Army platoon and five assault engineers or signallers, and to be so shallow drafted as to be able to land them, wet only up to their knees, in eighteen inches of water. All of these specifications made the Landing Craft Assault; a separate set of requirements were laid down for a vehicle and supplies carrier, although previously the two roles had been combined in the Motor Landing Craft.
J. S. White of Cowes built a prototype to the Fleming design. Eight weeks later the craft was doing trials on the Clyde. All landing craft designs must find a compromise between two divergent priorities; the qualities that make a good sea boat are opposite those that make a craft suitable for beaching.
The craft had a hull built of double-diagonal mahogany planking. The sides were plated with &quot;10lb. DHT&quot; armour, a heat treated steel based on D1 steel, in this case Hadfield&#x27;s Resista &quot;.
The Landing Craft Assault remained the most common British and Commonwealth landing craft of World War II, and the humblest vessel admitted to the books of the Royal Navy on D-Day. Prior to July 1942, these craft were referred to as &quot;Assault Landing Craft&quot; (ALC), but &quot;Landing Craft; Assault&quot; (LCA) was used thereafter to conform with the joint US–UK nomenclature system.

The Landing Craft Infantry was a stepped up amphibious assault ship, developed in response to a British request for a vessel capable of carrying and landing substantially more troops than the smaller Landing Craft Assault (LCA). The result was a small steel ship that could land 200 troops, traveling from rear bases on its own bottom at a speed of up to 15 knots. The original British design was envisioned as being a &quot;one time use&quot; vessel which would simply ferry the troops across the English Channel, and were considered an expendable vessel. As such, no troop sleeping accommodations were placed in the original design. This was changed shortly after initial use of these ships, when it was discovered that many missions would require overnight accommodations.

The first LCI(L)s entered service in 1943 chiefly with the Royal Navy (RN) and United States Navy. Some 923 LCI were built in ten American shipyards and 211 provided under lend-lease to the Royal Navy.

====Specialized vehicle landing craft====
Following the Inter-Service Training and Development Centre&#x27;s (ISTDC) successful development of the infantry carrying LCA, attention turned to the means of efficiently delivering a tank to a beach in 1938. Inquires were made of the army as to the heaviest tank that might be employed in a landing operation. The army wanted to be able to land a 12-ton tank, but the ISTDC, anticipating weight increases in future tank models specified 16 tons burthen for Mechanised Landing Craft designs. Another governor on any design was the need to land tanks and other vehicles in less than approximately feet of water.

Design work began at John I. Thornycroft Ltd. in May 1938 with trials completing in February 1940. Although early LCM(1)s were powered by two Thornycroft 60 bhp petrol engines, the majority were powered by Chrysler, in-line, 6-cylinder Crown petrol engines. Constructed of steel and selectively clad with armour plate, this shallow-draft, barge-like boat with a crew of 6, could ferry a tank of 16 long tons to shore at 7 knots (13 km/h). Depending on the weight of the tank to be transported the craft might be lowered into the water by its davits already loaded or could have the tank placed in it after being lowered into the water.

Although the Royal Navy had the Landing Craft Mechanised at its disposal, in 1940, Prime Minister Winston Churchill demanded an amphibious vessel capable of landing at least three 36-ton heavy tanks directly onto a beach, able to sustain itself at sea for at least a week, and inexpensive and easy to build. Admiral Maund, Director of the Inter-Service Training and Development Centre (which had developed the Landing Craft Assault), gave the job to naval architect Sir Roland Baker, who within three days completed initial drawings for a landing craft with a beam and a shallow draft. Ship builders Fairfields and John Brown agreed to work out details for the design under the guidance of the Admiralty Experimental Works at Haslar. Tank tests with models soon determined the characteristics of the craft, indicating that it would make on engines delivering about . Designated the LCT Mark 1, 20 were ordered in July 1940 and a further 10 in October 1940.

The first LCT Mark 1 was launched by Hawthorn Leslie in November 1940. It was an all-welded 372-ton steel-hulled vessel that drew only of water at the bow. Sea trials soon proved the Mark 1 to be difficult to handle and almost unmanageable in some sea conditions. The designers set about correcting the faults of the Mark 1 in the LCT Mark 2. Longer and wider, three Paxman diesel or Napier Lion petrol engines replaced the Hall-Scotts, and 15 and 20 lb. armoured shielding was added to the wheelhouse and gun tubs.
The Mark 3 had an additional midsection that gave it a length of and a displacement of 640 tons. Even with this extra weight, the vessel was slightly faster than the Mark 1. The Mk.3 was accepted on 8 April 1941, and was prefabricated in five sections. The Mark 4 was slightly shorter and lighter than the Mk.3, but had a much wider beam () and was intended for cross channel operations as opposed to seagoing use. When tested in early assault operations, like the ill-fated Canadian commando raid on Dieppe in 1942, the lack of manoeuvring ability led to the preference for a shorter overall length in future variants, most of which were built in the United States.

When the United States entered the war in December 1941, the U.S. Navy had no amphibious vessels at all, and found itself obliged to consider British designs already in existence. One of these, advanced by K.C. Barnaby of Thornycroft, was for a double-ended LCT to work with landing ships. The Bureau of Ships quickly set about drawing up plans for landing craft based on Barnaby&#x27;s suggestions, although with only one ramp. The result, in early 1942, was the LCT Mark 5, a 117-foot craft with a beam of 32 feet that could accommodate five 30-ton or four 40-ton tanks or 150 tons of cargo. With a crew of twelve men and one officer, this 286 ton landing craft had the merit of being able to be shipped to combat areas in three separate water-tight sections aboard a cargo ship or carried pre-assembled on the flat deck of an LST. The Mk.5 would be launched by heeling the LST on its beam to let the craft slide off its chocks into the sea, or cargo ships could lower each of the three sections into the sea where they were joined.
A further development was the Landing Ship, Tank designation, built to support amphibious operations by carrying significant quantities of vehicles, cargo, and landing troops directly onto an unimproved shore. The British evacuation from Dunkirk in 1940 demonstrated to the Admiralty that the Allies needed relatively large, ocean-going ships capable of shore-to-shore delivery of tanks and other vehicles in amphibious assaults upon the continent of Europe. The first purpose-built LST design was . To carry 13 Churchill infantry tanks, 27 vehicles and nearly 200 men (in addition to the crew) at a speed of 18 knots, it could not have the shallow draught that would have made for easy unloading. As a result, each of the three (&quot;Boxer&quot;, &quot;Bruiser&quot;, and &quot;Thruster&quot;) ordered in March 1941 had a very long ramp stowed behind the bow doors.

In November 1941, a small delegation from the British Admiralty arrived in the United States to pool ideas with the United States Navy&#x27;s Bureau of Ships with regard to development of ships and also including the possibility of building further &quot;Boxer&quot;s in the US. During this meeting, it was decided that the Bureau of Ships would design these vessels. The LST(2) design incorporated elements of the first British LCTs from their designer, Sir Rowland Baker, who was part of the British delegation. This included sufficient buoyancy in the ships&#x27; sidewalls that they would float even with the tank deck flooded. The LST(2) gave up the speed of HMS &quot;Boxer&quot; at only 10 knots but had a similar load while drawing only 3 feet forward when beaching.

In three separate acts dated 6 February 1942, 26 May 1943, and 17 December 1943, Congress provided the authority for the construction of LSTs along with a host of other auxiliaries, destroyer escorts, and assorted landing craft. The enormous building program quickly gathered momentum. Such a high priority was assigned to the construction of LSTs that the previously laid keel of an aircraft carrier was hastily removed to make room for several LSTs to be built in her place. The keel of the first LST was laid down on 10 June 1942 at Newport News, Va., and the first standardized LSTs were floated out of their building dock in October. Twenty-three were in commission by the end of 1942. Lightly armored, they could steam cross the ocean with a full load on their own power, carrying infantry, tanks and supplies directly onto the beaches. Together with 2,000 other landing craft, the LSTs gave the troops a protected, quick way to make combat landings, beginning in summer 1943.

====D-Day====

The most famous amphibious assaults of the war, and of all time, were the Normandy landings on 6 June 1944, in which British, Canadian, and US forces landed at Utah, Omaha, Gold, Juno and Sword beaches in the largest amphibious operation in history.

The organizational planning of the landings (Operation Neptune) was in the hands of Admiral Bertram Ramsay. It covered the landing of the troops and their re-supply. Many innovative elements were included in the operation to ensure its success.

Operation Pluto was a scheme developed by Arthur Hartley, chief engineer with the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, to construct an undersea oil pipeline under the English Channel between England and France to provide logistical support to the landed armies. Allied forces on the European continent required a tremendous amount of fuel. Pipelines were considered necessary to relieve dependence on oil tankers, which could be slowed by bad weather, were susceptible to German submarines, and were also needed in the Pacific War. Geoffrey William Lloyd, the Minister for Petroleum gained the support of Admiral Mountbatten, Chief of Combined Operations for the operation.

Two types of pipeline were developed. The first type was the flexible &quot;HAIS&quot; pipe with a () diameter lead core, weighing around 55 long tons per nautical mile (), was essentially a development by Siemens Brothers (in conjunction with the National Physical Laboratory) of their existing undersea telegraph cables, and known as HAIS (from Hartley-Anglo-Iranian-Siemens). The second type was a less flexible steel pipe of similar diameter, developed by engineers from the Iraq Petroleum Company and the Burmah Oil Company.
In June 1942 the Post Office cable ship &quot;Iris&quot; laid lengths of both Siemens&#x27; and Henleys&#x27; cable in the Clyde. The pipeline was completely successful and PLUTO was formally brought into the plans for the invasion of Europe. The project was deemed &quot;strategically important, tactically adventurous, and, from the industrial point of view, strenuous&quot;. After full-scale testing of an 83 km (45 nautical mile) HAIS pipe across the Bristol Channel between Swansea in Wales and Watermouth in North Devon, the first line to France was laid on 12 August 1944, over the 130 km (70 nautical miles) from Shanklin Chine on the Isle of Wight across the English Channel to Cherbourg Naval Base. A further HAIS pipe and two HAMELs followed. As the fighting moved closer to Germany, 17 other lines (11 HAIS and 6 HAMEL) were laid from Dungeness to Ambleteuse in the Pas-de-Calais.

In January 1945, 305 tonnes (300 long tons) of fuel was pumped to France per day, which increased tenfold to 3,048 tonnes (3,000 long tons) per day in March, and eventually to 4,000 tons (almost 1,000,000 Imperial gallons) per day. In total, over 781 000 m3 (equal to a cube with 92 metre long sides or over 172 million imperial gallons) of gasoline had been pumped to the Allied forces in Europe by VE day, providing a critical supply of fuel until a more permanent arrangement was made, although the pipeline remained in operation for some time after.

Portable harbours were also prefabricated as temporary facilities to allow rapid offloading of cargo onto the beaches during the Allied invasion of Normandy. The Dieppe Raid of 1942 had shown that the Allies could not rely on being able to penetrate the Atlantic Wall to capture a port on the north French coast. The problem was that large ocean-going ships of the type needed to transport heavy and bulky cargoes and stores needed sufficient depth of water under their keels, together with dockside cranes, to off-load their cargo and this was not available except at the already heavily defended French harbours. Thus, the Mulberries were created to provide the port facilities necessary to offload the thousands of men and vehicles, and tons of supplies necessary to sustain Operation Overlord and the Battle of Normandy. The harbours were made up of all the elements one would expect of any harbour: breakwater, piers, roadways etc.

At a meeting following the Dieppe Raid, Vice-Admiral John Hughes-Hallett declared that if a port could not be captured, then one should be taken across the Channel. The concept of Mulberry harbours began to take shape when Hughes-Hallett moved to be Naval Chief of Staff to the Overlord planners.

The proposed harbours called for many huge caissons of various sorts to build breakwaters and piers and connecting structures to provide the roadways. The caissons were built at a number of locations, mainly existing ship building facilities or large beaches like Conwy Morfa around the British coast. The works were let out to commercial construction firms including Balfour Beatty, Costain, Nuttall, Henry Boot, Sir Robert McAlpine and Peter Lind &amp; Company, who all still operate today, and Cubitts, Holloway Brothers, Mowlem and Taylor Woodrow, who all have since been absorbed into other businesses that are still operating. On completion they were towed across the English Channel by tugs to the Normandy coast at only 4.3 Knots (8 km/h or 5 mph), built, operated and maintained by the Corps of Royal Engineers, under the guidance of Reginald D. Gwyther, who was appointed CBE for his efforts.

By 9 June, just 3 days after D-Day, two harbours codenamed Mulberry &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; were constructed at Omaha Beach and Arromanches, respectively. However, a large storm on 19 June destroyed the American harbour at Omaha, leaving only the British harbour still intact but damaged, which included damage to the &#x27;Swiss Roll&#x27; which had been deployed as the most western floating roadway had to be taken out of service. The surviving Mulberry &quot;B&quot; came to be known as Port Winston at Arromanches. While the harbour at Omaha was destroyed sooner than expected, Port Winston saw heavy use for 8 months—despite being designed to last only 3 months. In the 10 months after D-Day, it was used to land over 2.5 million men, 500,000 vehicles, and 4 million tonnes of supplies providing much needed reinforcements in France.

====Other====
Other large amphibious operations in the European theatre of World War II and the war in the Pacific include:

Europe:
Pacific:
===Korean War===

During the Korean War the U.S. X Corps, consisting of the 1st Marine Division and 7th Infantry Division landed at Inchon. Conceived of and commanded by U.S. General Douglas MacArthur, this landing is considered by many military historians to have been a tactical jewel, one of the most brilliant amphibious maneuvers in history (See analysis in main article).

The success of this battle eventually resulted in link up with U.S. Army forces that broke out of the Pusan perimeter, and led by the 1st Cavalry Division and its Task Force Lynch, cleared much of South Korea. A second landing by the Tenth Corps on the east coast approached the Chosin Reservoir and hydroelectric plants that powered much of Communist China&#x27;s heavy industry, and led to intervention by Chinese forces on behalf of North Korea. Amphibious landings also took place during the First Indochina War, notably during Operation Camargue, one of the largest of the conflict.

===Suez Crisis and Falklands War===
The British Royal Marines made their first post-World War II amphibious assault during the Suez Crisis of 1956 when they successfully landed at Suez on 6 November as part of a joint seaborne/airborne operation code-named MUSKETEER.

Despite all the progress that was seen during World War II, there were still fundamental limitations in the types of coastline that were suitable for assault. Beaches had to be relatively free of obstacles, and have the right tidal conditions and the correct slope. However, the development of the helicopter fundamentally changed the equation.

The first use of helicopters in an amphibious assault came during the Anglo-French-Israeli invasion of Egypt in 1956 (the Suez War). Two British light fleet carriers were pressed into service to carry helicopters, and a battalion-sized airborne assault was made. Two of the other carriers involved, and , were converted in the late 1950s into dedicated &quot;commando carriers.&quot;

Nearly 30 years later in the Falklands War, the 1st Marines Brigade of the Argentine Marine Corps along with Navy&#x27;s Special Forces performed Operation Rosario landing at Mullet Creek near Stanley on 2 April 1982, while later the Royal Marines&#x27; 3 Commando Brigade, (augmented by the British Army&#x27;s Parachute Regiment) landed at Port San Carlos on 21 May 1982 during Operation Sutton.

===Landing at Cyprus===
The Turkish Armed Forces launched an amphibious assault on 20 July 1974, on Kyrenia, following the 1974 Cypriot coup d&#x27;état. The Turkish naval force provided naval gunfire support during the landing operation and transported the amphibious forces from the port of Mersin to the island. The Turkish landing forces consisted of around 3,000 troops, tanks, armoured personnel carriers and artillery pieces.

===Iran-Iraq war===

During the Iran–Iraq War, the Iranians launched Operation Dawn 8 (Persian: عملیات والفجر ۸), in which 100,000 troops comprising 5 Army divisions and 50,000 men from the IRGC and the Basij advanced in a two-pronged offensive into southern Iraq. Taking place between 9 and 25 February, the assault across the Shatt al-Arab achieved significant tactical and operational surprise. The Iranians launched their assault on the peninsula at night, their men arriving on rubber boats. Iranian Navy SEALs spearheaded the offensive despite a shortage of gear. Prior to this action Iranian Naval Commandos performed reconnaissance of the Faw Peninsula. The Iranian SEALs penetrated an obstacle belt and isolated Iraqi bunkers whose troops had taken cover from the heavy rains inside or were sleeping. Iranian demolition teams detonated charges on the obstacles to create a path for the Iranian infantry waiting to begin their assault.

Not only did the amphibious landings provide a significant lodgement behind Iraq&#x27;s tactical front, but they also created a psychological shock wave throughout the Persian Gulf region. Soon after the initial landings, Iranian combat engineers were able to construct bridges to improve the flow of ground troops into the lodgement area. Iran managed to maintain their foothold in Al-Faw against several Iraqi counter-offensives and chemical attacks for another month despite heavy casualties until a stalemate was reached. The Faw Peninsula was later recaptured by Iraqi forces, by the massive and illegal use of chemical weapons, the same day as the US launched Operation Praying Mantis on Iran, destroying their navy.

===Persian Gulf War===
During the Persian Gulf War, Assault Craft Unit 5 was able to position U.S. Marine and naval support off the coast of Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. This force was composed of 40 amphibious assault ships, the largest such force to be assembled since the Battle of Inchon. The objective was to fix the six Iraqi divisions deployed along the Kuwaiti coast. The purpose behind this amphibious maneuver (known as an amphibious demonstration) was to prevent 6 Iraqi divisions poised for the defense of the littorals from being able to actively engage in combat at the real front. The operation was extremely successful in keeping more than 41,000 Iraqi forces from repositioning to the main battlefield. As a result, the Marines maneuvered through the Iraq defense of southern Kuwait and outflanked the Iraqi coastal defense forces.

=== Elem War ===
During the Sri Lankan civil war the LTTE used amphibious warfare in some of their successful battles such as Battle of Pooneryn in 1992 and Second Battle of Elephant Pass in 2000 to overrun and capture Sri Lankan Army bases.

===Iraq War===

An amphibious assault was carried out by Royal Marines, U.S. Marines and units of the Polish special forces when they landed at the Al-Faw Peninsula on 20 March 2003 during the Iraq War.

===Invasion of Anjouan===
On 25 March 2008, Operation Democracy in Comoros was launched in the Comoros by government and African Union troops. The amphibious assault led to the ousting of Colonel Bacar&#x27;s government, which had taken over the autonomous state of Adjouan.

===Battle of Kismayo (2012)===
From 28 September to 1 October 2012, the Somali National Army launched an assault in conjuncture with allied militia led by Kenya Defense Forces to liberate the city of Kismayo from insurgent control in a first of its kind by an African military. The operation, known as Operation Sledge Hammer, started with the landing of Somali and Kenyan troops outside the city of Kismayo. By 1 October, the coalition forces were able to push Al-Shabaab out of the city.

==See also==
* List of marines and similar forces
* Marines
* Navy
* Raid (military)#Seaborne
* US Amphibious Training Base

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Alexander, Joseph H., and Merrill L. Bartlett. &quot;Sea Soldiers in the Cold War: Amphibious Warfare, 1945–1991&quot; (1994)
* Bartlett, Merrill L. &quot;Assault from the Sea: Essays on the History of Amphibious Warfare&quot; (1993)
* Dwyer, John B. &quot;Commandos From The Sea: The History Of Amphibious Special Warfare In World War II And The Korean War&quot; (1998)
* Fissel, Mark, &quot;The Military Revolution and Revolutions in Military Affairs&quot; (2022)
* Heck, Timothy; Friedman, B. A., eds. &quot;On Contested Shores: The Evolving Role of Amphibious Operations&quot; (Marine Corps University Press, 2020) online review of this book
* Ireland, Bernard. &quot;The World Encyclopedia of Amphibious Warfare Vessels: An illustrated history of modern amphibious warfare&quot; (2011)
* Isely, Jeter A., Philip A. Crowl. &quot;The U.S. Marines and Amphibious War Its Theory and Its Practice in the Pacific&quot; (1951)
* Millett, Allan R. &quot; Semper Fidelis: History of the United States Marine Corps&quot; (2nd ed. 1991) ch 12–14
* 
* Venzon, Anne Cipriano. &quot;From Whaleboats to Amphibious Warfare: Lt. Gen. &quot;Howling Mad&quot; Smith and the U.S. Marine Corps&quot; (Praeger, 2003)

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="0" end="18" title="Amphibious warfare" label="Amphibious warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001676" start="32" end="41" title="Offensive (military)" label="offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="42" end="60" title="military operation" label="military operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177597" start="77" end="87" title="naval ship" label="naval ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698988" start="111" end="120" title="air power" label="air power"/>
<link wikidata="Q646740" start="181" end="194" title="landing beach" label="landing beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8345388" start="248" end="264" title="ship&amp;#x27;s boat" label="ship&amp;#x27;s boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="329" end="347" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Gallipoli Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229765" start="361" end="371" title="watercraft" label="watercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q841751" start="455" end="468" title="landing craft" label="landing craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="490" end="498" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q331795" start="509" end="520" title="patrol boat" label="patrol boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q218139" start="523" end="530" title="Zodiac Group" label="zodiacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q634415" start="565" end="582" title="Midget submarine" label="mini-submersibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352031" start="729" end="770" title="Vickers-Carden-Loyd Light Amphibious Tank" label="Vickers-Carden-Loyd Light Amphibious Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803025" start="778" end="801" title="Landing Vehicle Tracked" label="Landing Vehicle Tracked"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="912" end="926" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q149543" start="957" end="976" title="combined operations" label="combined operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875869" start="1417" end="1426" title="beachhead" label="beachhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="1585" end="1594" title="Aerial warfare" label="air power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982006" start="1596" end="1609" title="Naval gunfire support" label="naval gunfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q671079" start="1611" end="1626" title="troopship" label="naval transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q163059" start="1628" end="1647" title="military logistics" label="logistical planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190472" start="1672" end="1684" title="land warfare" label="land warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="1686" end="1693" title="Military tactics" label="tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q718893" start="1910" end="1931" title="theater (warfare)" label="theatre of operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734459" start="1945" end="1954" title="US Amphibious Training Base" label="rehearsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875869" start="1991" end="2000" title="beachhead" label="beachhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q163059" start="2158" end="2176" title="military logistics" label="military logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982006" start="2178" end="2191" title="naval gunfire support" label="naval gunfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="2196" end="2213" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287072" start="2445" end="2456" title="operational level of war" label="operational"/>
<link wikidata="Q476807" start="2457" end="2462" title="Raid (military)" label="raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="2475" end="2486" title="Dieppe Raid" label="Dieppe Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q552727" start="2558" end="2581" title="Kerch–Eltigen Operation" label="Kerch–Eltigen Operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q714777" start="2661" end="2680" title="Allied invasion of Italy" label="Operation Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637368" start="3078" end="3088" title="task force" label="task force"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="3109" end="3117" title="Division (military)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423459" start="3262" end="3274" title="Military deployment" label="redeployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088231" start="3303" end="3311" title="Military reserve" label="reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q189524" start="3483" end="3494" title="naval fleet" label="naval fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="3503" end="3508" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q483039" start="3568" end="3586" title="Operation Chromite" label="Operation Chromite"/>
<link wikidata="Q646740" start="3606" end="3623" title="landing operation" label="landing operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="3700" end="3712" title="archipelago" label="archipelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q717004" start="3726" end="3741" title="Battle of Leyte" label="Battle of Leyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="3767" end="3784" title="Operation Neptune" label="Operation Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543007" start="4295" end="4306" title="Small boat operations" label="small boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q719226" start="4308" end="4319" title="Fast attack craft" label="small craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793055" start="4337" end="4353" title="Armed merchant ship" label="civilian vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q646740" start="4465" end="4482" title="landing operation" label="landing operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748201" start="4542" end="4567" title="amphibious reconnaissance" label="amphibious reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193850" start="4687" end="4697" title="Sea People" label="Sea People"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="4711" end="4720" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q81794" start="4739" end="4748" title="Akhenaten" label="Akhenaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q932622" start="4779" end="4791" title="Medinet Habu (temple)" label="Medinet Habu"/>
<link wikidata="Q522862" start="4796" end="4802" title="Karnak" label="Karnak"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="4808" end="4816" title="Ancient Greece" label="Hellenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q31900" start="4973" end="4981" title="Battle of Marathon" label="Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="4989" end="4995" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="5083" end="5102" title="Battle of Gallipoli" label="Battle of Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="5127" end="5156" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="5161" end="5174" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388607" start="5306" end="5321" title="Spanish Navy Marines" label="Spanish Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="5431" end="5437" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="5834" end="5840" title="Piracy" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="5893" end="5900" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628386" start="5912" end="5918" title="Gelves" label="Gelves"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="5944" end="5949" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5969" end="5982" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q58732" start="5994" end="6014" title="Great Siege of Malta" label="Great Siege of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="6105" end="6122" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="6181" end="6195" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898583" start="6417" end="6430" title="Marines" label="marine forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="6556" end="6564" title="colonies" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q786171" start="7169" end="7190" title="Ottoman–Habsburg wars" label="Ottoman–Habsburg wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898583" start="7237" end="7252" title="marine infantry" label="marine infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q156521" start="7560" end="7572" title="Andrea Doria" label="Andrea Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q670504" start="7577" end="7598" title="Alfonso d&amp;#x27;Avalos" label="Alfonso d&amp;#x27;Avalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q815184" start="7641" end="7654" title="Siege of Nice" label="Siege of Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q749150" start="7751" end="7757" title="tercio" label="tercio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037032" start="7786" end="7803" title="Capture of Mahdia (1550)" label="Capture of Mahdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q367350" start="7842" end="7848" title="Dragut" label="Dragut"/>
<link wikidata="Q251441" start="7970" end="8008" title="Álvaro de Bazán, Marquis of Santa Cruz" label="Álvaro de Bazán, Marquis of Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099190" start="8066" end="8082" title="Battle of Vila Franca do Campo" label="Terceras Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="8096" end="8102" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="8254" end="8264" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="8266" end="8273" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="8278" end="8284" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q16518" start="8313" end="8318" title="barge" label="barge"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="8349" end="8356" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="8357" end="8362" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="8372" end="8387" title="Artillery" label="artillery piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q21368803" start="8411" end="8422" title="Rowing" label="rowing boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="8446" end="8452" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078994" start="8860" end="8886" title="Siege of Port Royal (1710)" label="Siege of Port Royal (1710)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398298" start="9000" end="9019" title="Port-Royal (Acadia)" label="Port-Royal (Acadia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q869045" start="9045" end="9066" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="9108" end="9137" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q207353" start="9201" end="9207" title="Acadia" label="Acadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q564536" start="9309" end="9324" title="Annapolis Royal" label="Annapolis Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366970" start="9432" end="9461" title="Battle of Cartagena de Indias" label="Battle of Cartagena de Indias"/>
<link wikidata="Q8965" start="9465" end="9476" title="Viceroyalty of New Granada" label="New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q713145" start="9545" end="9558" title="Edward Vernon" label="Edward Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q969817" start="9667" end="9686" title="Lawrence Washington (1718–1752)" label="Lawrence Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="9710" end="9727" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152894" start="9921" end="9947" title="Siege of Louisbourg (1745)" label="Siege of Louisbourg (1745)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="9974" end="9985" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="10018" end="10025" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263622" start="10041" end="10051" title="Louisbourg" label="Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q69461" start="10072" end="10078" title="Early modern France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593199" start="10091" end="10101" title="Île-Royale (New France)" label="Île-Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q188489" start="10115" end="10133" title="Cape Breton Island" label="Cape Breton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="10146" end="10176" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q517578" start="10187" end="10209" title="King George&amp;#x27;s War" label="King George&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="10217" end="10233" title="British North America" label="British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427781" start="10331" end="10338" title="Dunkirkers" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="10374" end="10383" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322019" start="10453" end="10473" title="Wabanaki Confederacy" label="Wabanaki Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10581" end="10585" title="King William&amp;#x27;s War#New England, Acadia and Newfoundland Theatre" label="1688"/>
<link wikidata="Q11400813" start="10587" end="10591" title="Northeast Coast Campaign (1703)" label="1703"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057851" start="10593" end="10597" title="Northeast Coast Campaign (1723)" label="1723"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10599" end="10603" title="Father Rale&amp;#x27;s War#Northeast Coast Campaign (1724)" label="1724"/>
<link wikidata="Q540062" start="10632" end="10654" title="Fortress of Louisbourg" label="Fortress of Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569593" start="10692" end="10698" title="Canada (New France)" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="11127" end="11135" title="garrison" label="garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q156086" start="11813" end="11838" title="Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748)" label="Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050672" start="11917" end="11943" title="Siege of Louisbourg (1758)" label="Siege of Louisbourg (1758)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="12074" end="12095" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="12131" end="12152" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="12199" end="12214" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="12276" end="12296" title="French North America" label="French North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="12376" end="12397" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q311726" start="12403" end="12418" title="Siege of Quebec (1759)" label="Siege of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="12704" end="12724" title="Saint Lawrence River" label="Saint Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q379812" start="12845" end="12856" title="James Wolfe" label="James Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852447" start="13179" end="13193" title="Anse-au-Foulon" label="Anse-au-Foulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="13795" end="13801" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q562277" start="13811" end="13844" title="Battle of Havana (1762)" label="besieged the city and captured it"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="13960" end="13970" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="14028" end="14039" title="Spanish East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617813" start="14041" end="14047" title="Battle of Manila (1762)" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150388" start="14118" end="14133" title="Samuel Nicholas" label="Samuel Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294379" start="14142" end="14161" title="Continental Marines" label="Continental Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="14197" end="14223" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889477" start="14264" end="14278" title="Raid of Nassau" label="Raid of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q815145" start="14357" end="14372" title="Great Siege of Gibraltar" label="seize Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576215" start="14462" end="14469" title="Invasion of Minorca, 1781" label="Minorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037035" start="14584" end="14613" title="Capture of Minorca (1798)" label="captured by a British landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="14673" end="14680" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="14685" end="14696" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="14698" end="14705" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="14707" end="14716" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="14722" end="14727" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q108179410" start="14745" end="14762" title="Imperial fortress" label="Imperial fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="14825" end="14838" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="14843" end="14852" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="15123" end="15143" title="American War of 1812" label="American War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412541" start="15167" end="15188" title="North America and West Indies Station" label="North America Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="15323" end="15340" title="East Coast of the United States" label="Atlantic seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="15348" end="15372" title="United States of America" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870801" start="15428" end="15451" title="Battle of Craney Island" label="Battle of Craney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="15475" end="15494" title="Chesapeake Campaign" label="Chesapeake Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432141" start="15529" end="15550" title="Battle of Bladensburg" label="Battle of Bladensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q897786" start="15566" end="15588" title="Burning of Washington" label="burning Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283729" start="15594" end="15622" title="Raid on Alexandria (Virginia)" label="raiding Alexandria, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="15966" end="15973" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q56243957" start="16134" end="16142" title="landsman" label="landsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="16746" end="16766" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q354759" start="16784" end="16798" title="Winfield Scott" label="Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745368" start="16917" end="16934" title="Siege of Veracruz" label="Siege of Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="16948" end="16959" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091915" start="17063" end="17072" title="Battle of Bomarsund" label="Bomarsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="17074" end="17081" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="17112" end="17130" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="17148" end="17161" title="United States of America" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="17223" end="17241" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185405" start="17254" end="17268" title="Battle of Hatteras Inlet Batteries" label="Hatteras Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="17302" end="17316" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636839" start="17369" end="17383" title="Roanoke Island" label="Roanoke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="17389" end="17398" title="Galveston" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q737517" start="17404" end="17415" title="Fort Sumter" label="Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545258" start="17417" end="17430" title="Morris Island" label="Morris Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136619" start="17435" end="17447" title="James Island (South Carolina)" label="James Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443093" start="17522" end="17533" title="Second Battle of Fort Fisher" label="Fort Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="17626" end="17652" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="17752" end="17770" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925292" start="17776" end="17802" title="Mississippi Marine Brigade" label="Mississippi Marine Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="17842" end="17853" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q663805" start="17982" end="18005" title="United States Ram Fleet" label="United States Ram Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q152004" start="18061" end="18079" title="War of the Pacific" label="War of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373123" start="18213" end="18230" title="Battle of Pisagua" label="Battle of Pisagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="18242" end="18247" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q990472" start="18275" end="18282" title="Pisagua, Chile" label="Pisagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="18294" end="18298" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="18307" end="18314" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208711" start="18346" end="18358" title="Chilean Navy" label="Chilean Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="18460" end="18468" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="18473" end="18479" title="sapper" label="sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="19355" end="19365" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373123" start="19386" end="19403" title="Battle of Pisagua" label="Battle of Pisagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="19405" end="19423" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782163" start="19437" end="19458" title="Theodorus B. M. Mason" label="Theodorus B. M. Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q142988" start="19561" end="19580" title="Alfred Thayer Mahan" label="Alfred Thayer Mahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236680" start="19787" end="19808" title="gentleman&amp;#x27;s club" label="gentleman&amp;#x27;s club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139846" start="19884" end="19923" title="The Influence of Sea Power upon History" label="The Influence of Sea Power upon History"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="19990" end="20006" title="Veracruz (city)" label="Veracruz, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="20025" end="20043" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316711" start="20044" end="20074" title="United States occupation of Veracruz" label="attacked and occupied the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q166210" start="20092" end="20106" title="Tampico Affair" label="Tampico Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="20131" end="20142" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870334" start="20324" end="20351" title="Royal Marine Light Infantry" label="Royal Marine Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870334" start="20369" end="20391" title="Royal Marine Artillery" label="Royal Marine Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="20417" end="20430" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="20477" end="20487" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="20568" end="20578" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q646534" start="20593" end="20613" title="Royal Naval Division" label="Royal Naval Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741179" start="20868" end="20887" title="Battle of Bita Paka" label="Battle of Bita Paka"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771" start="20955" end="20966" title="New Britain" label="New Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q165008" start="21028" end="21045" title="German New Guinea" label="German New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076895" start="21053" end="21102" title="Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force" label="Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="21150" end="21165" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="21259" end="21278" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152902" start="21333" end="21338" title="Tanga, Tanzania" label="Tanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q153963" start="21340" end="21358" title="German East Africa" label="German East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q704921" start="21514" end="21534" title="Battle of Tanga" label="advanced on the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q846336" start="21650" end="21669" title="Mark IV tank" label="British heavy tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103880" start="21675" end="21683" title="Pontoon (boat)" label="pontoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q426227" start="21702" end="21723" title="Third Battle of Ypres" label="Third Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="21771" end="21775" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q583941" start="21780" end="21784" title="Imperial Russian Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="21830" end="21839" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q871617" start="21995" end="22011" title="Operation Albion" label="Operation Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q951302" start="22031" end="22039" title="Saaremaa" label="Saaremaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q146530" start="22048" end="22055" title="Hiiumaa" label="Hiiumaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778301" start="22067" end="22071" title="Muhu" label="Muhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q174731" start="22116" end="22128" title="Gulf of Riga" label="Gulf of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051067" start="22296" end="22322" title="pre-dreadnought battleship" label="pre-dreadnought battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564067" start="22329" end="22334" title="Russian battleship Slava" label="Slava"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="22417" end="22432" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="22457" end="22466" title="Petrograd" label="Petrograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="22531" end="22544" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern front"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="22709" end="22728" title="Battle of Gallipoli" label="Battle of Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="22749" end="22763" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="22771" end="22782" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="22788" end="22797" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="22839" end="22850" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q37901" start="22854" end="22860" title="strait" label="strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="22908" end="22922" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="22935" end="22948" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied powers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23068" end="23086" title="#World War I era" label="amphibious landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="23162" end="23176" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="23189" end="23197" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982006" start="23381" end="23398" title="naval bombardment" label="naval bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620231" start="23465" end="23474" title="Commander" label="Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342939" start="23475" end="23492" title="Robert Clark-Hall" label="Robert Clark-Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="23518" end="23539" title="aerial reconnaissance" label="aerial reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624963" start="23571" end="23592" title="landing at Anzac Cove" label="landing at Anzac Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064229" start="23687" end="23701" title="No. 203 Squadron RAF" label="No. 3 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="23709" end="23732" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048896" start="23978" end="24004" title="SS River Clyde" label="SS &amp;quot;River Clyde&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109500" start="24017" end="24024" title="collier (ship)" label="collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300236" start="24046" end="24058" title="Amphibious warfare ship" label="landing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754797" start="24067" end="24089" title="Landing at Cape Helles" label="Landing at Cape Helles"/>
<link wikidata="Q211367" start="24253" end="24265" title="Sheet steel" label="Boiler plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="24402" end="24425" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="24501" end="24511" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="24926" end="24942" title="spoon-shaped bow" label="spoon-shaped bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="25057" end="25063" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776241" start="25107" end="25127" title="landing at Suvla Bay" label="landing at Suvla Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281542" start="25131" end="25139" title="IX Corps (United Kingdom)" label="IX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620231" start="25154" end="25163" title="Commander" label="Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065024" start="25164" end="25176" title="Edward Unwin" label="Edward Unwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="25787" end="25804" title="Normandy Landings" label="Normandy Landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="25828" end="25841" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="25880" end="25895" title="US Marine Corps" label="US Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="25929" end="25940" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="26005" end="26020" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26286" end="26298" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="26326" end="26338" title="armed forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="26442" end="26459" title="Normandy Landings" label="Normandy Landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q714777" start="26569" end="26574" title="Allied invasion of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q250309" start="26583" end="26589" title="Battle of Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238546" start="26601" end="26616" title="Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862972" start="27069" end="27088" title="National Army (Ireland)" label="Irish National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="27109" end="27124" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017331" start="27164" end="27172" title="Westport, County Mayo" label="Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775905" start="27174" end="27179" title="Fenit" label="Fenit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="27184" end="27188" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029338" start="27280" end="27290" title="QF 18-pounder gun" label="18-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="27810" end="27817" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026815" start="27824" end="27841" title="Alhucemas landing" label="Alhucemas landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="27950" end="27957" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982006" start="28049" end="28070" title="naval gunfire support" label="naval gunfire support"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="28362" end="28371" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="28466" end="28479" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038907" start="28487" end="28502" title="Battle of Wuhan" label="Battle of Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="28596" end="28620" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069846" start="28659" end="28686" title="Japanese Special Naval Landing Forces" label="Special Naval Landing Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="28894" end="28899" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="28908" end="28924" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="28955" end="28971" title="inter-war period" label="inter-war period"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="29019" end="29028" title="Gallipoli campaign" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="29168" end="29178" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="29207" end="29225" title="Gallipoli campaign" label="Gallipoli campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698988" start="29265" end="29273" title="airpower" label="airpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522839" start="29440" end="29453" title="Staff College" label="Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="29474" end="29485" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q185458" start="29503" end="29509" title="Quetta" label="Quetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="29552" end="29572" title="Dardanelles campaign" label="Dardanelles campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="29618" end="29631" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814941" start="29673" end="29692" title="economic depression" label="economic depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517950" start="29735" end="29748" title="Ten Year Rule" label="Ten Year Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918136" start="29904" end="29923" title="Motor Landing Craft" label="Motor Landing Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="30269" end="30275" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088282" start="30276" end="30300" title="Landing Craft Mechanized" label="landing craft mechanised"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="30313" end="30317" title="British Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="30322" end="30332" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676408" start="30468" end="30483" title="J. Samuel White" label="J. Samuel White"/>
<link wikidata="Q587996" start="30487" end="30492" title="Cowes" label="Cowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356704" start="30723" end="30731" title="Pump-jet" label="waterjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630793" start="30791" end="30800" title="Hotchkiss et Cie" label="Hotchkiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q128822" start="30976" end="30980" title="knot (unit)" label="knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="31406" end="31409" title="bow (ship)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089213" start="31531" end="31556" title="Royal Naval Staff College" label="Royal Naval Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077288" start="31657" end="31672" title="Chiefs of Staff Committee" label="Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="31816" end="31829" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847930" start="32220" end="32265" title="Inter-Service Training and Development Centre" label="Inter-Service Training and Development Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471001" start="32285" end="32300" title="Fort Cumberland (England)" label="Fort Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="32307" end="32317" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="32373" end="32383" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="32385" end="32389" title="British Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="32395" end="32410" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q149543" start="32485" end="32504" title="Combined Operations" label="Combined Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="32908" end="32924" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="33020" end="33025" title="Operation Torch" label="Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="33030" end="33035" title="Operation Husky" label="Husky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103880" start="33379" end="33386" title="Pontoon (boat)" label="pontoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="33493" end="33501" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259221" start="33648" end="33669" title="Landing Craft Assault" label="Assault Landing Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457422" start="33675" end="33699" title="LCM 1" label="Mechanized Landing Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169332" start="33714" end="33740" title="Landing Craft Tank" label="Landing Craft Tank (Mk. 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484651" start="33783" end="33804" title="Landing Ship Infantry" label="Landing Ship Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="33877" end="33889" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="33999" end="34011" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="34139" end="34150" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="34221" end="34229" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567147" start="34280" end="34293" title="rapid reaction force" label="fast-reacting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="34369" end="34376" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142988" start="34499" end="34507" title="Alfred Thayer Mahan" label="Mahanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604714" start="34551" end="34563" title="forward base" label="forward base"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="34608" end="34628" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q775056" start="34740" end="34754" title="Culebra, Puerto Rico" label="Culebra Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="34756" end="34767" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531736" start="34791" end="34830" title="General Board of the United States Navy" label="General Board of the United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="34893" end="34900" title="Pacific" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="34909" end="34918" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="35022" end="35031" title="Gallipoli campaign" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325899" start="35079" end="35107" title="Earl Hancock Ellis" label="Major &amp;quot;Pete&amp;quot; Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="35409" end="35417" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="35419" end="35427" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="35429" end="35437" title="Marianas Islands" label="Marianas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="35442" end="35448" title="Ryukyu Islands" label="Ryukyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q841751" start="35671" end="35684" title="landing craft" label="assault craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982006" start="35703" end="35716" title="Naval bombardment" label="naval gunfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380335" start="35721" end="35740" title="Airstrike" label="attack from the air"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="35877" end="35888" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="35896" end="35911" title="light artillery" label="light artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q875583" start="35913" end="35924" title="light tanks" label="light tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="35930" end="35945" title="combat engineer" label="combat engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="36152" end="36157" title="Ottoman empire" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q649190" start="36479" end="36487" title="Eniwetok" label="Eniwetok"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="36495" end="36511" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="36595" end="36612" title="aerial reconnaissance" label="observer aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623609" start="36641" end="36653" title="light bomber" label="light bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897627" start="36731" end="36746" title="heavy artillery" label="heavy artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="37087" end="37099" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="37119" end="37134" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686129" start="37221" end="37240" title="Advanced Base Force" label="advanced base force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427712" start="37269" end="37287" title="Fleet Marine Force" label="Fleet Marine Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458402" start="37330" end="37353" title="Fleet Landing Exercises" label="Fleet Landing Exercises"/>
<link wikidata="Q505414" start="37410" end="37424" title="Andrew Higgins" label="Andrew Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="37461" end="37468" title="Draft (hull)" label="draught"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803024" start="37481" end="37486" title="LCVP (United States)" label="LCVPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906436" start="37569" end="37602" title="Bureau of Construction and Repair" label="Bureau of Construction and Repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="37742" end="37758" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188559" start="37907" end="37928" title="French Foreign Legion" label="French Foreign Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186920" start="37942" end="37959" title="13th Demi-Brigade of the Foreign Legion" label="13th Demi-Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q768187" start="37982" end="37995" title="Hotchkiss H39" label="Hotchkiss H39"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388512" start="38018" end="38026" title="Bjerkvik" label="Bjerkvik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38160" end="38178" title="Battle of Madagascar#Landings (Operation Ironclad)" label="Operation Ironclad"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="38210" end="38233" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy French-controlled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="38234" end="38244" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q936629" start="38308" end="38315" title="Force H" label="Force H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548213" start="38321" end="38339" title="British Home Fleet" label="British Home Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278174" start="38356" end="38369" title="Eastern Fleet" label="Eastern Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344610" start="38397" end="38418" title="Edward Neville Syfret" label="Edward Neville Syfret"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632942" start="38617" end="38646" title="29th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="British 29th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043648" start="38651" end="38665" title="No. 5 Commando" label="No. 5 Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259221" start="38676" end="38689" title="Landing Craft Assault" label="assault craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185093" start="38749" end="38770" title="5th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="5th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393140" start="38823" end="38838" title="Fairey Albacore" label="Fairey Albacore"/>
<link wikidata="Q674079" start="38843" end="38859" title="Fairey Swordfish" label="Fairey Swordfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="38860" end="38867" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q841751" start="38922" end="38935" title="landing craft" label="landing craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="38987" end="38994" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="38996" end="39012" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="Operation Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="39059" end="39065" title="Dieppe Raid" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233004" start="39276" end="39291" title="Operation Claymore" label="Lofoten Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q572676" start="39293" end="39303" title="St Nazaire Raid" label="St Nazaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q304403" start="39308" end="39316" title="Operation Biting" label="Bruneval"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="39380" end="39392" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847930" start="39496" end="39541" title="Inter-Service Training and Development Centre" label="Inter-Service Training and Development Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q841751" start="39565" end="39578" title="landing craft" label="landing craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q667419" start="39627" end="39635" title="long ton" label="long ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q304673" start="39695" end="39702" title="platoon" label="platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="39712" end="39728" title="Royal Engineers" label="assault engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322747" start="39733" end="39742" title="Royal Signal Corps" label="signaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259221" start="39896" end="39917" title="Landing Craft Assault" label="Landing Craft Assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918136" start="40060" end="40079" title="Motor Landing Craft" label="Motor Landing Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676408" start="40081" end="40092" title="J. Samuel White" label="J. S. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q239788" start="40431" end="40439" title="mahogany" label="mahogany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159176" start="40560" end="40568" title="Mangalloy" label="Hadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259221" start="40596" end="40617" title="Landing Craft Assault" label="Landing Craft Assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="40655" end="40667" title="British Commonwealth" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="40752" end="40762" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="40766" end="40771" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q637410" start="40989" end="41011" title="Landing Craft Infantry" label="Landing Craft Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q474748" start="41029" end="41052" title="amphibious assault ship" label="amphibious assault ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259221" start="41185" end="41206" title="Landing Craft Assault" label="Landing Craft Assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="41483" end="41498" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847930" start="42021" end="42066" title="Inter-Service Training and Development Centre" label="Inter-Service Training and Development Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259221" start="42130" end="42133" title="Landing Craft Assault" label="LCA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42450" end="42462" title="Builder&amp;#x27;s Old Measurement#American tons burthen" label="tons burthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q551401" start="42642" end="42666" title="John I. Thornycroft &amp;amp; Company" label="John I. Thornycroft Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="42894" end="42899" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16518" start="42960" end="42965" title="barge" label="barge"/>
<link wikidata="Q128822" start="43043" end="43048" title="knot (unit)" label="knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457422" start="43290" end="43314" title="LCM 1" label="Landing Craft Mechanised"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="43356" end="43373" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q771712" start="43445" end="43455" title="heavy tank" label="heavy tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663647" start="43566" end="43579" title="Loben Edward Harold Maund" label="Admiral Maund"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847930" start="43597" end="43642" title="Inter-Service Training and Development Centre" label="Inter-Service Training and Development Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259221" start="43668" end="43689" title="Landing Craft Assault" label="Landing Craft Assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393251" start="43858" end="43868" title="Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Company" label="Fairfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699428" start="43873" end="43883" title="John Brown &amp;amp; Company" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q15223240" start="43984" end="43990" title="Haslar" label="Haslar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548575" start="44253" end="44268" title="Hawthorn Leslie and Company" label="Hawthorn Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807793" start="44600" end="44611" title="Napier Lion" label="Napier Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="45233" end="45239" title="Dieppe Raid" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q551401" start="45622" end="45633" title="John I. Thornycroft &amp;amp; Company" label="Thornycroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010549" start="45694" end="45709" title="Bureau of Ships" label="Bureau of Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229656" start="46229" end="46232" title="Landing Ship, Tank" label="LST"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229656" start="46465" end="46483" title="Landing Ship, Tank" label="Landing Ship, Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q646740" start="46595" end="46609" title="landing troops" label="landing troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="46657" end="46680" title="Operation Dynamo" label="evacuation from Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="46709" end="46718" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="46816" end="46820" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="46844" end="46862" title="amphibious assault" label="amphibious assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q696182" start="46947" end="46956" title="Churchill tank" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267919" start="46957" end="46970" title="infantry tank" label="infantry tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="47420" end="47438" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010549" start="47446" end="47461" title="Bureau of Ships" label="Bureau of Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499623" start="48262" end="48278" title="destroyer escort" label="destroyer escort"/>
<link wikidata="Q841751" start="48294" end="48307" title="landing craft" label="landing craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="48464" end="48480" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="48616" end="48628" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport News"/>
<link wikidata="Q757273" start="49239" end="49243" title="Utah Beach" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q464257" start="49245" end="49250" title="Omaha Beach" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q745883" start="49252" end="49256" title="Gold Beach" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q832409" start="49258" end="49262" title="Juno Beach" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138519" start="49267" end="49272" title="Sword Beach" label="Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="49375" end="49392" title="Operation Neptune" label="Operation Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="49414" end="49421" title="Admiral" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q710439" start="49422" end="49436" title="Bertram Ramsay" label="Bertram Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q966383" start="49576" end="49591" title="Operation Pluto" label="Operation Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798983" start="49618" end="49632" title="Arthur Hartley" label="Arthur Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q267380" start="49658" end="49683" title="Anglo-Iranian Oil Company" label="Anglo-Iranian Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="49710" end="49722" title="Pipeline transport" label="oil pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="49733" end="49748" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="49757" end="49764" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="49769" end="49775" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="50038" end="50044" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="50045" end="50054" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="50085" end="50096" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101091" start="50098" end="50120" title="Geoffrey William Lloyd" label="Geoffrey William Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="50171" end="50190" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Admiral Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q149543" start="50201" end="50220" title="Combined Operations" label="Combined Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q667419" start="50382" end="50390" title="long ton" label="long ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q93318" start="50396" end="50409" title="nautical mile" label="nautical mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510880" start="50447" end="50463" title="Siemens Brothers" label="Siemens Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="50489" end="50517" title="National Physical Laboratory, UK" label="National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="50537" end="50561" title="undersea telegraph cable" label="undersea telegraph cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748814" start="50720" end="50742" title="Iraq Petroleum Company" label="Iraq Petroleum Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q865030" start="50751" end="50769" title="Burmah Oil Company" label="Burmah Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="51250" end="51257" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="51261" end="51266" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974375" start="51271" end="51281" title="Watermouth" label="Watermouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q674940" start="51285" end="51296" title="North Devon" label="North Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488755" start="51392" end="51406" title="Shanklin Chine" label="Shanklin Chine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="51414" end="51427" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398673" start="51458" end="51478" title="Cherbourg Naval Base" label="Cherbourg Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q911577" start="51618" end="51627" title="Dungeness (headland)" label="Dungeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q457707" start="51631" end="51641" title="Ambleteuse" label="Ambleteuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689" start="51649" end="51662" title="Pas-de-Calais" label="Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="52006" end="52014" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="52038" end="52044" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="52065" end="52071" title="Victory in Europe Day" label="VE day"/>
<link wikidata="Q426875" start="52220" end="52237" title="Mulberry harbour" label="Portable harbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="52349" end="52376" title="invasion of Normandy" label="Allied invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="52382" end="52393" title="Dieppe Raid" label="Dieppe Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="52421" end="52427" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="52474" end="52487" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="52652" end="52677" title="Draft (hull)" label="sufficient depth of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="52690" end="52694" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178692" start="52711" end="52725" title="Crane (machine)" label="dockside crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="52998" end="53016" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="53025" end="53043" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="Battle of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215635" start="53124" end="53134" title="Breakwater (structure)" label="breakwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q863454" start="53136" end="53140" title="pier" label="pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="53185" end="53196" title="Dieppe Raid" label="Dieppe Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240275" start="53211" end="53230" title="John Hughes-Hallett" label="John Hughes-Hallett"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="53314" end="53321" title="English Channel" label="Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="53436" end="53444" title="Operation Overlord" label="Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q846451" start="53499" end="53507" title="Caisson (engineering)" label="caissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q804920" start="53824" end="53838" title="Balfour Beatty" label="Balfour Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174993" start="53840" end="53847" title="Costain Group" label="Costain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834589" start="53849" end="53856" title="BAM Nuttall" label="Nuttall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718375" start="53858" end="53868" title="Henry Boot PLC" label="Henry Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556889" start="53870" end="53889" title="Sir Robert McAlpine" label="Sir Robert McAlpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175465" start="53894" end="53918" title="Peter Lind &amp;amp; Company" label="Peter Lind &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880816" start="53953" end="53960" title="Holland, Hannen &amp;amp; Cubitts" label="Cubitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881803" start="53962" end="53979" title="Holloway Brothers (London)" label="Holloway Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13109143" start="53981" end="53987" title="Mowlem" label="Mowlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088889" start="53992" end="54006" title="Taylor Woodrow Construction" label="Taylor Woodrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q191826" start="54149" end="54153" title="Tugboat" label="tugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q464257" start="54480" end="54491" title="Omaha Beach" label="Omaha Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q212620" start="54496" end="54507" title="Arromanches-les-Bains" label="Arromanches"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="55264" end="55296" title="European theatre of World War II" label="European theatre of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="55305" end="55323" title="Pacific War" label="war in the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="55380" end="55390" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14480883" start="55400" end="55407" title="X Corps (United States)" label="X Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q163669" start="55427" end="55446" title="1st Marine Division (United States)" label="1st Marine Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q261179" start="55451" end="55472" title="7th Infantry Division (United States)" label="7th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q483039" start="55473" end="55489" title="Battle of Inchon" label="landed at Inchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="55526" end="55551" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="General Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55702" end="55726" title="Battle of Inchon#Analysis" label="analysis in main article"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="56138" end="56145" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="56166" end="56177" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="56226" end="56245" title="First Indochina War" label="First Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354670" start="56262" end="56280" title="Operation Camargue" label="Operation Camargue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="56367" end="56380" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="56446" end="56457" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134514" start="56499" end="56503" title="Suez" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="56634" end="56646" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="56814" end="56819" title="tide" label="tidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="57056" end="57064" title="Suez War" label="Suez War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="57154" end="57163" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57302" end="57310" title="Landing Platform Helicopter#Royal Navy" label="carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="57348" end="57361" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4303265" start="57394" end="57416" title="Argentine Marine Corps" label="Argentine Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748194" start="57428" end="57454" title="Amphibious Commandos Group" label="Navy&amp;#x27;s Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992361" start="57465" end="57482" title="Operation Rosario" label="Operation Rosario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934202" start="57494" end="57506" title="Mullet Creek" label="Mullet Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12245" start="57512" end="57519" title="Stanley, Falkland Islands" label="Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q279233" start="57573" end="57591" title="3 Commando Brigade" label="3 Commando Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="57611" end="57623" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q197217" start="57631" end="57649" title="Parachute Regiment (United Kingdom)" label="Parachute Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321257" start="57661" end="57676" title="Port San Carlos" label="Port San Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q537052" start="57699" end="57715" title="Operation Sutton" label="Operation Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q501053" start="57746" end="57766" title="Turkish Armed Forces" label="Turkish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q206760" start="57818" end="57825" title="Kyrenia" label="Kyrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069434" start="57841" end="57870" title="1974 Cypriot coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1974 Cypriot coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="57876" end="57883" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q134291" start="58011" end="58017" title="Mersin" label="Mersin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="58184" end="58197" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="58239" end="58246" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q271110" start="58342" end="58346" title="IRGC" label="IRGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="59265" end="59277" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q82995" start="59651" end="59661" title="Second Battle of al-Faw" label="recaptured"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083363" start="59706" end="59729" title="Iraqi chemical attacks against Iran" label="use of chemical weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026308" start="59763" end="59787" title="Operation Praying Mantis" label="Operation Praying Mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="59855" end="59871" title="Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808566" start="59873" end="59893" title="Assault Craft Unit 5" label="Assault Craft Unit 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="59962" end="59968" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="59973" end="59985" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q474748" start="60017" end="60040" title="amphibious assault ship" label="amphibious assault ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q483039" start="60092" end="60108" title="Battle of Inchon" label="Battle of Inchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213394" start="60695" end="60715" title="Sri Lankan civil war" label="Sri Lankan civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q80312" start="60720" end="60724" title="LTTE" label="LTTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872080" start="60793" end="60811" title="Battle of Pooneryn" label="Battle of Pooneryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443086" start="60824" end="60854" title="Second Battle of Elephant Pass" label="Second Battle of Elephant Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="60967" end="60980" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="60982" end="60994" title="U.S. Marines" label="U.S. Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438930" start="61019" end="61033" title="GROM" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930510" start="61044" end="61050" title="Battle of Al Faw (2003)" label="landed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984682" start="61058" end="61074" title="Al-Faw Peninsula" label="Al-Faw Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="61103" end="61111" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q660843" start="61158" end="61188" title="2008 invasion of Anjouan" label="Operation Democracy in Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="61209" end="61216" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952969" start="61462" end="61482" title="Somali National Army" label="Somali National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q720033" start="61545" end="61565" title="Kenya Defense Forces" label="Kenya Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871455" start="61692" end="61715" title="Battle of Kismayo (2012)" label="Operation Sledge Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q270787" start="61790" end="61797" title="Kismayo" label="Kismayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q309998" start="61852" end="61862" title="Al-Shabaab (militant group)" label="Al-Shabaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121826" start="61896" end="61930" title="List of marines and similar forces" label="List of marines and similar forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898583" start="61933" end="61940" title="Marines" label="Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="61943" end="61947" title="Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61950" end="61974" title="Raid (military)#Seaborne" label="Raid (military)#Seaborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734459" start="61977" end="62004" title="US Amphibious Training Base" label="US Amphibious Training Base"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795036" wikidata="Q5759890" url="?curid=795036" title="Highway Emergency Response Operators">
<text>The Highway Emergency Response Operators (HERO) program is a type of freeway service patrol in United States.

The first program started with the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) in 1994. It has expanded to states like Texas, with similar programs in Florida and New York (state). Both the programs and the individual vehicles are typically referred to by the acronym HERO.

== History ==
The program began in Atlanta in 1994 as the city prepared for the 1996 Olympics and has since been expanded with GDOT&#x27;s 511 Navigator Intelligent Transportation System program.

While previously being sponsored by State Farm which began in 2009, funding for the HERO program has been provided by Congestion Mitigation/Air Quality (CMAQ) Fund under the guidance of the Atlanta Regional Commission&#x27;s (ARC) Incident Management Taskforce. The Taskforce members include the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), GDOT, traffic reporters, emergency and first-response agencies and the private sector.

In February 2017, GDOT expanded it to east Georgia with the Coordinated Highway Assistance &amp; Maintenance Program (CHAMP), which performs all of the HERO functions, in addition to monitoring for any maintenance needs along rural state roads. It began at first by covering I-20 east from metro Atlanta to the state line including I-520 around Augusta, and the middle of I-16 around Dublin. The CHAMP program expand statewide in May 2017.

== Georgia ==
The state of Georgia operates the HERO program as part of GDOT&#x27;s Office of Traffic Operations. The HERO unit&#x27;s primary purpose is to minimize traffic congestion by clearing wrecked or disabled vehicles from the travel lanes and providing traffic control at incident scenes. As a secondary service, HERO operates as a service patrol; assisting stranded motorists who have a flat tire, are out of fuel, or are stranded by a mechanical failure of their vehicle. In addition to their normal patrol duties in metro Atlanta, HERO is deployed to assist with traffic control at the Masters Tournament in Augusta, Georgia and along Interstates 16, 75, and 95 during hurricane evacuations.

HERO Operators are GDOT employees, distinguishing the program from freeway service patrols in other states, such as California, which are operated under contract by private tow truck companies. The HERO day is split into four shifts: Alpha (morning), Bravo (afternoon), Charlie (weekend) and Delta (overnight). HERO operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Typically, HERO and CHAMP Operators work between 75,000 and 80,000 incidents per year. 

In Georgia, motorists needing HERO or CHAMP assistance dial 511 (and press 1) to reach the Traffic Management Center, GDOT&#x27;s primary center for incident management. 511 is also the number for general traffic information throughout the state of Georgia.

=== Expansion ===
Under Georgia Governor Sonny Perdue&#x27;s Fast Forward Congestion Relief program, the HERO program was expanded. Before the 2005 expansion, the HERO program consisted of 48 operators; in May 2009 there were nearly 90 positions in the program, 2015 there were 110 operators. This expansion as well as several others since added new routes to the HERO coverage area.
As of 2015, GDOT&#x27;s fleet of 90 HERO trucks cover over 420 miles of roads.

=== Towing and Recovery Incentive Program (TRIP) ===
The HERO units also oversee the TRIP program which now requires an accident to be cleared enough to have traffic significantly improved in 90 minutes from the time that the towing company arrives on scene and is given notice to proceed. (must be on scene in 30 (peak) to 45 (non-peak) minutes or less) Most towing companies pass this requirement because of assistance from GDOT in getting to the scene. Towing companies in the TRIP program must meet a minimum set of standards and pass inspections by GDOT. The approved equipment is issued a TRIP certification sticker.

== Texas ==
In Texas, the program began in 2010, and is generally operated and funded by local Texas Department of Transportation districts and other local area organizations. Initially managed by the Central Texas Mobility Authority, it is has been managed by TxDOT since 2017.

=== Service Areas ===
Texas HERO&#x27;s operate in the Austin, Texas area (covering the Capital Area Metropolitan Planning Organization service area), El Paso (covering the El Paso County, Texas sections of Interstate 10, Texas State Highway Loop 375 and U.S. Route 54) and San Antonio greater area (including but not limited to Interstate 35, Interstate 10, Interstate 410 and Interstate 37).

=== Acknowledgement Program ===
Launched in 2024, TxDOT&#x27;s Acknowledgement Program allows for companies or organizations outside TxDOT to donate to Safety Service Patrols. In exchange, donors can be acknowledged for their donations by having their name, logo or image placed on the back of a Safety Service Patrol truck.

== Other Similar Programs ==

=== Florida - Road Ranger Service Patrol ===
In Florida, the Florida Department of Transportation, operates the Road Ranger Service Patrol (aka Road Ranger&#x27;s) program. Operating since 2000, it&#x27;s mission is to &quot;is to provide free highway assistance services during incidents to reduce delay and improve safety for the motoring public and responders&quot;. Approximately, it helps more than 4,000 motorists every month who need minor breakdown assistance.

=== New York - Highway Emergency Local Patrol (HELP) ===
In New York (state), the New York Department of Transportation operates the Highway Emergency Local Patrol (HELP) program since 1994. It is a free service that operates during peak commuter hours during the regular work week. Patrols are provided by NYSDOT staff, through contracts with local private vendors.

==Fleets==
HERO fleets mostly consist of the Ford F450 utility box configuration as their primary patrol vehicle, International Rescue Trucks, and Ford F250 and Ford Expedition as supervisor vehicles. In Georgia, they painted in bright green and in Texas they are painted white and light blue. Some HERO trucks can pull a fully loaded tractor trailer out of the travel lanes. Inside the trucks, there are enough supplies to handle incidents from accidents, spills, and debris to the tools to get motorists back on the road.

In 2017, GDOT began upgrading the fleet to the Ford F550 in both the traditional enclosed utility box design and a new utility half-box design while phasing out the older Diesel F450&#x27;s.

== Line of Duty Deaths ==
Since HERO was established in 1994, two operators have been killed in the line of duty. 

=== Georgia ===
Spencer Pass was struck and killed in January 2011 while jumping a stalled car on Interstate 85 in South Atlanta. In 2016, the overpass at I-85 and Cleveland Ave was renamed in his honor. 

Moses King was killed in August 2015 when he was struck by an impaired driver that crashed into him on Atlanta&#x27;s I-75/I-85 while providing traffic control for an earlier accident scene. The driver was arrested at the scene.

==References==
==External links==
*GDOT Official website
*Georgia 511
*GDOT Highway Emergency Response Operators vehicle photos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5759890" start="4" end="40" title="Highway Emergency Response Operators" label="Highway Emergency Response Operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501251" start="69" end="91" title="freeway service patrol" label="freeway service patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q944993" start="146" end="182" title="Georgia Department of Transportation" label="Georgia Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="230" end="235" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="262" end="269" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="274" end="290" title="New York (state)" label="New York (state)"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="371" end="378" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759890" start="379" end="383" title="Highway Emergency Response Operators" label="HERO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="466" end="479" title="1996 Olympics" label="1996 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q508378" start="539" end="572" title="Intelligent Transportation System" label="Intelligent Transportation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007336" start="619" end="629" title="State Farm" label="State Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428646" start="1338" end="1343" title="I-520" label="I-520"/>
<link wikidata="Q181962" start="1351" end="1358" title="Augusta, Georgia" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q93493" start="1378" end="1382" title="Interstate 16" label="I-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671021" start="1390" end="1396" title="Dublin, Georgia" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4323994" start="1541" end="1548" title="Traffic" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="1613" end="1631" title="traffic congestion" label="traffic congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222002" start="1689" end="1693" title="lane" label="lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q280275" start="2045" end="2063" title="Masters Tournament" label="Masters Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2268" end="2278" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q332050" start="2325" end="2334" title="tow truck" label="tow truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q525362" start="2901" end="2913" title="Sonny Perdue" label="Sonny Perdue"/>
<link wikidata="Q568743" start="4043" end="4077" title="Texas Department of Transportation" label="Texas Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="4283" end="4296" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="4401" end="4422" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79914" start="4435" end="4448" title="Interstate 10" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505854" start="4450" end="4478" title="Texas State Highway Loop 375" label="Texas State Highway Loop 375"/>
<link wikidata="Q409870" start="4483" end="4496" title="U.S. Route 54" label="U.S. Route 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="4502" end="4526" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio greater area"/>
<link wikidata="Q94150" start="4557" end="4570" title="Interstate 35" label="Interstate 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q79914" start="4572" end="4585" title="Interstate 10" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451115" start="4587" end="4601" title="Interstate 410" label="Interstate 410"/>
<link wikidata="Q94171" start="4606" end="4619" title="Interstate 37" label="Interstate 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074270" start="5040" end="5076" title="Florida Department of Transportation" label="Florida Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="5509" end="5525" title="New York (state)" label="New York (state)"/>
<link wikidata="Q527769" start="5531" end="5568" title="New York State Department of Transportation" label="New York Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267790" start="5862" end="5871" title="Ford F450" label="Ford F450"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146685" start="5964" end="5973" title="Ford F250" label="Ford F250"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339764" start="5978" end="5993" title="Ford Expedition" label="Ford Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267790" start="6389" end="6398" title="Ford F550" label="Ford F550"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795042" wikidata="Q7249368" url="?curid=795042" title="Vote Smart">
<text>Vote Smart, formerly called Project Vote Smart, is an American non-profit, non-partisan research organization that collects and distributes information on candidates for public office in the United States. It covers candidates and elected officials in six basic areas: background information, issue positions (via the Political Courage Test), voting records, campaign finances, interest group ratings, and speeches and public statements. This information is distributed via their web site, a toll-free phone number, and print publications. The founding president of the organization was Richard Kimball. Kimball became president emeritus in 2022, when Kyle Dell was announced as the new president of Vote Smart.

PVS also provides records of public statements, contact information for state and local election offices, polling place and absentee ballot information, ballot measure descriptions for each state (where applicable), links to federal and state government agencies, and links to political parties and issue organizations.

==History==
In 1986, Richard Kimball ran unsuccessfully for one of Arizona&#x27;s two U.S. Senate seats. In a candidates&#x27; debate, he described the campaign process to prospective voters:

Kimball used this philosophy to found Vote Smart in 1992. His founding board included Presidents Jimmy Carter (D) and Gerald Ford (R), plus Republican U.S. Senator Barry Goldwater and Democratic U.S. Senators George McGovern and William Proxmire as well as other nationally known figures.

Originally based at Oregon State University in Corvallis, Oregon, PVS established its headquarters and research center in 1999 at the Great Divide Ranch near Philipsburg, Montana. In 2006, Vote Smart added a branch at The University of Arizona in Tucson, Arizona. Coincident with this move, Vote Smart gave its president Richard Kimball a pay increase that was criticized by some alumni and contributed to a reduction in its Charity Navigator score. In December 2010, the Tucson office was closed in preparation for two new satellite research offices. The reason for the closure of the Tucson branch was also related to the university&#x27;s budget cuts, which eliminated Vote Smart&#x27;s &quot;rent-free space at a 1,500- square-foot house off the main campus.&quot;

In January 2011, Vote Smart moved its Key Votes Department and Political Courage Test Department to facilities offered by both the University of Texas at Austin and the University of Southern California. Vote Smart has since left the University of Southern California and moved its Political Courage Department to its Montana research center.

In March 2014, Vote Smart laid off six employees, citing financial difficulties. A seventh employee quit because of the sudden layoffs.

In August 2016, Vote Smart announced that it would be selling its 150-acre ranch near Philipsburg, Montana, and relocating its headquarters after the November 2016 U.S. presidential election. Kimball said the ranch&#x27;s secluded location, which housed 40 interns, had caused issues: &quot;We have all the problems a university does with the experimental, adventurous, hormonal torrent that is the young. Only in the wilderness such things can become dangerous. Love was requited and denied, marriages were created, fights ensued, drinkers crashed, injuries of every sort, hospital trips too numerous to recall, some to sustain life, and distressingly, three deaths.&quot; Drake University in Des Moines, Iowa was later announced as the new headquarters.

==Funding==
Vote Smart says that it does not accept contributions from corporations, labor unions, political parties, or other organizations that lobby, support or oppose candidates or issues. Donors to the organization have included the Ford Foundation, the Carnegie Corporation of New York, and the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation.

Individual contributors are considered members, and are given the opportunity to visit their headquarters where they work as research volunteers alongside interns and staff.

== Political Courage Test ==

The Political Courage Test (formerly the National Political Awareness Test, NPAT) is an American initiative intended to increase transparency in American politics.

It is part of the voter education organization Vote Smart&#x27;s candidate information program. With a view towards elections, the test seeks to obtain answers from election candidates, describing their respective stances on a variety of popular issues in American politics. This information is then made available to voters in a selection-driven, standardized format.

In 2008, Project Vote Smart kicked John McCain off of the organization&#x27;s board due to his refusal to fill out the Political Courage Test.

The response to the Political Courage Test has dropped, from 72% in 1996 to 48% in 2008 and even further to 20% by 2016, because politicians from both parties are afraid that challengers will use their responses out of context in attack ads, according to &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;. Rep. Anne Gannon, Democratic leader pro tempore of the Florida House of Representatives, stated: &quot;We tell our candidates not to do it. It sets them up for a hit piece.&quot; In response, Vote Smart has tried to shame politicians into it, and lets them leave up to 30% of answers blank.

==VoteEasy==

VoteEasy is &quot;the interactive tool that enables voters to compare their position on various issues with that of a candidate.&quot; It was introduced by Vote Smart during the 2010 election season.

Following its launch, VoteEasy was a topic of interest among several national news organizations including CBS News, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, and the &quot;Christian Science Monitor&quot;.

==See also==
*On the Issues

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7249368" start="0" end="10" title="Vote Smart" label="Vote Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249368" start="28" end="46" title="Vote Smart" label="Project Vote Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="63" end="73" title="non-profit" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049542" start="75" end="87" title="non-partisan" label="non-partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027774" start="359" end="376" title="Campaign finance in the United States" label="campaign finances"/>
<link wikidata="Q431603" start="378" end="392" title="interest group" label="interest group"/>
<link wikidata="Q348308" start="492" end="514" title="toll-free phone number" label="toll-free phone number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327072" start="587" end="602" title="Richard Kimball" label="Richard Kimball"/>
<link wikidata="Q596496" start="837" end="852" title="absentee ballot" label="absentee ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="990" end="1007" title="political parties" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327072" start="1055" end="1070" title="Richard Kimball" label="Richard Kimball"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="1324" end="1336" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="1345" end="1356" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="1391" end="1406" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="1436" end="1451" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894476" start="1456" end="1472" title="William Proxmire" label="William Proxmire"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="1537" end="1560" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q967012" start="1675" end="1695" title="Philipsburg, Montana" label="Philipsburg, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="1739" end="1760" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063259" start="1942" end="1959" title="Charity Navigator" label="Charity Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="2418" end="2447" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="2456" end="2489" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305629" start="3442" end="3458" title="Drake University" label="Drake University"/>
<link wikidata="Q39709" start="3462" end="3478" title="Des Moines, Iowa" label="Des Moines, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="3596" end="3608" title="corporations" label="corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="3610" end="3622" title="labor unions" label="labor unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="3624" end="3641" title="political parties" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313036" start="3763" end="3778" title="Ford Foundation" label="Ford Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660410" start="3784" end="3816" title="Carnegie Corporation of New York" label="Carnegie Corporation of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256434" start="3826" end="3864" title="John S. and James L. Knight Foundation" label="John S. and James L. Knight Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q330963" start="4217" end="4234" title="Politics of the United States" label="American politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="4642" end="4653" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="5012" end="5035" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q909020" start="5098" end="5130" title="Florida House of Representatives" label="Florida House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="5657" end="5665" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5673" end="5691" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q284947" start="5713" end="5738" title="Christian Science Monitor" label="Christian Science Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091389" start="5761" end="5774" title="On the Issues" label="On the Issues"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795043" wikidata="Q237809" url="?curid=795043" title="JoBeth Williams">
<text>Margaret JoBeth Williams (born December 6, 1948) is an American actress. She rose to prominence appearing in such films as &quot;Kramer vs. Kramer&quot; (1979), &quot;Stir Crazy&quot; (1980), &quot;Poltergeist&quot; (1982), &quot;The Big Chill&quot; (1983), &quot;The Day After&quot; (1983), &quot;Teachers&quot; (1984), and &quot;Poltergeist II: The Other Side&quot; (1986). A three-time Emmy Award nominee, she was nominated for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie for her work in the TV movie &quot;Adam&quot; (1983) and the TV miniseries &quot;Baby M&quot; (1988). Her third nomination was for her guest role in the sitcom &quot;Frasier&quot; (1994). She also starred in the TV series &quot;The Client&quot; (1995–96) and had recurring roles in the TV series &quot;Dexter&quot; (2007) and &quot;Private Practice&quot; (2009–11).

Her directorial debut with the 1994 short film &quot;On Hope&quot; earned her an Academy Award nomination for Best Live Action Short Film. In 2009, she began serving as president of the Screen Actors Guild Foundation; she is President Emeritus of the foundation.

==Early life==
Williams was born in Houston, to Frances Faye (née Adams), a dietitian, and Fredric Roger Williams, an opera singer and manager of a wire and cable company. Williams grew up in the South Park neighborhood of Houston, and attended Jones High School, from which she graduated in 1966.

==Career==

===Early career===
Williams&#x27;s first television role was on the Boston-produced first-run syndicated children&#x27;s television series &quot;Jabberwocky&quot;, which debuted in 1972. Her character was named JoBeth. She joined the &quot;Jabberwocky&quot; cast in season two, replacing the original hostess, Joanne Sopko. The series ran until 1978. She was a regular on two soap operas, playing Carrie Wheeler on &quot;Somerset&quot; and Brandy Shelloe on &quot;Guiding Light&quot;. Williams&#x27;s feature-film debut came in 1979&#x27;s &quot;Kramer vs. Kramer&quot; as a girlfriend of Dustin Hoffman&#x27;s character, memorably quizzed by his son after being discovered walking nude to the bathroom.

===Motion pictures===
Williams is perhaps most recognized for her roles in &quot;Stir Crazy&quot; (1980), with Gene Wilder and Richard Pryor, &quot;The Dogs of War&quot; (1980) with Christopher Walken and Tom Berenger, and &quot;Poltergeist&quot; (1982), as suburban housewife Diane Freeling, a character she reprised in a sequel, &quot;Poltergeist II: The Other Side&quot;, 1986). A year later, she was part of the ensemble comedy-drama &quot;The Big Chill&quot; (1983). Her starring role in the film &quot;American Dreamer&quot; (1984), opposite Tom Conti, earned her the 1985 Best Actress Award from the Kansas City Film Critics Circle. High-profile co-starring roles in &quot;Teachers&quot; (1984) with Nick Nolte, &quot;Desert Bloom&quot; (1986) with Jon Voight, &quot;Memories of Me&quot; with Billy Crystal (1988), and Blake Edwards&#x27;s &quot;Switch&quot; (1991) with Ellen Barkin followed.

She is also known for starring opposite Kris Kristofferson in Oscar-winning director Franklin J. Schaffner&#x27;s final film, the Vietnam POW drama &quot;Welcome Home&quot; (1989). In 1992, she re-teamed with &quot;The Big Chill&quot; director Lawrence Kasdan to portray Bessie Earp in &quot;Wyatt Earp&quot; with Kevin Costner, and starred as Crazy Diane/Sane Diane, a schizophrenic shut-in, in the dark independent comedy, &quot;Me Myself &amp; I&quot;.

She also co-starred with Ed O&#x27;Neill in the John Hughes-written comedy &quot;Dutch&quot; (1991), and starred in &quot;Stop! Or My Mom Will Shoot&quot; (1992) as the police detective/love interest of Sylvester Stallone&#x27;s character. In 1995, she was nominated for an Academy Award for her 1994 live-action short &quot;On Hope,&quot; starring Annette O&#x27;Toole; the film was Williams&#x27;s directorial debut. In 1997, she played a domineering lesbian in the independent comedy &quot;Little City&quot; with Jon Bon Jovi, and an hysterical publishing editor in &quot;Just Write&quot; with Jeremy Piven. In 2005, she appeared in the Drew Barrymore-Jimmy Fallon baseball comedy &quot;Fever Pitch&quot;.

In 2011, she appeared with Steve Martin, Owen Wilson, Rashida Jones, and Jack Black in the bird-watching comedy &quot;The Big Year&quot; for Twentieth Century Fox.

===Television work===
Williams has also gained critical acclaim for a number of performances in notable television movies, including the nuclear holocaust film &quot;The Day After&quot; (1983), &quot;Murder Ordained&quot; (1987), as Lois Burnham Wilson in &quot;My Name is Bill W.&quot; (1989), and the critically acclaimed &quot;Masterpiece Theatre&quot; presentation of &quot;The Ponder Heart&quot; (2003) for director Martha Coolidge.

She earned Emmy nominations for starring as real-life characters Revé Walsh (the wife of John Walsh) in the film &quot;Adam&quot; (1983) and Mary Beth Whitehead in &quot;Baby M&quot; (1988). In 1993, she anchored the improvised Showtime dramedy &quot;Chantilly Lace&quot; with Helen Slater and Martha Plimpton.

She also had an Emmy-nominated guest-starring role on &quot;Frasier&quot; and played Reggie Love in the 1995–1996 CBS series &quot;The Client&quot; (adapted from the 1994 film of the same title), which lasted only 21 episodes, but gained a wider audience when it was rebroadcast in reruns on the TNT Network.

Williams appeared on a 2006 episode of &quot;24&quot; as Christopher Henderson (Peter Weller)&#x27;s wife, Miriam, who literally takes a (nonfatal) bullet for her husband.

She appeared in one episode of the 1998 TV miniseries &quot;From the Earth to the Moon&quot; as Marge Slayton, the wife of Deke Slayton. The episode is part 11 of the series and titled &quot;The Original Wives Club&quot;.

In 1999, Williams teamed with John Larroquette and Julie Benz for the CBS network situation comedy &quot;Payne&quot;. The show, which was the American television version of the hit British comedy &quot;Fawlty Towers&quot;, lasted just 10 episodes.

In 2007, she joined &quot;Dexter&quot; for a four-episode arc as the serial killer&#x27;s future mother-in-law, whose daughter was also played by Benz. Also, she appeared in a memorable 2009 &quot;Criminal Minds&quot; listed as Special Guest Star in the episode &quot;Empty Planet&quot; as Professor Ursula Kent, who helps the BAU with a bomb threat in Seattle.

She has played the recurring role of Bizzy Forbes-Montgomery, mother of Kate Walsh&#x27;s Addison, on ABC&#x27;s &quot;Private Practice&quot; since 2009.

In 2014, she appeared in the CBS science-fiction drama &quot;Extant&quot;, as Leigh Kern (season one, episode seven).

==Personal life==
She is married to TV and film director John Pasquin, with whom she worked on &quot;Jungle 2 Jungle&quot;; they have two sons: Will and Nick; and she has a step-daughter, Sarah, from Pasquin&#x27;s previous marriage.

== Filmography ==

===Film===
===Television===
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q237809" start="0" end="24" title="JoBeth Williams" label="Margaret JoBeth Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q193577" start="129" end="146" title="Kramer vs. Kramer" label="Kramer vs. Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q232251" start="167" end="177" title="Stir Crazy (film)" label="Stir Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q497622" start="198" end="209" title="Poltergeist (1982 film)" label="Poltergeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198794" start="230" end="243" title="The Big Chill (film)" label="The Big Chill"/>
<link wikidata="Q738462" start="264" end="277" title="The Day After" label="The Day After"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211139" start="298" end="306" title="Teachers (film)" label="Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="331" end="361" title="Poltergeist II: The Other Side" label="Poltergeist II: The Other Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="389" end="399" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q989447" start="431" end="482" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie" label="Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604969" start="518" end="522" title="Adam (1983 film)" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q444468" start="564" end="570" title="Baby M" label="Baby M"/>
<link wikidata="Q209282" start="649" end="656" title="Frasier" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793477" start="711" end="721" title="The Client (TV series)" label="The Client"/>
<link wikidata="Q23577" start="785" end="791" title="Dexter (TV series)" label="Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q283393" start="815" end="831" title="Private Practice (TV series)" label="Private Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="931" end="944" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324407" start="960" end="987" title="Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film" label="Best Live Action Short Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388562" start="1036" end="1066" title="SAG Foundation" label="Screen Actors Guild Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568142" start="1310" end="1320" title="South Park, Houston" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186379" start="1359" end="1376" title="Jones High School (Houston)" label="Jones High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6110055" start="1570" end="1581" title="Jabberwocky (TV series)" label="Jabberwocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031083" start="1846" end="1854" title="Somerset (TV series)" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145764" start="1889" end="1902" title="Guiding Light" label="Guiding Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q193577" start="1971" end="1988" title="Kramer vs. Kramer" label="Kramer vs. Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42930" start="2014" end="2028" title="Dustin Hoffman" label="Dustin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q232251" start="2211" end="2221" title="Stir Crazy (film)" label="Stir Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213524" start="2278" end="2293" title="The Dogs of War (film)" label="The Dogs of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q497622" start="2359" end="2370" title="Poltergeist (1982 film)" label="Poltergeist"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2467" end="2497" title="Poltergeist II: The Other Side" label="Poltergeist II: The Other Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198794" start="2574" end="2587" title="The Big Chill (film)" label="The Big Chill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549293" start="2638" end="2654" title="American Dreamer (1984 film)" label="American Dreamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q241962" start="2678" end="2687" title="Tom Conti" label="Tom Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211139" start="2810" end="2818" title="Teachers (film)" label="Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188018" start="2837" end="2847" title="Nick Nolte" label="Nick Nolte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263889" start="2855" end="2867" title="Desert Bloom (film)" label="Desert Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q167520" start="2886" end="2896" title="Jon Voight" label="Jon Voight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920111" start="2904" end="2918" title="Memories of Me" label="Memories of Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="2930" end="2943" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q56093" start="2956" end="2969" title="Blake Edwards" label="Blake Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q996159" start="2983" end="2989" title="Switch (1991 film)" label="Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q229234" start="3008" end="3020" title="Ellen Barkin" label="Ellen Barkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208681" start="3072" end="3090" title="Kris Kristofferson" label="Kris Kristofferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="3094" end="3099" title="Academy Award" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51503" start="3117" end="3138" title="Franklin J. Schaffner" label="Franklin J. Schaffner"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="3170" end="3173" title="POW" label="POW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567134" start="3186" end="3198" title="Welcome Home (1989 film)" label="Welcome Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q240872" start="3276" end="3291" title="Lawrence Kasdan" label="Lawrence Kasdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355172" start="3324" end="3334" title="Wyatt Earp (film)" label="Wyatt Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11930" start="3346" end="3359" title="Kevin Costner" label="Kevin Costner"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="3402" end="3415" title="schizophrenic" label="schizophrenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802884" start="3463" end="3480" title="Me Myself &amp;amp; I (film)" label="Me Myself &amp;amp; I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16758" start="3514" end="3529" title="Ed O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Ed O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q311263" start="3537" end="3548" title="John Hughes (filmmaker)" label="John Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q784704" start="3570" end="3575" title="Dutch (1991 film)" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q254555" start="3611" end="3637" title="Stop! Or My Mom Will Shoot" label="Stop! Or My Mom Will Shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="3692" end="3710" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q231135" start="3838" end="3858" title="Annette O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Annette O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649585" start="3982" end="3993" title="Little City" label="Little City"/>
<link wikidata="Q150916" start="4005" end="4017" title="Jon Bon Jovi" label="Jon Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730956" start="4064" end="4074" title="Just Write" label="Just Write"/>
<link wikidata="Q315083" start="4086" end="4098" title="Jeremy Piven" label="Jeremy Piven"/>
<link wikidata="Q676094" start="4129" end="4143" title="Drew Barrymore" label="Drew Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q335680" start="4144" end="4156" title="Jimmy Fallon" label="Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q574875" start="4179" end="4190" title="Fever Pitch" label="Fever Pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="4226" end="4238" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161916" start="4240" end="4251" title="Owen Wilson" label="Owen Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q540608" start="4253" end="4266" title="Rashida Jones" label="Rashida Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q483907" start="4272" end="4282" title="Jack Black" label="Jack Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304692" start="4317" end="4329" title="The Big Year" label="The Big Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="4468" end="4485" title="television movies" label="television movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q620562" start="4501" end="4518" title="nuclear holocaust" label="nuclear holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q738462" start="4530" end="4543" title="The Day After" label="The Day After"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126356" start="4564" end="4579" title="Murder Ordained" label="Murder Ordained"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258680" start="4597" end="4616" title="Lois Wilson (activist)" label="Lois Burnham Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290685" start="4626" end="4644" title="My Name is Bill W." label="My Name is Bill W."/>
<link wikidata="Q3297878" start="4694" end="4713" title="Masterpiece Theatre" label="Masterpiece Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q270092" start="4785" end="4800" title="Martha Coolidge" label="Martha Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262859" start="4892" end="4902" title="John Walsh (television host)" label="John Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604969" start="4922" end="4926" title="Adam (1983 film)" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q444468" start="4973" end="4979" title="Baby M" label="Baby M"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="5031" end="5039" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072675" start="5054" end="5068" title="Chantilly Lace (film)" label="Chantilly Lace"/>
<link wikidata="Q241879" start="5080" end="5092" title="Helen Slater" label="Helen Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q267383" start="5097" end="5112" title="Martha Plimpton" label="Martha Plimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q209282" start="5175" end="5182" title="Frasier" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="5229" end="5232" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793477" start="5246" end="5256" title="The Client (TV series)" label="The Client"/>
<link wikidata="Q255376" start="5281" end="5308" title="The Client (1994 film)" label="1994 film of the same title"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="5411" end="5422" title="TNT (American TV network)" label="TNT Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q56194" start="5470" end="5472" title="24 (TV series)" label="24"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891256" start="5482" end="5503" title="Christopher Henderson (character)" label="Christopher Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q360477" start="5505" end="5517" title="Peter Weller" label="Peter Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="5658" end="5684" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From the Earth to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="5721" end="5733" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q471003" start="5851" end="5867" title="John Larroquette" label="John Larroquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q230320" start="5872" end="5882" title="Julie Benz" label="Julie Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="5891" end="5902" title="CBS network" label="CBS network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898407" start="5926" end="5931" title="Payne (TV series)" label="Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q212731" start="6023" end="6036" title="Fawlty Towers" label="Fawlty Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q202141" start="6267" end="6281" title="Criminal Minds" label="Criminal Minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q229979" start="6505" end="6515" title="Kate Walsh (actress)" label="Kate Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="6535" end="6538" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q283393" start="6552" end="6568" title="Private Practice (TV series)" label="Private Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072814" start="6649" end="6655" title="Extant (TV series)" label="Extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q328483" start="6764" end="6776" title="John Pasquin" label="John Pasquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q777632" start="6808" end="6823" title="Jungle 2 Jungle" label="Jungle 2 Jungle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795047" wikidata="Q5505770" url="?curid=795047" title="Front-runner">
<text>In politics, a front-runner (also spelled frontrunner or front runner) is a leader in an electoral race. While the front-runner in athletic events (the namesake of the political concept) is generally clear, a political front-runner, particularly in the presidential primary process, is less so as a potential nominee may lead in the polls, have the most name recognition, the most funds raised, or a combination of these. The front-runner is most often declared by the media who are following the race and is written about in a different style than his or her challengers.

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;front-runner&quot; originated in the United States. The term emerged from foot racing. It was used by 1914. According to &quot;Merriam-Webster&quot; the term meant &quot;a contestant who runs best when in the lead&quot; by that time. However the &quot;Dictionary of American Slang&quot; says it meant &quot;the leader in a contest, election, etc.&quot; by that year.

The adjective &quot;front-running&quot; was used by 1940. It also originated from racing. The meaning of the word was analogous to its nounal counterpart at that time. The term was used as a noun by 1970 in the United States to mean &quot;support given to a person or team only when they are doing well.&quot; By the 1980s a new definition for &quot;front-running&quot; emerged from the commodities market in which the word was also used as a noun. The definition was used to describe &quot;a type of fraud in which a trader withholds a large customer order so that he can personally profit from its effect on the market.&quot;

The intransitive verb &quot;front-run&quot; emerged by 1950. It originated from a back formation of &quot;front-runner&quot;. By that year it had a meaning that was analogous to its nounal counterpart.

The related word &quot;frontrunneritis&quot; was used by 1995. It is a combination of &quot;frontrunner&quot; and &quot;–itis&quot;, a suffix frequently used informally to describe a tendency or mood that is comparable to a disease. The term was used by that time to describe &quot;the condition of being a leading candidate.&quot; In particular it was used to characterize &quot;a tendency to coast or to be under increased scrutiny by the press.&quot;

== Performance ==
American author, columnist, journalist and presidential speechwriter William Safire describes the front-runner as being able to leave &quot;the starting gate well&quot; and set the pace for the other contestants. He uses the racing term &quot;shows early foot&quot; to characterize this tendency. Safire says occasionally the front-runner&#x27;s lead becomes &quot;insurmountable.&quot; He cites Barry Goldwater&#x27;s successful 1964 Republican presidential nomination and Jimmy Carter&#x27;s success in several convention states and early primaries in his 1976 presidential campaign as examples.

However Safire says the modern usage of the word &quot;front-runner&quot; has &quot;ominous overtones&quot; of being likely to eventually lose. As an example he references Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s receiving a letter from Robert W. Woolley about Roosevelt&#x27;s front-runner status early in his 1932 presidential campaign: &quot;Herein lies the danger ... automatically you become the target of the other candidates, real and potential. There isn&#x27;t a single favorite son whose delegation won&#x27;t be held out of the Roosevelt column so long as there is a reasonable chance of getting something for that favorite son, even at your expense.&quot; Safire gives another example when he quotes Ted Sorensen&#x27;s thoughts about John F. Kennedy&#x27;s front-runner status during his 1960 presidential campaign: &quot;There were disadvantages in being the &#x27;front runner.&#x27; The Senator&#x27;s critics became more open and vocal and his every word was politically interpreted.&quot;

The outcome of the second round of primaries is critical to a front-runner&#x27;s success. Safire argues that the front-runner &quot;must come thundering into the convention increasing his speed and with enough &#x27;kick&#x27; left for a final spurt&quot; to be successful. He quotes Thomas E. Dewey writing about his losing the 1940 Republican presidential nomination as an example: &quot;When the balloting starts, every candidate wants to show enough strength to be one of the leaders on the first ballot. He also wants to have enough strength in reserve so he can gain on the psychologically important second ballot. For example, in 1940, I led on the first three ballots out of six—the wrong three. I lost ground on the second ballot. That was the beginning of the end and everybody knew it.&quot;

Safire states that front-runners often take advantage of the bandwagon effect by emphasizing their &quot;inevitability factor.&quot; He says this is done by suggesting the futility of the front-runner&#x27;s opponents. However Safire notes that a front-runner&#x27;s &quot;inevitability&quot; can be vulnerable to their opponents. Safire cites the example of George W. Bush&#x27;s front-runner status in the 2000 Republican primary being threatened by John McCain&#x27;s victory in the New Hampshire primary. Another example he notes is Gary Hart&#x27;s upset win in the New Hampshire primary, which challenged Walter Mondale&#x27;s front-runner status in the 1984 Democratic primary. Safire quotes Peter Hart, a pollster &quot;who advised&quot; Walter Mondale, commenting on the 1984 race in 2007: &quot;Inevitability is not a message ... there needs to be something to grab on to. Inevitability is not a tune that people can march to.&quot; Safire also cites journalist Adam Gourney&#x27;s thoughts: &quot;[N]othing invites a teardown more than being perceived as the front-runner. Being on top makes you a big target for your opponents and the news media, and sets you up for buyer&#x27;s remorse, a common phenomenon in the nomination process, even before the sale is done.&quot;

Safire says that despite the risks in being the front-runner, candidates prefer it over being a dark horse or a long shot because that position has a higher chance of winning. Front-runners often have a financial advantage over dark horses.

=== Early front-runners ===
David Greenberg, associate professor of History and of Journalism and Media Studies at Rutgers University, states that front-runners decided by early polls often do not win the nomination. Greenberg notes that early polls decided Birch Bayh in the 1976 Democratic primary, Ted Kennedy in the 1980 Democratic primary, Jesse Jackson in the 1988 Democratic primary, Jerry Brown in the 1992 Democratic primary, Howard Dean in the 2004 Democratic primary and Herman Cain in the 2012 Republican primary as front-runners, all of whom lost the nomination.

Greenberg suggests that the futility of most early front-runners reflects early polls&#x27; unreliability and in particular, their respondents&#x27; indifference to the candidates. He notes that indifference is especially justified for electorates whose state primary runs during the later stages of the race. He cites David Karol, a political scientist, who says that &quot;[t]he media don&#x27;t always report the numbers that say &#x27;not sure&#x27; or &#x27;don&#x27;t know enough.&#x27;&quot;

Greenberg states that the rise of early front-runners is partly due to name recognition. He cites the early lead of Donald Trump in the 2016 Republican primary, Joe Lieberman in the 2004 Democratic primary and George W. Bush in the 2000 Republican primary as examples of this. He further states that early front-runners are established in part due to recent media attention, and notes that Jonathan Bernstein, a political scientist and columnist, shares this view. Greenberg cites the early front-runners Donald Trump in the 2016 Republican primary, Gary Hart in the 1984 Democratic primary and Howard Dean in the 2004 Democratic primary as examples of this.

Greenberg acknowledges that some front-runners decided by early polls win the nomination. He states that this often occurs &quot;in races with few competitors.&quot; He notes Al Gore’s early lead in 1999 before winning the 2000 Democratic presidential nomination as an example. Greenberg states that early front-runners can also win if they are an &quot;overwhelming favorite&quot; in the race. He gives Ronald Reagan’s early front-runner status in 1979 before winning the 1980 Republican presidential nomination as an example. Greenberg notes that William Mayer, a political scientist at Northeastern University, discovered that in contested primary races since 1980, of the eight front-runners who polled at 34 percent or higher in the September before the election, six won the nomination, and none of the five front-runners who polled below that percentage won.

=== Debates ===
Primary debate participation may hinder a front-runner&#x27;s chance to be nominated.

Debate analysts and scholars recognize that the front-runner is often attacked more frequently by the other candidates. It is a common strategy of the front-runner&#x27;s opponents, especially for long shot candidates. During the December 2, 1999 Republican primary debate, almost all attacks were directed against the front-runner George W. Bush. Long shot candidates Gary Bauer, Orrin Hatch and Alan Keyes significantly contributed to the mass attack. In a debate featuring the 1988 Democratic primary candidates, long shot candidates &quot;gang[ed] up&quot; on the front-runner. Analysis on a 1992 primary debate showed that the front-runner received the most attacks.

However, excessively attacking the front-runner can hurt one&#x27;s image and support from viewers. In the December 2, 1999 Republican primary debate, all 10 of Steve Forbes&#x27; attacks were made against George W. Bush, contributing to over half of the total attacks that targeted Bush. Steve Forbes experienced a negative effect on his image and lost all support he had from a sample of 91 viewers before the debate. Although reasons other than excessive attacking may have contributed to Forbes&#x27; decline, viewers had &quot;a clear negative reaction to his constant attack of Bush.&quot; John McCain, who made no attacks, had his image improved and his support from the viewers increased. This suggests that a front-runner&#x27;s opponent may be more successful if they &quot;attack in moderation.&quot; It may also suggest that if the opponent is recognized by viewers as a &quot;legitimate contender,&quot; they can benefit from refraining from attacks and &quot;permitting the larger field of [long shot candidates] to do the dirty work of attacking a front-runner.&quot; This would allow the opponent to project &quot;a more positive message&quot; about their ideas.

== See also ==
* Presumptive nominee

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5505770" start="15" end="27" title="Front-runner" label="front-runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505770" start="42" end="53" title="Front-runner" label="frontrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505770" start="57" end="69" title="Front-runner" label="front runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916312" start="253" end="273" title="United States presidential primary" label="presidential primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193236" start="469" end="474" title="News media" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q955199" start="1212" end="1219" title="Bandwagon effect" label="support"/>
<link wikidata="Q601156" start="1466" end="1479" title="Front running" label="type of fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166153" start="1606" end="1623" title="intransitive verb" label="intransitive verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q989162" start="1684" end="1698" title="Back-formation" label="back formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q254983" start="2347" end="2361" title="William Safire" label="William Safire"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="2674" end="2689" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="2752" end="2764" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="3049" end="3070" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350769" start="3102" end="3119" title="Robert W. Woolley" label="Robert W. Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438638" start="3344" end="3356" title="favorite son" label="favorite son"/>
<link wikidata="Q518197" start="3577" end="3589" title="Ted Sorensen" label="Ted Sorensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="3612" end="3627" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29093696" start="3666" end="3692" title="John F. Kennedy 1960 presidential campaign" label="1960 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q320061" start="4158" end="4173" title="Thomas E. Dewey" label="Thomas E. Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914973" start="6059" end="6069" title="dark horse" label="dark horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q15113505" start="7353" end="7369" title="name recognition" label="name recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q160157" start="7443" end="7456" title="Joe Lieberman" label="Joe Lieberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333727" start="7640" end="7655" title="Publicity" label="media attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q381157" start="9293" end="9304" title="Orrin Hatch" label="Orrin Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q740470" start="9309" end="9319" title="Alan Keyes" label="Alan Keyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240907" start="10782" end="10801" title="Presumptive nominee" label="Presumptive nominee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795050" wikidata="Q1349829" url="?curid=795050" title="Affluenza">
<text>Affluenza describes the psychological and social effects of affluence. It is a portmanteau of &quot;affluence&quot; and &quot;influenza&quot;, and is used most commonly by critics of consumerism. Some psychologists consider it to be a pseudo-scientific term, however the word continues to be used in scientific literature.

== History ==

The word is thought to have been first used in 1908, and to have been adopted for its most common current usage in California in 1973. It was also used by John Levy, executive director of the C.G. Jung Institute in San Francisco in 1984 to describe the lack of motivation which could dog wealthy people. It was popularized in 1997 with a PBS documentary of the same name and the subsequent book &quot;&quot; (2001, revised in 2005, 2014). These works define affluenza as &quot;a painful, contagious, socially transmitted condition of overload, debt, anxiety, and waste resulting from the dogged pursuit of more&quot;. A more informal definition of the term would describe it as &quot;a quasi-illness caused by guilt for one&#x27;s own socio-economic superiority&quot;. The term &quot;affluenza&quot; has also been used to refer to an inability to understand the consequences of one&#x27;s actions because of financial privilege.

The term &quot;affluenza&quot; was re-popularized in 2013 with the arrest of Ethan Couch, a wealthy Texas teen, for driving while intoxicated and killing four pedestrians and injuring several others. Testimony from a psychologist in court referred to Couch as having a case of affluenza, sparking a media frenzy and victim family outrage. The psychologist testified during the sentencing phase as a part of mitigation of penalty, not, as was reported, as a defence to the charge at trial.

==Theory==
Clive Hamilton and Richard Denniss&#x27;s 2005 book, &quot;&quot;, poses the question: &quot;If the economy has been doing so well, why are we not becoming happier?&quot; They argue that affluenza causes overconsumption, &quot;luxury fever&quot;, consumer debt, overwork, waste, and harm to the environment. These pressures lead to &quot;psychological disorders, alienation and distress&quot;, causing people to &quot;self-medicate with mood-altering drugs and excessive alcohol consumption&quot;.

They note that a number of Australians have reacted by &quot;downshifting&quot;—they decided to &quot;reduce their incomes and place family, friends and contentment above money in determining their life goals&quot;. Their critique leads them to identify the need for an &quot;alternative political philosophy&quot;, and the book concludes with a &quot;political manifesto for wellbeing&quot;.

In 2007 British pop psychologist Oliver James asserted that there was a correlation between the increasing occurrence of affluenza and the resulting increase in material inequality: the more unequal a society, the greater the unhappiness of its citizens. Referring to Vance Packard&#x27;s thesis &quot;The Hidden Persuaders&quot; on the manipulative methods used by the advertising industry, James related the stimulation of artificial needs to the rise in affluenza. To highlight the spread of affluenza in societies with varied levels of inequality, James interviewed people in several cities including Sydney, Singapore, Auckland, Moscow, Shanghai, Copenhagen and New York.

In 2008 James wrote that higher rates of mental disorders were the consequence of excessive wealth-seeking in consumerist nations. In a graph created from multiple data sources, James plotted &quot;Prevalence of any emotional distress&quot; and &quot;Income inequality&quot;, attempting to show that English-speaking nations have nearly twice as much emotional distress as mainland Europe and Japan: 21.6 percent vs 11.5 percent. James defined affluenza as &quot;placing a high value on money, possessions, appearances (physical and social) and fame&quot;, which was the rationale behind the increasing mental illness in English-speaking societies. He explained the greater incidence of affluenza as the result of &#x27;selfish capitalism&#x27;, the market liberal political governance found in English-speaking nations as compared to the less selfish capitalism pursued in mainland Europe. James asserted that societies can remove the negative consumerist effects by pursuing real needs over perceived wants, and by defining themselves as having value independent of their material possessions.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 


==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;The Circle of Simplicity&quot;, Cecile Andrews, 
* &quot;The Golden Ghetto: The Psychology of Affluence&quot;, Jessie H. O&#x27;Neill, 
* &quot;Voluntary Simplicity&quot;, Duane Elgin, 
* &quot;How Much Is Too Much? Raising Likeable, Responsible, Respectful Children-From Toddler to Teens-In an Age of Overindulgence&quot;, Clarke, Jean Illsley, Bredehoft, David &amp; Dawson, Connie, 

==External links==
* Macquarie Dictionary Word of the Year Winners: Affluenza
* The Affluenza Project
* Affluenza issues in the USA
* Affluenza video </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1349829" start="0" end="9" title="Affluenza" label="Affluenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="79" end="90" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q200535" start="100" end="109" title="wealth" label="affluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="126" end="135" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="183" end="194" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="677" end="680" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="827" end="837" title="infectious disease" label="contagious"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="883" end="887" title="debt" label="debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="889" end="896" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q45701" start="902" end="907" title="waste" label="waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199966" start="1346" end="1357" title="Ethan Couch" label="Ethan Couch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101957" start="1770" end="1784" title="Clive Hamilton" label="Clive Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325173" start="1789" end="1804" title="Richard Denniss" label="Richard Denniss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174091" start="1974" end="1989" title="overconsumption" label="overconsumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308159" start="2017" end="2030" title="consumer debt" label="consumer debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402319" start="2330" end="2342" title="Downshifting (lifestyle)" label="downshifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087627" start="2696" end="2708" title="Oliver James (psychologist)" label="Oliver James"/>
<link wikidata="Q559972" start="2931" end="2944" title="Vance Packard" label="Vance Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q905726" start="3000" end="3012" title="psychological manipulation" label="manipulative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="3268" end="3274" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="3276" end="3285" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="3287" end="3295" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="3297" end="3303" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="3305" end="3313" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="3315" end="3325" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3330" end="3338" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="3451" end="3462" title="Consumerism" label="consumerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="4091" end="4097" title="Market (economics)" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="4193" end="4203" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231705" start="4853" end="4869" title="David Bredehoft" label="Bredehoft, David"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795051" wikidata="Q505468" url="?curid=795051" title="Müllheim">
<text>Müllheim (High Alemannic: &quot;Mille&quot;) is a town in Baden-Württemberg in southern Germany. It belongs to the district Breisgau-Hochschwarzwald. Müllheim is generally considered to be the center of the region known as Markgräflerland.

==History==
On October 27, 758 Strachfried gave as a gift to the monastery of St. Gallen his properties in Müllheim, including the vineyards. This deed is in the archives of St. Gallen and it is where we today can find the first written reference to the &quot;villa Mulinhaimo&quot;, which is the current city of Müllheim.

Archeology shows however that Müllheim was inhabited even earlier than this. During the renovation of the Martin&#x27;s church in 1980 and 1981 the workers came upon a portion of a Roman villa. It is assumed that it is the center of large Roman possessions in the region.

==Population==
Inhabitants: 17,630 (February 2002) as follows -
12,030 Central Müllheim
1351 Hügelheim;
1235 Niederweiler;
991 Britzingen;
812 Vögisheim;
636 Feldberg;
362 Dattingen;
215 Zunzingen.

==Geography==
Müllheim is located in the center of Markgräflerland, in between the &quot;Bath triangle&quot; of Badenweiler, Bad Krozingen and Bad Bellingen. The city lies between the Rhine valley and the Black Forest with hills devoted largely to vineyards.

Müllheim is bordered by Auggen (to the south), Vögisheim to the southeast, and Hügelheim to the north. The main artery is the B3 which runs a north-south route along Müllheim&#x27;s western side. It lies between Freiburg in the north and Basel, Switzerland to the south on this route.

==Economy==
Local jobs roughly. 8,000 of which about 3,000 are industrial, mainly work with glass, and metal.

Commuting:
*Incoming: about 4,000
*Outgoing: about 3,000

==Education==

===General schools===
*Michael-Friedrich-Wild-Grundschule
*Rosenburg Grundschule
*Grundschule Britzingen
*Adolf-Blankenhorn-Hauptschule
*Albert-Julius-Sievert-Förder- u. Sprachheilschule Heilpädagogisches Förderzentrum
*Alemannen-Realschule
*Markgräfler Gymnasium
*Freie Waldorfschule

===Professional schools===
*Georg-Kerschensteiner-Schule Gewerbliche Schulen
*House (Home economics) and agricultural Schools
*Commercial Schools

===Miscellaneous schools===
*Forum Jugend-Beruf
*Grundschulförderklasse
*Sprachheilkindergarten

==Transport==
Müllheim (Baden) station is on the Rhine Valley Railway, which is serviced by Deutsche Bahn.

*From Müllheim schedule 
*To Müllheim schedule 

==International relations==
===Twin towns and cities===
Müllheim is twinned with:
* Gray, France
* Vevey, Switzerland

==People==

* Ernst Krieck (1882–1947), teacher, writer and professor, influential on pedagogy in national socialism
* Joscha Kiefer (born 1982), actor
* Lada Pusch (born 2008), rhythmic gymnast

==References==
==External links==

*Official Web site 
*History and many images </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q505468" start="0" end="8" title="Müllheim" label="Müllheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q503728" start="10" end="24" title="High Alemannic German" label="High Alemannic"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="58" end="75" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="88" end="95" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8195" start="124" end="148" title="Breisgau-Hochschwarzwald" label="Breisgau-Hochschwarzwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q566224" start="223" end="238" title="Markgräflerland" label="Markgräflerland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="272" end="283" title="Strachfried" label="Strachfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q25607" start="319" end="329" title="St. Gallen" label="St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="746" end="757" title="Roman villa" label="Roman villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25430" start="1149" end="1160" title="Badenweiler" label="Badenweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="1285" end="1294" title="vineyards" label="vineyards"/>
<link wikidata="Q268734" start="1321" end="1327" title="Auggen" label="Auggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34444" start="1423" end="1425" title="Bundesstraße 3" label="B3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="1509" end="1517" title="Freiburg" label="Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="1535" end="1540" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1542" end="1553" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097154" start="2311" end="2335" title="Müllheim (Baden) station" label="Müllheim (Baden) station"/>
<link wikidata="Q564867" start="2346" end="2366" title="Rhine Valley Railway" label="Rhine Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9322" start="2389" end="2402" title="Deutsche Bahn" label="Deutsche Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="2522" end="2529" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q265332" start="2538" end="2542" title="Gray (Haute-Saône)" label="Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2544" end="2550" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q68160" start="2553" end="2558" title="Vevey" label="Vevey"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="2560" end="2571" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q69169" start="2587" end="2599" title="Ernst Krieck" label="Ernst Krieck"/>
<link wikidata="Q118252" start="2692" end="2705" title="Joscha Kiefer" label="Joscha Kiefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q120520632" start="2727" end="2737" title="Lada Pusch" label="Lada Pusch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795056" wikidata="Q451154" url="?curid=795056" title="Étienne Aymonier">
<text>Étienne François Aymonier (26 February 1844 – 21 January 1929) was a French linguist and explorer. He was the first archaeologist to the ruins of the Khmer empire in today&#x27;s Cambodia, Thailand, Laos and southern Vietnam. His principal work was &quot;Le Cambodge&quot;, published in three volumes from 1900 to 1904.

He was born in Le Châtelard, Savoie, France.

He served as acting French representative for the French protectorate of Cambodia from 6 January 1879 to 10 May 1881 and was the first director of the École Coloniale. He assembled a large collection of Khmer sculpture, which was later housed in the Guimet Museum in Paris. He also wrote books on the Cham language.

He died on 21 January 1929 at the age of 84.

==Legacy==
The species &quot;Gyrinocheilus aymonieri&quot; (Siamese algae eater) commemorates his name.

== Works ==
* 

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q451154" start="0" end="25" title="Étienne Aymonier" label="Étienne François Aymonier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="76" end="84" title="linguistics" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="116" end="129" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="150" end="162" title="Khmer empire" label="Khmer empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="179" end="187" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="189" end="197" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="199" end="203" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289221" start="208" end="224" title="southern Vietnam" label="southern Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q819553" start="336" end="348" title="Le Châtelard, Savoie" label="Le Châtelard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12745" start="350" end="356" title="Savoie" label="Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="417" end="448" title="Colonial Cambodia" label="French protectorate of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q273557" start="518" end="533" title="École nationale de la France d&amp;#x27;Outre-Mer" label="École Coloniale"/>
<link wikidata="Q860994" start="617" end="630" title="Guimet Museum" label="Guimet Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q241146" start="668" end="681" title="Cham language" label="Cham language"/>
<link wikidata="Q632110" start="759" end="782" title="Gyrinocheilus aymonieri" label="Gyrinocheilus aymonieri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795058" wikidata="Q618716" url="?curid=795058" title="Aplite">
<text>Aplite () is an intrusive igneous rock that has a granitic composition. Aplites are fine-grained to aphanitic (without grains visible to the naked eye) and may consist of only quartz and feldspar or the term may refer to any leucocratic (pale-coloured) minor intrusion of that grain size. They are associated with the later stages of many larger intermediate to felsic intrusions.

==Occurrence==
Aplites have a global distribution and have been described from most areas where there are significant granitic intrusions. They occur in the form of intrusive sheets, both within the associated granitic bodies and in the surrounding country rock. Trace element analysis shows that there are no volcanic equivalents to aplites.

Some aplites form in close association with pegmatites, which are otherwise uncommon in granites. These aplite-pegmatite sheet complexes may show fine-scale banding with alternations of aplite and pegmatite.

Syenite-aplites consist mainly of alkali feldspar; the diorite-aplites of plagioclase; there are nepheline-bearing aplites, including those containing the elaeolite variety of nepheline. In all cases, they bear the same relation to the parent masses.

==Formation==
Aplites are intruded at a late stage in the history of the associated intrusion when crystallisation is at an advanced stage. In this state, the parent intrusion is mechanically coherent enough to support tensile stresses, leading to fractures. These fractures may then be filled by the remaining uncrystallised parts of the original magma (the residual fluids) to form the aplites. There may be repeated phases of intrusion, solidification, fracturing and aplite dyke intrusion. This has been observed in the Half Dome granodiorite in Yosemite National Park, California, with multiple stages of aplite intrusion recognised, with the earlier aplite sheets becoming deformed by later intrusions into the main granodiorite body, but recognisable from their consistent chemistry.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q618716" start="0" end="6" title="Aplite" label="Aplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q354025" start="16" end="25" title="intrusive rock" label="intrusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="26" end="38" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="50" end="58" title="granite" label="granitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q618416" start="100" end="109" title="Aphanite" label="aphanitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666229" start="346" end="358" title="Intermediate composition" label="intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q847257" start="362" end="368" title="felsic" label="felsic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177532" start="631" end="643" title="Country rock (geology)" label="country rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q105630" start="770" end="779" title="pegmatite" label="pegmatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q329118" start="935" end="942" title="Syenite" label="Syenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q714830" start="1009" end="1020" title="plagioclase" label="plagioclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q407339" start="1032" end="1041" title="nepheline" label="nepheline"/>
<link wikidata="Q206175" start="1406" end="1420" title="tensile stress" label="tensile stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q215690" start="1721" end="1733" title="granodiorite" label="granodiorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="1737" end="1759" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite National Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795059" wikidata="Q771159" url="?curid=795059" title="1824 Constitution of Mexico">
<text>The Federal Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1824 () was the first constitution of Mexico, enacted on October 4 of 1824, inaugurating the First Mexican Republic.

== Background ==
During the Mexican War of Independence, the liberal dominated Spanish Cortes of Cádiz had included representatives from the colonies, and taken into account many of the colonial grievances which were leading to independence. The consequent liberal Constitution of 1812, was promulgated during the insurgency led by José María Morelos. It established a system of &#x27;provincial deputations&#x27; which granted more autonomy to local governments in the colonies while also providing for freedom of speech. The newly liberated Mexican press however simply inflamed anti-Spanish sentiment, Morelos&#x27; rebellion continued, and on the pretext of necessity for subduing the rebels, the constitution was suspended in New Spain the same year it was proclaimed, making Mexican liberals lose hope of attaining reform within the colonial system, while not forgetting the local provincial autonomy that they had temporarily been granted.

Mexico finally gained its independence under the Plan of Iguala promulgated by Agustín de Iturbide, which planned for Mexico to be ruled by a member of the Spanish Bourbons, in either a personal union or with a member of the royal family travelling to Mexico to establish a new throne. The Spanish government refused the offer and a popular demonstration led to Iturbide himself assuming the throne. The ill-fated Empire which lasted less than a year, never managed to produce a constitution, and the failure to do so was one of the accusations Iturbide levelled at congress when he controversially dissolved it. The lack of clearly defined powers for congress and the emperor also contributed to the clashes which ultimately produced a successful rebellion against Emperor Iturbide in early 1823. The Empire was abolished and congress established the Supreme Executive Power to serve as a provisional government.

== Supreme Executive Power ==
On the May 21, 1823, elections were announced for a new congress whose term was scheduled to begin on October 31. Rules for the new election were published on June 17. 
Congressional seats were allocated on a basis of one representative per 50,000 inhabitants, elected by manhood suffrage available to any man over the age of 18, and using the three-tiered system established by the Constitution of 1812, by which voters in each parish chose electors, who then met at the district level and chose electors for the province level, whom in turn finally voted for representatives to be sent to Congress.

The new congress elected in late October was mainly federalist in composition. It first met on November 7, 1823, and soon divided itself into two main factions: the federalists, whose most prominent voice was Miguel Ramos Arizpe, and the centralists, whose most prominent voice was Servando Teresa de Mier. Through the minister of justice, the executive announced to the congress on November 14, that they must now set to work on answering the popular call to establish the government most suited for the nation. A constitutional committee headed by Arizpe, was commissioned with writing a constitutional draft, and on November 22, 1823, delivered the (), with the fifth article declaring that Mexico adopts the republican, federal, popular, representative form of government, and debate on the matter began on December 3.

== Drafting a constitution ==

A committee consisting of Miguel Ramos Arizpe, Juan de Dios Cañedo, Miguel Argüelles, Rafael Mangino, Tomás Vargas, José de Jesús Huerta, and Manuel Crescencio Rejón, submitted an &quot;Acta Constitutiva&quot; (draft of a constitution) on 20 November. The group completed the draft of the charter in a few days. This was possible because the document was based on the shared Hispanic political theory and practice that Mexicans, the former novohispanos, knew well, since they had played a significant role in shaping it. In the years since Napoleon had invaded Spain in 1808, the political entities that formed the Mexican nation in 1821 had undergone a series of rapid political changes that politicized the majority of the population and led to a vibrant political discourse. The Directioners Constitution of 1812 and its institutions of government were well known; seven proposals for a Mexican constitution had been debated throughout the country in the previous months. The constituent congress, therefore, was filled with educated men with diverse ideas and extensive political experience at the local, state, national, and international levels. A few, like Ramos Arizpe and Guridi y Alcocer, had served in the Cortes in Spain and had participated in the discussions of the Constitution of 1812. In addition, Ramos Arizpe had been working on a federal constitution for some time. Lorenzo de Zavala was president of the congress that approved the constitution.

== Nature of the constitution ==

The Acta Constitutiva submitted by the committee was modelled on the Hispanic Constitution of 1812. Most of its articles were based on the Peninsular document; a few were adopted verbatim from that charter. For example, on the question of sovereignty the Hispanic Constitution stated: &quot;Sovereignty resides essentially in the nation and, therefore, it [the nation] possesses the exclusive right to adopt the form of government that seems most convenient for its conservation and prosperity&quot;. Article 3 of the Mexican Acta Constitutiva read: &quot;Sovereignty resides radically and essentially in the nation and, therefore, it [the nation] possesses the exclusive right to adopt by means of its representatives the form of government and other fundamental laws that seem most convenient for its conservation and greater prosperity&quot;. Although the deputies relied on their first constitutional experience, the Constitution of 1812, they did not slavishly copy the Hispanic model. Guridi y Alcocer, for example, explained that ever since he had served on the constitutional commission in the Hispanic Cortes he had maintained that sovereignty resided radically in the nation, by which he meant that the nation, as the institutional representative of el Pueblo, could not lose its sovereignty. His principal critics were radical federalists like Juan de Dios Cañedo, deputy from Jalisco, who challenged the need for an article declaring national sovereignty. He asked: that the article be deleted because in a republican federal government each state is sovereign. (...) Therefore, it is impossible to conceive how sovereignty, which is the origin and source of authority and power, can be divided among the many states. [T]hat is why the first constitution of the United States [the Articles of Confederation] (...) does not mention national sovereignty. And, therefore, (...) Article 1 which discusses the nation should not be approved because it is not appropriate in the system we now have.

The Acta, unlike the Hispanic constitution, did not grant exclusive or even preponderant sovereignty to the nation, because the states also claimed sovereignty. Accordingly, Article 6 stated: &quot;Its integral parts are independent, free, and sovereign States in that which exclusively concerns their administration and interior government&quot;. The issue of sovereignty remained at heart a question of the division of power between the national and the state governments. It was an issue that would be debated at length in the months to come.

== Struggle among confederalists, federalists, and centralists ==

The proponents of state sovereignty—the confederalists—were challenged by some less radical federalist delegates who argued that only the nation could be sovereign. Because these men stressed the need to endow the national government with sufficient power to sustain national interests, they are often mistakenly considered centralists. Servando Teresa de Mier, their outstanding spokesman, argued that people wrongly considered him a centralist, an error that arose from an unnecessarily restrictive definition of federalism. He indicated that federalism existed in many forms: the Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland and the United States were federations, yet each was different.
Mier advocated the establishment of a unique brand of federalism suited to Mexico. He believed that local realities precluded the adoption of the extreme form of federalism—confederalism—championed by states&#x27; righters. He declared: &quot;I have always been in favour of a federation, but a reasonable and moderate federation. (...) I have always believed in a medium between the lax federation of the United States, whose defects many writers have indicated, (…) and the dangerous concentration [of executive power] in Colombia and Peru.&quot; In his view, Mexico needed a strong federal system because the country required an energetic and decisive national government to lead it during the crucial early years of nationhood, particularly since Spain refused to recognise Mexico&#x27;s independence and the Holy Alliance threatened to intervene. For these reasons, Mier voted in favour of Article 5, which established a federal republic, while opposing Article 6, which granted sovereignty to the states.

Neither the advocates of states&#x27; rights, like Cañedo, nor the proponents of national sovereignty, like Mier, triumphed. Instead, a compromise emerged: shared sovereignty, as advocated by moderate federalists such as Ramos Arizpe. Throughout the debates, he and others argued that although the nation was sovereign, the states should control their internal affairs. The group saw no conflict between Article 3, which declared that sovereignty resided in the nation, and Article 6, which granted sovereignty to the states on internal matters. The moderates were able to forge shifting coalitions to pass both articles. First, they brought Article 3 to a vote. A coalition of the proponents of national sovereignty, the advocates of shared sovereignty, and a few centralists passed the article by a wide margin. To secure passage of Article 6, those favouring approval succeeded in having the question brought to the floor in two parts. The first vote, on the section of Article 6 which indicated that the states were independent and free to manage their own affairs, passed by a wide margin, since the wording pleased all the confederalist/federalist groups, including the one led by Father Mier. Only seven centralist deputies opposed the measure. Then Congress examined the section of Article 6 which declared that the states were sovereign. The coalition divided on this issue: Father Mier and his supporters joined the centralists in voting against the measure. Nevertheless, the proponents of states&#x27; rights and those who believed in shared sovereignty possessed enough strength to pass the measure by a margin of 41 to 28 votes.

The states did not just share sovereignty with the national government; they obtained the financial means to enforce their authority. They gained considerable taxing power at the expense of the federal government, which lost approximately half the revenue formerly collected by the viceregal administration. To compensate for that loss, the states were to pay the national government a contingente assessed for each state according to its means. As a result, the nation would have to depend upon the goodwill of the states to finance or fulfil its responsibilities.

== Weak executive branch ==

The constituent congress&#x27;s decision to share sovereignty, moreover, did not settle the question of the division of power within the national government. Although all agreed on the traditional concept of separation of powers among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches, most congressmen believed that the legislature should be dominant. Recent Hispanic and Mexican experience had fostered a distrust of executive power. Therefore, the earlier Mexican Cortes had established a plural executive, the Supreme Executive Power. Since that body was perceived as subservient to the legislature, neither the provinces nor the Second Constituent Congress bothered to appoint a new executive. The authors of the Acta Constitutiva, however, proposed in Article 16 that executive power be conferred &quot;on an individual with the title of president of the Mexican Federation, who must be a citizen by birth of said federation and have attained at least thirty-five years of age&quot;. The proposal led to a heated debate that transcended the former division between states&#x27; righters and strong nationalist coalitions. While Cañedo supported Ramos Arizpe in favouring a single executive, others, including Rejón and Guridi y Alcocer, insisted on the need to weaken executive power by establishing a plural executive.

Ramos Arizpe proposed that the president govern with the aid of a council of government. But that was not sufficient to mollify the opposition, which had the majority in congress. The opponents of a single executive presented several counter-proposals. Demetrio Castillo of Oaxaca suggested that a president, a vice-president and an alternate, called designee, should govern. Each would have a vote, but the president would cast the deciding one. Rejón, instead, recommended that three individuals form the Supreme Executive Power; their terms would be staggered so that one member would always possess seniority, but no individual would serve more than three years. Guridi y Alcocer proposed that the executive power be conferred on two persons. He argued that the best solution was to merge the experiences of ancient Rome, Spain, and the United States. Therefore, he urged that the two members of the executive power be backed by two alternates, who might resolve any differences that arose between the two members of the executive.

Article 16 of the Acta Constitutiva was put to a vote on 2 January 1824 at an extraordinary session. It was defeated by a vote of 42 to 25. As a result, the congress did not address Article 17, which dealt with the vice-president. The proposal to establish a president and a vice-president was one of the few instances in which the second constitution of the United States served as a model. The majority did not agree with the proposal because it feared the possibility of one individual dominating Congress through military or popular forces, as Iturbide had done. The commission on the constitution revised the articles on the executive a number of times, but could not obtain support for its proposals.

The fear of provincial disorder also influenced the debate. After Articles 5 and 6 of the Acta Constitutiva had been approved, several provinces decided to implement their right to form their own government. The national administration viewed their actions with concern, particularly because some movements were also anti-European Spaniards. The revolt of 12 December in Querétaro, for example, demanded the expulsion of gachupines (Spaniards who had come to Mexico) from the country. A similar uprising occurred later in Cuernavaca. In both instances, the national government sent forces to restore order.

Then, on 23 December, Puebla declared itself a sovereign, free, and independent state. The authorities in Mexico City immediately concluded that the military commander of the province, General José Antonio de Echávarri, was responsible for the &quot;revolt&quot;. Therefore, the government dispatched an army under the command of Generals Manuel Gómez Pedraza and Vicente Guerrero to restore order. The forces of the national government approached the capital city of Puebla at the end of December 1823. After lengthy negotiations, General Gómez Pedraza proposed that, since Congress was about to issue the convocatoria for national and state elections, the leaders of Puebla renounce their earlier action and hold new elections. The Poblanos agreed. The convocatoria was received in Puebla on 12 January 1824. Elections were held throughout the province and a new state government was inaugurated on 22 March 1824.

Although the national government had maintained order in the nation, the revolt led by General Jose María Lobato on 20 January 1824 demonstrated that the plural executive could not act with the unity of purpose and the speed necessary to quell a large scale uprising in the capital. The rebels demanded the dismissal of Spaniards from government jobs and their expulsion from the country. Lobato managed to win support of the garrisons in the capital and the government seemed on the verge of capitulation when the Supreme Executive Power convinced Congress to declare Lobato an outlaw and to grant the executive sufficient power to quell the rebellion.
As a result of the crisis, the majority in Congress eventually decided to establish an executive branch composed of a president and a vice-president. The creation of a single executive, however, did not mean that Congress had accepted a strong presidency. Most Mexicans continued to favour legislative supremacy. The Mexican charter, like the Hispanic constitution, severely restricted the power of the chief executive. The Constitution of 1824 created a quasi-parliamentary system in which the ministers of state answered to the congress. Consequently, the minister of interior and foreign relations acted as a quasi-prime minister.

The creation of a national government did not end the tensions between the provinces and Mexico City. The debate over the location of the country&#x27;s capital sparked a new conflict. The national elite favoured making the &quot;Imperial City of Mexico&quot; the capital of the republic. The regional elites were divided. During 1823, while discussing the importance of local control, they also emphasised the need to maintain a &quot;centre of unity&quot;, that is, a capital. However, a significant number pointedly refused to bestow that honour upon Mexico City. The special committee on the nation&#x27;s capital recommended to the Constituent Congress on 31 May 1824 that another city, Querétaro, become the capital, and that the territory around it become the federal district. After a heated debate, Congress rejected the proposal to move the capital from Mexico City. Thereafter, the discussion centred on whether or not a federal district should be created. The ayuntamiento and the provincial deputation of Mexico were vehemently against such action. Indeed, the provincial legislature threatened secession and civil war if Mexico City were federalised. Nevertheless, on 30 October Congress voted fifty-two to thirty-one to make Mexico City the nation&#x27;s capital and to create a federal district.

== Constitution of 1824 ==
After months of debate, Congress ratified the constitution, on 4 October 1824. The new charter established that:
Article 3: The religion of the Mexican nation is and will permanently be the Roman, Catholic, Apostolic [religion]. The nation protects her with wise and just laws and prohibits the exercise of any other [religion].

Article 4. The Mexican nation adopts for its government a representative, popular, federal republic.

Article 5. The parts of this federation are the following states and territories: the states of Chiapas, Chihuahua, Coahuila and Texas, Durango, Guanajuato, México, Michoacán, Nuevo León, Oaxaca, Puebla de los Ángeles, Querétaro, San Luis Potosí, Sonora and Sinaloa, Tabasco, Tamaulipas, Veracruz, Xalisco, Yucatán and Zacatecas; and the territories of: Alta California, Baja California, Colima Territory and Santa Fe de Nuevo México Territory. A constitutional law will determine the status of Tlaxcala.

Article 74. The supreme executive power of the federation is deposited in only one individual who shall be called President of the United Mexican States (Estados Unidos Mexicanos).

Article 75. There will also be a vice president who, in case of the physical or moral incapacity of the president, will receive all his authority and prerogatives.

Like the &quot;Acta Constitutiva&quot;, the Constitution of 1824 was modelled on the Hispanic Constitution of 1812, not, as is often asserted, on the US Constitution of 1787. Although superficially similar to the latter although it adopted a few practical applications from the U.S. Constitution, such as the executive, the Mexican document was based primarily on Hispanic constitutional and legal precedents. For example, although the Constitution of 1824 created a president, in Mexico the office was subordinate to the legislature.

Since Mexico was essentially confederalist, rather than federalist, the Mexican Charter was closer in spirit to the first U.S. Constitution, the Articles of Confederation, than to the U.S. Constitution of 1787. Entire sections of the Cádiz Charter were repeated verbatim in the Mexican document because Mexicans did not reject their Hispanic heritage, and because men who drafted the new republican constitution had served in the Cortes of Cádiz and had helped write the 1812 Constitution. Both the 1812 Constitution and the Mexican Constitution of 1824 established powerful legislatures and weak executives. However, the 1824 constitution was not a mere copy of that of 1812. Events in Mexico, particularly the assertion of states&#x27; rights by the former provinces, forced Congress to frame a constitution to meet the unique circumstances of the nation.

The principal innovations (republicanism, federalism, and the presidency) were adopted to address Mexico&#x27;s new reality. The monarchy was abolished because both Fernando VII and Agustín I had failed as rulers, not because Mexicans imitated the U.S. Constitution. Federalism arose naturally from Mexico&#x27;s earlier political experience. The provincial deputations created by the Constitution of Cádiz simply converted themselves into states. Unlike the 1812 document, the Mexican charter gave the states significant taxing power.

Although modeled on the Spanish Constitution of 1812, the new charter did not address a number of issues included in the earlier document because the new Mexican federation shared sovereignty between the national government and the states. Thus, unlike the Constitution of Cádiz, which defined citizenship, the Mexican Constitution of 1824 remained silent on the subject. Similarly, it did not define who possessed the suffrage or the size of the population required to establish &quot;ayuntamientos&quot; (town councils), two significant factors in determining the popular nature of the Hispanic constitutional system. Those decisions were the prerogatives of the states.

The constitutions of the states of the Mexican federation varied, but they generally followed the precedents of the Constitution of Cádiz. Most state constitutions explicitly defined the people in their territory as being citizens of the state; they were chiapanecos, sonorenses, chihuahuenses, duranguenses, guanajuatenses, etc. Some states, such as Mexico and Puebla, simply referred to &quot;the natives [sic] and citizens of the estate.&quot; The constitution is silent on the explicit status of Mexican women.

Following the Cádiz model, all states established indirect elections. A few, however, introduced property qualifications. Many also followed the constitution of 1812 in allowing &quot;ayuntamientos&quot; in towns with more than 1,000 persons, but some raised the population requirements to 2,000, 3,000 or 4,000. Tabasco permitted only the &quot;cabeceras&quot; (head towns) of the &quot;partido&quot; (district) to have &quot;ayuntamientos&quot;. Article 78 of Veracruz&#x27;s constitution stated that the &quot;jefe&quot; of the department &quot;will arrange the number and function of the &quot;ayuntamientos&quot;.&quot;

== Content ==
The 1824 Constitution was composed of 7 titles and 171 articles, and was based on the Constitution of Cádiz for American issues, on the United States Constitution for the formula for federal representation and organization, and on the Constitutional Decree for the Liberty of Mexican America of 1824, which abolished the monarchy. It introduced the system of federalism in a popular representative republic with Catholicism as official religion. The 1824 constitution does not expressly state the rights of citizens. The right to equality of citizens was restricted by the continuation of military and ecclesiastical courts. The most relevant articles were:

:1. The Mexican nation is sovereign and free from the Spanish government and any other nation.
:3. The religion of the nation is the Roman Catholic Church and is protected by law and prohibits any other.
:4. The Mexican nation adopts as its form of government a popular federal representative republic.
:6. The supreme power of the federation is divided into Legislative power, Executive power and Judiciary power.
:7. Legislative power is deposited in a Congress of two chambers—a Chamber of Deputies and a Chamber of Senators.
:50. Political freedom of press in the federation and the states (paragraph 1).
:74. Executive power is vested in a person called the President of the United Mexican States.
:75. It provides the figure of vice president, who in case of physical or moral impossibility of the president, exercise the powers and prerogatives of the latter.
:95. The term of the president and vice president shall be four years.
:123. Judiciary power lies in a Supreme Court, the Circuit Courts and the District Courts.
:124. The Supreme Court consists of eleven members divided into three rooms and a prosecutor.
:157. The individual state governments will be formed by the same three powers.

Although this was not stipulated in the constitution, slavery was prohibited in the Republic. Miguel Hidalgo promulgated the abolition in Guadalajara on 6 December 1810. President Guadalupe Victoria declared slavery abolished too, but it was President Vicente Guerrero who made the decree of &quot;Abolition of Slavery&quot; on 15 September 1829.

== Federation ==

At the time of the promulgation of the Constitution, the nation was composed of 19 free states and 3 territories. That same year, two changes were made in the structure, resulting finally in 19 free states, 5 territories and the federal district.
* The five Federal Territories were: Alta California, Baja California, Colima, Tlaxcala, and Santa Fe de Nuevo México.
* The Federal District was established around the City of México on November 18, 1824.

== Reactions ==
Due to the influence of Spanish liberal thought, the fragmentation that had been gradually consolidated by the Bourbon Reforms in New Spain, the newly won Independence of Mexico, the size of the territory—almost 4,600,000 km2 (1,776,069 sq mi)—and lack of easy communication across distances, there resulted a federal system with regional characteristics. The central states—Mexico, Puebla, Querétaro, Guanajuato, Veracruz and Michoacán—which were the most populated, worked as an administrative decentralization. The states of the periphery—Zacatecas, Coahuila y Texas, Durango, Chihuahua, Jalisco, San Luis Potosí and Nuevo León—acquired a moderate confederalism. The states furthest from the center—Yucatán, Sonora y Sinaloa, Tamaulipas and Las Californias—acquired a radical confederalism.

Without the existence of established political parties, three political tendencies are distinguished. The first still supported the empire of Iturbide, but was a minority. The second was influenced by the Yorkist Lodge of freemasonry, whose philosophy was radical Federalism and also encouraged an anti-Spanish sentiment largely promoted by the American plenipotentiary Joel Roberts Poinsett. And the third was influenced by the Scottish Lodge of freemasonry, which had been introduced to Mexico by the Spaniards themselves, favored Centralism, and yearned for the recognition of the new nation by Spain and the Holy See.

With the consummation of independence, the &quot;Royal Patronage&quot; was gone, the federal government and state governments now considered these rights to belong to the State. The way to manage church property was the point that most polarized the opinions of the political class. Members of the Yorkist Lodge intended to use church property to clean up the finances, the members of the Scottish Lodge considered the alternative anathema. According to the federal commitment, states should provide an amount of money and men for the army, or &quot;blood quota&quot;. The federal budget was insufficient to pay debt, defense, and surveillance of borders, and states resisted meeting the &quot;blood quota&quot;, sometimes meeting that debt with criminals.

Some state constitutions were more radical and took supplies to practice &quot;patronage&quot; locally, under the banner of &quot;freedom and progress&quot;. The constitutions of Jalisco and Tamaulipas decreed government funding of religion, the constitutions of Durango and the State of Mexico allowed the governor the practice of &quot;patronage&quot;, the constitution of Michoacán gave the local legislature the power to regulate the enforcement of fees and discipline of clergy, and the constitution of Yucatán, in a vanguardist way, decreed freedom of religion.

== Repeal and resettlement ==
In 1835, there was a drastic shift to the new Mexican Nation. The triumph of conservative forces in the elections unleashed a series of events that culminated on 23 October 1835, during the interim presidency of Miguel Barragán (the constitutional president was Antonio López de Santa Anna, but he was out of office), when the &quot;Basis of Reorganization of the Mexican Nation&quot; was approved, which ended the federal system and established a provisional centralist system. On 30 December 1836, interim president José Justo Corro issued the Seven Constitutional Laws, which replaced the Constitution. Secondary laws were approved on 24 May 1837.

The Seven Constitutional Laws, among other things, replaced the &quot;free states&quot; with French-style &quot;departments&quot;, centralizing national power in Mexico City. This created an era of political instability, unleashing conflicts between the central government and the former states. Rebellions arose in various places, the most important of which were:

* Texas declared its independence following the change from the federalist system, and refused to participate in the centralized system. American settlers held a convention in San Felipe de Austin and declared the people of Texas to be at war against Mexico&#x27;s central government, therefore ignoring the authorities and laws. Thus arose the Republic of Texas.
* Yucatán under its condition of &quot;Federated Republic&quot; declared its independence in 1840 (officially in 1841). The Republic of Yucatán finally rejoined the nation in 1848.
* The states of Nuevo León, Tamaulipas, and Coahuila became &quot;de facto&quot; independent from Mexico (in just under 250 days). The Republic of the Rio Grande never consolidated, because independence forces were defeated by the centralist forces.
* Tabasco decreed its separation from Mexico in February 1841, in protest against centralism, rejoining in December 1842.

The Texas annexation and the border conflict after the annexation led to the Mexican–American War. As a result, the Constitution of 1824 was restored by interim President José Mariano Salas on 22 August 1846. In 1847, &quot;The Reform Act&quot; was published, which officially incorporated, with some changes, the Federal Constitution of 1824, to operate while the next constitution was drafted. This federalist phase culminated in 1853.

The Plan of Ayutla, which had a federalist orientation, was proclaimed on 1 March 1854. In 1855, Juan Álvarez, interim President of the Republic, issued the call for the Constituent Congress, which began its work on 17 February 1856 to produce the Federal Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1857.

== See also ==
* Constitutions of Mexico
* Constitutionalists in the Mexican Revolution
* Political Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1917 (&quot;currently in force&quot;)
* History of democracy in Mexico
* Spanish Constitution of 1812

== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 


== External links ==
* 1824 Constitution (in Spanish)
* 1824 Map of State and Territorial Boundaries
* Constitución Federal (1824) From the Collections at the Library of Congress</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q771159" start="4" end="61" title="1824 Constitution of Mexico" label="Federal Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109279" start="150" end="172" title="First Mexican Republic" label="First Mexican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="203" end="230" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135591" start="262" end="277" title="Cortes of Cádiz" label="Cortes of Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421412" start="440" end="460" title="Spanish Constitution of 1812" label="Constitution of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q378420" start="507" end="525" title="José María Morelos" label="José María Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606520" start="1172" end="1186" title="Plan of Iguala" label="Plan of Iguala"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="1309" end="1323" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q288200" start="1975" end="1998" title="Supreme Executive Power" label="Supreme Executive Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421412" start="2451" end="2471" title="Constitution of 1812" label="Constitution of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844758" start="2879" end="2898" title="Miguel Ramos Arizpe" label="Miguel Ramos Arizpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114256" start="2952" end="2975" title="Servando Teresa de Mier" label="Servando Teresa de Mier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844758" start="3551" end="3570" title="Miguel Ramos Arizpe" label="Miguel Ramos Arizpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6301245" start="3572" end="3591" title="Juan de Dios Cañedo" label="Juan de Dios Cañedo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3593" end="3609" title="Miguel Argüelles" label="Miguel Argüelles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3611" end="3625" title="Rafael Mangino" label="Rafael Mangino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3627" end="3639" title="Tomás Vargas" label="Tomás Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3641" end="3661" title="José de Jesús Huerta" label="José de Jesús Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3667" end="3690" title="Manuel Crescencio Rejón" label="Manuel Crescencio Rejón"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4706" end="4722" title="Guridi y Alcocer" label="Guridi y Alcocer"/>
<link wikidata="Q970690" start="4911" end="4928" title="Lorenzo de Zavala" label="Lorenzo de Zavala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114256" start="7982" end="8005" title="Servando Teresa de Mier" label="Servando Teresa de Mier"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="8228" end="8239" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="8241" end="8248" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="8250" end="8261" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8270" end="8283" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="8850" end="8858" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="8863" end="8867" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q154640" start="9139" end="9152" title="Holy Alliance" label="Holy Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="11786" end="11806" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q288200" start="12092" end="12115" title="Provisional Government of Mexico (1823–24)" label="Supreme Executive Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="14281" end="14314" title="constitution of the United States" label="constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="15364" end="15375" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15451" end="15476" title="José Antonio de Echávarri" label="José Antonio de Echávarri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075932" start="15597" end="15617" title="Manuel Gómez Pedraza" label="Manuel Gómez Pedraza"/>
<link wikidata="Q315618" start="15622" end="15638" title="Vicente Guerrero" label="Vicente Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16270" end="16287" title="Jose María Lobato" label="Jose María Lobato"/>
<link wikidata="Q79754" start="18156" end="18165" title="Querétaro" label="Querétaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19001" end="19009" title="Roman Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="19332" end="19339" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="19341" end="19350" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q949898" start="19352" end="19370" title="Coahuila and Texas" label="Coahuila and Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79918" start="19372" end="19379" title="Durango" label="Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q46475" start="19381" end="19391" title="Guanajuato" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="19393" end="19399" title="State of Mexico" label="México"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="19401" end="19410" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="19412" end="19422" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="19424" end="19430" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293" start="19432" end="19453" title="Puebla de los Ángeles" label="Puebla de los Ángeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q79754" start="19455" end="19464" title="Querétaro" label="Querétaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q78980" start="19466" end="19481" title="San Luis Potosí" label="San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389503" start="19483" end="19501" title="Sonora and Sinaloa" label="Sonora and Sinaloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80914" start="19503" end="19510" title="Tabasco" label="Tabasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="19512" end="19522" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="19524" end="19532" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13160" start="19534" end="19541" title="Jalisco" label="Xalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176" start="19543" end="19550" title="Yucatán" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q80269" start="19555" end="19564" title="Zacatecas" label="Zacatecas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="19590" end="19605" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11951646" start="19607" end="19622" title="Baja California Territory" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q61309" start="19624" end="19640" title="Colima" label="Colima Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="19645" end="19679" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Santa Fe de Nuevo México Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810728" start="19731" end="19739" title="Tlaxcala Territory" label="Tlaxcala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20654" end="20667" title="confederalist" label="confederalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="20770" end="20795" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135591" start="21055" end="21070" title="Cortes of Cádiz" label="Cortes of Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="21649" end="21661" title="Fernando VII" label="Fernando VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="22440" end="22448" title="suffrage" label="suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421412" start="23937" end="23958" title="Spanish Constitution of 1812" label="Constitution of Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="24263" end="24274" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="24643" end="24664" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q10551526" start="24693" end="24712" title="Confessional state" label="prohibits any other"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="24869" end="24886" title="Legislature" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="24888" end="24903" title="Executive (government)" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="24908" end="24923" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="24929" end="24946" title="Legislature" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495862" start="24965" end="24973" title="Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="24977" end="24989" title="Bicameralism" label="two chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014316" start="24992" end="25011" title="Chamber of Deputies (Mexico)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q264113" start="25018" end="25037" title="Senate (Mexico)" label="Chamber of Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="25454" end="25469" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary power"/>
<link wikidata="Q130925" start="25480" end="25493" title="Supreme Court of Mexico" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q130925" start="25549" end="25562" title="Supreme Court of Mexico" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636" start="25808" end="25822" title="Miguel Hidalgo" label="Miguel Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022" start="25852" end="25863" title="Guadalajara (Jalisco)" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q311425" start="25894" end="25912" title="Guadalupe Victoria" label="Guadalupe Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q315618" start="25966" end="25982" title="Vicente Guerrero" label="Vicente Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="26364" end="26379" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11951646" start="26381" end="26396" title="Baja California Territory" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11951645" start="26398" end="26404" title="Colima Territory" label="Colima"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810728" start="26406" end="26414" title="Tlaxcala Territory" label="Tlaxcala"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="26420" end="26444" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Santa Fe de Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="26496" end="26510" title="Mexico City" label="City of México"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734662" start="26661" end="26676" title="Bourbon Reforms" label="Bourbon Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="26680" end="26689" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="26705" end="26727" title="Independence of Mexico" label="Independence of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="26925" end="26931" title="State of Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q79923" start="26933" end="26939" title="Puebla" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q79754" start="26941" end="26950" title="Querétaro" label="Querétaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q46475" start="26952" end="26962" title="Guanajuato" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="26964" end="26972" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="26977" end="26986" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q80269" start="27092" end="27101" title="Zacatecas" label="Zacatecas"/>
<link wikidata="Q949898" start="27103" end="27119" title="Coahuila y Texas" label="Coahuila y Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79918" start="27121" end="27128" title="Durango" label="Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="27130" end="27139" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q13160" start="27141" end="27148" title="Jalisco" label="Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q78980" start="27150" end="27165" title="San Luis Potosí" label="San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="27170" end="27180" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176" start="27252" end="27259" title="Yucatán" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389503" start="27261" end="27277" title="Sonora y Sinaloa" label="Sonora y Sinaloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="27279" end="27289" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q301467" start="27294" end="27309" title="The Californias" label="Las Californias"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621834" start="27550" end="27563" title="York Rite" label="Yorkist Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="27609" end="27619" title="Federalism" label="Federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q723956" start="27715" end="27736" title="Joel Roberts Poinsett" label="Joel Roberts Poinsett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="27774" end="27788" title="Scottish Rite" label="Scottish Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="27848" end="27857" title="Spanish people" label="Spaniards"/>
<link wikidata="Q25585330" start="27878" end="27888" title="Centralized government" label="Centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="27957" end="27965" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554269" start="28011" end="28038" title="Patronato real" label="&amp;quot;Royal Patronage&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440529" start="28053" end="28071" title="Government of Mexico" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="28135" end="28144" title="Nation state" label="the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q211517" start="28399" end="28407" title="anathema" label="anathema"/>
<link wikidata="Q13160" start="28905" end="28912" title="Jalisco" label="Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="28917" end="28927" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79918" start="28989" end="28996" title="Durango" label="Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="29005" end="29020" title="State of Mexico" label="State of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="29101" end="29110" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176" start="29234" end="29241" title="Yucatán" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="29273" end="29292" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208732" start="29537" end="29552" title="Miguel Barragán" label="Miguel Barragán"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="29587" end="29614" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="29740" end="29754" title="Federation" label="federal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25585330" start="29785" end="29802" title="Centralized government" label="centralist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208264" start="29843" end="29859" title="José Justo Corro" label="José Justo Corro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554424" start="29871" end="29896" title="Siete Leyes" label="Seven Constitutional Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q643589" start="30089" end="30100" title="Department (subnational entity)" label="departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="30139" end="30150" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315810" start="30346" end="30351" title="Mexican Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q981206" start="30520" end="30540" title="San Felipe, Texas" label="San Felipe de Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="30689" end="30706" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176" start="30710" end="30717" title="Yucatán" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q671658" start="30832" end="30851" title="Republic of Yucatán" label="Republic of Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="30905" end="30915" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="30917" end="30927" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="30933" end="30941" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="30955" end="30963" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014442" start="31024" end="31050" title="Republic of the Rio Grande" label="Republic of the Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q80914" start="31141" end="31148" title="Tabasco" label="Tabasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187072" start="31266" end="31282" title="Texas annexation" label="Texas annexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="31339" end="31359" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837971" start="31433" end="31451" title="José Mariano Salas" label="José Mariano Salas"/>
<link wikidata="Q538766" start="31705" end="31719" title="Plan of Ayutla" label="Plan of Ayutla"/>
<link wikidata="Q460776" start="31798" end="31810" title="Juan Álvarez" label="Juan Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009194" start="31949" end="32006" title="1857 Constitution of Mexico" label="Federal Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995198" start="32026" end="32049" title="Constitutions of Mexico" label="Constitutions of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164339" start="32052" end="32096" title="Constitutionalists in the Mexican Revolution" label="Constitutionalists in the Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="32099" end="32158" title="1917 Constitution of Mexico" label="Political Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766770" start="32194" end="32224" title="History of democracy in Mexico" label="History of democracy in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421412" start="32227" end="32255" title="Spanish Constitution of 1812" label="Spanish Constitution of 1812"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795060" wikidata="Q252365" url="?curid=795060" title="Pat LaFontaine">
<text>Patrick Michael LaFontaine (born February 22, 1965) is an American former ice hockey center who played in the National Hockey League (NHL) and spent his entire playing career with the league&#x27;s New York State-based teams. He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2003.

LaFontaine played for the New York Islanders from 1983 until 1991, the Buffalo Sabres from 1991 until 1997, and the New York Rangers from 1997 until his retirement in 1998, scoring 468 goals and 1,013 points along the way before his career was ended by concussions. His 1.17 points per game (1,013 points over 865 games) is the best among American-born ice hockey players, active or retired. In 2017, LaFontaine was named one of the &quot;100 Greatest NHL Players&quot; in history. LaFontaine served as an executive of the Buffalo Sabres as the president of hockey operations until March 2014.

==Junior hockey==
Although he was born in St. Louis, LaFontaine grew up in Waterford, Michigan. His father moved the family to the Detroit area in 1972. As a youth, LaFontaine played in the 1977 Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament with a minor ice hockey team from Waterford. He graduated from Waterford Kettering High School. LaFontaine began his junior career with the Verdun Juniors of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League (QMJHL) during the 1982–83 season. In his only season in the QMJHL, LaFontaine contributed 104 goals and 130 assists for Verdun. LaFontaine&#x27;s 234 points was tops in the league and he was awarded the Jean Béliveau Trophy as the top scorer, out-dueling future NHL icon Mario Lemieux. His rookie season broke many records, including Guy Lafleur&#x27;s 40-game point-scoring streak and Mike Bossy&#x27;s 70 goals by a rookie. Other awards LaFontaine received after the season were the Michel Brière Memorial Trophy as the MVP of the regular season, the Guy Lafleur Trophy as the MVP of the playoffs, the Michel Bergeron Trophy as the Offensive Rookie of the Year, the Mike Bossy Trophy as the best professional prospect, and the Frank J. Selke Memorial Trophy as the most sportsmanlike player. Lafontaine was also chosen as the CHL Player of the Year.

==NHL career==
On October 1, 1981, the New York Islanders traded Bob Lorimer and Dave Cameron to the Colorado Rockies for the Rockies&#x27; (later market rival New Jersey Devils&#x27;) first-round draft pick in 1983; LaFontaine was selected by the Islanders in the first round as the third pick overall in the 1983 NHL Entry Draft with that pick. After representing the United States in the 1984 Winter Olympics in Sarajevo, Yugoslavia, LaFontaine joined the Islanders in time for the Stanley Cup Finals. His arrival was concurrent with the beginning of the end of the Islanders&#x27; dynasty, as the team was steeped deep in aging veterans. The Islanders lost in the finals that year to the Edmonton Oilers, ending the team&#x27;s run of consecutive Stanley Cup championships at four. LaFontaine had a strong performance, scoring two third-period goals during the Islanders&#x27; 5–2 loss to the Oilers in the fifth and deciding game of the series.

In the 1987 Stanley Cup playoffs, LaFontaine scored the winning goal in the fourth overtime period of the seventh and decisive game between the Islanders and Washington Capitals, known as the &quot;Easter Epic&quot;. The game was started on Saturday, April 18, and concluded just before 2 a.m. on the 19th, Easter Sunday. &quot;It was the most memorable moment in my hockey life,&quot; he later recalled. &quot;Even today, wherever I go, people come up to me and start telling me where they were during the Easter Epic.&quot;

The Islanders continued to struggle and in 1989, they missed the playoffs for the first time since 1974. In the first game of the Islanders&#x27; next playoff series, in 1990, LaFontaine suffered the first of many concussions, after a controversial, open-ice hit by James Patrick of the New York Rangers. He fell on his head and was unconscious while being taken off the ice on a stretcher. The ambulance he took was delayed en route to the hospital by Ranger fans who rocked and pounded it as it left Madison Square Garden. He was lost for the remainder of the series.

The 1990–91 season was a successful season for LaFontaine, but not the Islanders, who finished with a record of 25–45–10. LaFontaine, frustrated with his situation on Long Island, turned down a four-year, $6 million contract offer and refused to report to the Islanders for the start of the 1991–92 NHL season. Three weeks into the season, on October 25, 1991, LaFontaine was traded, along with Randy Wood, to the Buffalo Sabres for four players, including former first overall pick Pierre Turgeon. In only 57 games in 1991–92, LaFontaine scored 46 goals and 93 points.

The following season, LaFontaine recorded a personal-best and team-record 148 points (53 goals and 95 assists). The 148 points are also the most points scored by an American-born player in one season. His play-making ability helped his linemate Alexander Mogilny set a team season record with 76 goals (as of 2020, both LaFontaine&#x27;s 95 assists, 148 points and Mogilny&#x27;s 76 goals still stand as the Sabres&#x27; team records for a single season). LaFontaine finished as runner-up to Mario Lemieux in the scoring race and earned a spot on the postseason NHL All-Star second team. He was also a finalist for the Hart Memorial Trophy as NHL MVP and the Lady Byng Trophy as the most sportsmanlike player. In 1994–95 he was awarded the Bill Masterton Trophy as the player who best exemplified the qualities of perseverance, sportsmanship, and dedication to ice hockey.

LaFontaine is one of six players in NHL history to skate for all three teams based in the state of New York. The others were Mike Donnelly, Jason Dawe, Martin Biron, Chad Johnson, and Taylor Pyatt. Unique amongst them, LaFontaine played his entire career in the state of New York, while the others all played for additional teams outside the state in their careers. LaFontaine once joked about it, saying &quot;I think I&#x27;m the only player in history who has been traded twice and hasn&#x27;t had to change his license plate.&quot;

==International play==
LaFontaine was selected to play for the United States national team in the 1984 Winter Olympics. LaFontaine scored five goals and three assists as the US finished in seventh place. He also played in the 1998 Winter Olympics, where he scored one goal and one assist as the US finished sixth.

In the 1989 Ice Hockey World Championships, LaFontaine scored five goals and three assists as the US finished in sixth place.

LaFontaine played in the Canada Cup tournament twice, first in 1987 and then 1991, where he helped the US reach the finals but lost to Canada.

In the 1996 World Cup of Hockey, LaFontaine scored two goals and two assists as the US beat Canada 5–2 in the final, earning him his first international championship win.

==Retirement==
The 1996–97 season was the beginning of the end of his career. In a game against the Pittsburgh Penguins, LaFontaine was hammered by François Leroux with a high hit to the head, knocking him out with a concussion, and resulted in post-concussion syndrome. He was determined to return, even though the doctors advised against such an attempt. Sabres management, in conjunction with team doctors and specialists, refused to clear LaFontaine to return, and recommended he retire. LaFontaine, still believing he could play, was traded to the New York Rangers in a cost-cutting measure for a second round draft choice in the 1998 NHL Entry Draft and future considerations on September 29, 1997. During his one season with the Rangers, he tied for the team lead in goals scored, and recorded his 1,000th career NHL point.

In a game against the Ottawa Senators on March 16, 1998, LaFontaine accidentally collided with teammate Mike Keane and suffered another concussion. LaFontaine missed the remainder of the season and all of the next season, announcing his retirement formally on October 12, 1999.

Announced in 2001, the Pat LaFontaine Trophy was awarded to the winner of the Islanders–Rangers regular season series, with money paid by the losing team to the charity of LaFontaine&#x27;s choice. It is unclear whether the trophy is still awarded or acknowledged by either team.

He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame on November 3, 2003. &quot;I am truly thrilled to receive this tremendous honor,&quot; said LaFontaine upon receiving the news. &quot;Growing up in St. Louis, I always played for the love of the game and never dreamed this could ever lead to my being a member of the Hockey Hall of Fame.&quot; He was inducted into the United States Hockey Hall of Fame in that same year.

On March 3, 2006, the Buffalo Sabres retired LaFontaine&#x27;s number 16. He was also inducted into the Buffalo Sabres Hall of Fame in 2004. LaFontaine was voted the 3rd greatest Buffalo Sabre in the team&#x27;s 40-year history.

==Post-hockey==
In 1997, LaFontaine founded the Companions in Courage Foundation, an organization that builds interactive game rooms in children&#x27;s hospitals throughout North America.

In 2000, the Congressional Medal of Honor Society bestowed the Patriot Award on LaFontaine in recognition of his contribution to military morale throughout his career. In 2002, LaFontaine was given an honorary Goal! Award, sponsored by the Points of Light Foundation, for having overcome depression, living in the community and performing volunteer work. In 1998 he was honored with the Public Leadership in Neurology Award for his work in Public Awareness of Concussion In Sports.

In April 2003, LaFontaine was recognized with the International Humanitarian Award by the Gift of Life Foundation, an organization promoting the cure and treatment of children suffering from heart disease in third world countries.

In March 2004, LaFontaine was inducted into the Michigan Sports Hall of Fame at a ceremony in Detroit. In March 2005, he was named recipient of the James Keller Award by The Christophers organization. Since 1987, the Award has recognized individuals who have contributed in a meaningful way to the well-being of young people.

In 2007, LaFontaine was inducted into the Nassau County Sports Hall of Fame.

The Heisman Trophy Trust recognized LaFontaine with their Humanitarian of the Year Award in 2008. The hockey star joked that he never played football, and he never even went to college. But the Trust recognized him as an exemplary selfless individual, who gives of himself to improve the plight of those less fortunate or afflicted.

In November 2008, Pat participated in his sixth career Ironman Triathlon event in Panama City, Florida. He swam 2.4 miles, rode a bike 112 miles and then ran a 26-mile marathon as a fundraiser for his charity. In March 2012, LaFontaine coached his son and a group of teenagers from Long Island, to the U-16 National Championship in Buffalo, New York. The Long Island Royals became just the second youth hockey team from Long Island to ever win a national championship. Their exploits were followed throughout the season by the NHL.com series, &quot;Making of a Royal&quot;.

LaFontaine was recognized with a national Jefferson Award at a ceremony in Washington D.C. in June 2012. The Jefferson Awards (www.jeffersonawards.org) are a prestigious national recognition honoring community service in America. He was recognized for his work with the Companions in Courage Foundation. The 40th Annual Jefferson National Ceremony took place at Constitution Hall in Washington DC. Additional 2012 winners included General David Petraeus, musicians Harry Connick, Jr. and Branford Marsalis, former Buffalo Bills quarterback Jim Kelly and Indy race driver Charlie Kimball.

LaFontaine was invited to the Vatican and participated in Sport at the Service of Humanity: The First Global Conference on Faith &amp; Sport as a guest of Pope Francis in October 2016.

==Back to the NHL==
On June 7, 2006, the Islanders announced that Pat LaFontaine would return to the Islanders as Senior Advisor to the Owner. This was short-lived, however, as LaFontaine resigned in protest only six weeks later on July 18, the same day that Neil Smith was fired by the Islanders.

In March 2006, Pat LaFontaine&#x27;s #16 was retired by the Buffalo Sabres and raised to the rafters of the First Niagara Center (formerly HSBC Arena), joining other Sabre legends Gilbert Perreault, Rick Martin, and Rene Robert (a.k.a. The French Connection), Tim Horton and Danny Gare.

During the 2010 Stanley Cup playoffs, LaFontaine appeared in an NHL cross-promotional commercial for Honda, featuring Neal Broten, Mike Richter constructing a pond hockey rink and playing a pick-up game with neighborhood children.

As of 2010, LaFontaine works as a commentator for MSG Network Rangers broadcasts.

On November 13, 2013, LaFontaine was announced to be the new President of Hockey Operations for the Buffalo Sabres. On March 1, 2014, Pat LaFontaine resigned his position as President of Hockey Operations with the club on Saturday after just over three months on the job to resume his previous role with the National Hockey League.

==Awards==
CHL:
* CHL Player of the Year: 1983
* CHL Top Scorer Award: 1983 (234)

QMJHL:
* President&#x27;s Cup champion: 1983
* Guy Lafleur Trophy: 1983 
* Jean Béliveau Trophy: 1983
* Frank J. Selke Memorial Trophy: 1983
* Michael Bossy Trophy: 1983
* Michel Brière Memorial Trophy: 1983
* Michel Bergeron Trophy: 1983
* QMJHL first All-Star team: 1983

NHL:
* Selected to five NHL All-Star Games: 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993
* Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy: 1995
* Second All-Star team: 1993
* Lester Patrick Trophy: 1997 (with Bill Cleary and Seymour H. Knox III)

==Career statistics==

===Regular season and playoffs===
===International===
==See also==
* List of members of the Hockey Hall of Fame
* List of members of the United States Hockey Hall of Fame
* List of NHL players with 1,000 points
* Easter Epic

==References==
==External links==
* Profile at Hockeydraftcentral.com
* The Companions In Courage Foundation
* Pat LaFontaine&#x27;s Williams Lake Cup tournament
* 2010 NHL Playoffs &quot;Pond Hockey&quot; commercial



&quot;Note: Ramsey resigned his captaincy during the 1992–93 NHL season, in favor of LaFontaine. Mogilny served as captain during most of the 1993–94 NHL season, while LaFontaine was injured and out of the line-up.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q252365" start="0" end="26" title="Pat LaFontaine" label="Patrick Michael LaFontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="74" end="84" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583758" start="85" end="91" title="Centre (ice hockey)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="110" end="132" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="198" end="212" title="New York (state)" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="251" end="270" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="307" end="325" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="352" end="366" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="397" end="413" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="534" end="545" title="concussions" label="concussions"/>
<link wikidata="Q28665614" start="720" end="744" title="100 Greatest NHL Players" label="100 Greatest NHL Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365407" start="951" end="970" title="Waterford Township, Michigan" label="Waterford, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535360" start="1071" end="1117" title="Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament" label="Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869192" start="1125" end="1141" title="minor ice hockey" label="minor ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974030" start="1181" end="1212" title="Waterford Kettering High School" label="Waterford Kettering High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435605" start="1258" end="1272" title="Verdun Juniors" label="Verdun Juniors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431391" start="1280" end="1313" title="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League" label="Quebec Major Junior Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q902961" start="1518" end="1538" title="Jean Béliveau Trophy" label="Jean Béliveau Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="1586" end="1599" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q553249" start="1649" end="1660" title="Guy Lafleur" label="Guy Lafleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="1701" end="1711" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q943348" start="1800" end="1829" title="Michel Brière Memorial Trophy" label="Michel Brière Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q943304" start="1868" end="1886" title="Guy Lafleur Trophy" label="Guy Lafleur Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q841035" start="1919" end="1941" title="Michel Bergeron Trophy" label="Michel Bergeron Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q841976" start="1983" end="2000" title="Mike Bossy Trophy" label="Mike Bossy Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q841627" start="2044" end="2074" title="Frank J. Selke Memorial Trophy" label="Frank J. Selke Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023636" start="2143" end="2165" title="CHL Player of the Year" label="CHL Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="2207" end="2225" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933201" start="2233" end="2244" title="Bob Lorimer" label="Bob Lorimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228469" start="2249" end="2261" title="Dave Cameron (ice hockey)" label="Dave Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q868358" start="2269" end="2285" title="Colorado Rockies (NHL)" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="2328" end="2345" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q568707" start="2478" end="2498" title="1983 NHL Entry Draft" label="1983 NHL Entry Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q913651" start="2538" end="2551" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9657" start="2559" end="2579" title="1984 Winter Olympics" label="1984 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="2583" end="2591" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="2593" end="2603" title="SFR Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581880" start="2653" end="2671" title="1984 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="2860" end="2875" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583920" start="3126" end="3151" title="1987 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1987 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778778" start="3202" end="3210" title="overtime (ice hockey)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="3277" end="3296" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329882" start="3317" end="3328" title="Easter Epic" label="Easter Epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960815" start="3689" end="3693" title="1988–89 NHL season" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586298" start="3816" end="3820" title="1990 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q503714" start="3912" end="3925" title="James Patrick (ice hockey)" label="James Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="3933" end="3949" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="4148" end="4169" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q524097" start="4221" end="4235" title="1990–91 NHL season" label="1990–91 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="4384" end="4395" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="4508" end="4526" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130837" start="4612" end="4622" title="Randy Wood (ice hockey)" label="Randy Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="4631" end="4645" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q739886" start="4700" end="4714" title="Pierre Turgeon" label="Pierre Turgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505507" start="5033" end="5050" title="Alexander Mogilny" label="Alexander Mogilny"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="5280" end="5293" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="5407" end="5427" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="5435" end="5438" title="Most valuable player" label="MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q516636" start="5447" end="5463" title="Lady Byng Trophy" label="Lady Byng Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556571" start="5501" end="5508" title="1994–95 NHL season" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q795029" start="5528" end="5549" title="Bill Masterton Trophy" label="Bill Masterton Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378797" start="5787" end="5800" title="Mike Donnelly" label="Mike Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162919" start="5802" end="5812" title="Jason Dawe (ice hockey)" label="Jason Dawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384142" start="5814" end="5826" title="Martin Biron" label="Martin Biron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066274" start="5828" end="5840" title="Chad Johnson (ice hockey)" label="Chad Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q945620" start="5846" end="5858" title="Taylor Pyatt" label="Taylor Pyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q913651" start="6262" end="6289" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="United States national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q837993" start="6297" end="6317" title="Ice hockey at the 1984 Winter Olympics" label="1984 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q283805" start="6425" end="6445" title="Ice hockey at the 1998 Winter Olympics" label="1998 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119695" start="6521" end="6556" title="1989 Ice Hockey World Championships" label="1989 Ice Hockey World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q605945" start="6666" end="6676" title="Canada Cup" label="Canada Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031967" start="6704" end="6708" title="1987 Canada Cup" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031978" start="6718" end="6722" title="1991 Canada Cup" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q461503" start="6776" end="6782" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q946600" start="6792" end="6816" title="1996 World Cup of Hockey" label="1996 World Cup of Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="7057" end="7076" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085172" start="7105" end="7120" title="François Leroux" label="François Leroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="7174" end="7184" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581333" start="7202" end="7226" title="post-concussion syndrome" label="post-concussion syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="7510" end="7526" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q776656" start="7592" end="7612" title="1998 NHL Entry Draft" label="1998 NHL Entry Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="7811" end="7826" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997349" start="8146" end="8185" title="Islanders–Rangers rivalry" label="Islanders–Rangers regular season series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="8374" end="8393" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688049" start="8713" end="8746" title="United States Hockey Hall of Fame" label="United States Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270138" start="9426" end="9452" title="Points of Light Foundation" label="Points of Light Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837684" start="9949" end="9977" title="Michigan Sports Hall of Fame" label="Michigan Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722783" start="10071" end="10087" title="The Christophers" label="The Christophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q852591" start="10722" end="10742" title="Panama City, Florida" label="Panama City, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="10972" end="10989" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="11290" end="11305" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q28591" start="11654" end="11668" title="David Petraeus" label="David Petraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q263007" start="12249" end="12259" title="Neil Smith (ice hockey)" label="Neil Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345631" start="12549" end="12559" title="Tim Horton" label="Tim Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q116544" start="12564" end="12574" title="Danny Gare" label="Danny Gare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619766" start="12588" end="12613" title="2010 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2010 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="12678" end="12683" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q960185" start="12695" end="12706" title="Neal Broten" label="Neal Broten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933497" start="12708" end="12720" title="Mike Richter" label="Mike Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139000" start="12736" end="12747" title="pond hockey" label="pond hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717767" start="12859" end="12870" title="MSG (TV network)" label="MSG Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023636" start="13243" end="13265" title="CHL Player of the Year" label="CHL Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469149" start="13267" end="13271" title="1982–83 QMJHL season" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q839991" start="13274" end="13294" title="CHL Top Scorer Award" label="CHL Top Scorer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q974282" start="13317" end="13337" title="President&amp;#x27;s Cup (QMJHL)" label="President&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469149" start="13348" end="13352" title="1982–83 QMJHL season" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q943304" start="13355" end="13373" title="Guy Lafleur Trophy" label="Guy Lafleur Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q902961" start="13383" end="13403" title="Jean Béliveau Trophy" label="Jean Béliveau Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q841627" start="13412" end="13442" title="Frank J. Selke Memorial Trophy" label="Frank J. Selke Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q841976" start="13451" end="13471" title="Michael Bossy Trophy" label="Michael Bossy Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q943348" start="13480" end="13509" title="Michel Brière Memorial Trophy" label="Michel Brière Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q841035" start="13518" end="13540" title="Michel Bergeron Trophy" label="Michel Bergeron Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29144" start="13606" end="13624" title="National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="NHL All-Star Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q228701" start="13626" end="13630" title="39th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q231346" start="13632" end="13636" title="40th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q232334" start="13638" end="13642" title="41st National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q233028" start="13644" end="13648" title="42nd National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q234349" start="13650" end="13654" title="44th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q795029" start="13657" end="13687" title="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy" label="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556571" start="13689" end="13693" title="1994–95 NHL season" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193358" start="13696" end="13716" title="NHL All-Star team" label="Second All-Star team"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="13718" end="13722" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q674192" start="13725" end="13746" title="Lester Patrick Trophy" label="Lester Patrick Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="13748" end="13752" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q608058" start="13759" end="13770" title="Bill Cleary (ice hockey)" label="Bill Cleary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381625" start="13775" end="13794" title="Seymour H. Knox III" label="Seymour H. Knox III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846518" start="13889" end="13931" title="List of members of the Hockey Hall of Fame" label="List of members of the Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628265" start="13934" end="13990" title="List of members of the United States Hockey Hall of Fame" label="List of members of the United States Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q668581" start="13993" end="14030" title="List of NHL players with 1,000 points" label="List of NHL players with 1,000 points"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329882" start="14033" end="14044" title="Easter Epic" label="Easter Epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="14319" end="14337" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1992–93 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="14408" end="14426" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94 NHL season"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795063" wikidata="Q7315269" url="?curid=795063" title="Reserve clause">
<text>The reserve clause, in North American professional sports, was part of a player contract which stated that the rights to players were retained by the team upon the contract&#x27;s expiration. Players under these contracts were not free to enter into another contract with another team. Once signed to a contract, players could, at the team&#x27;s discretion, be reassigned, traded, sold, or released.

The only negotiating leverage of most players was to hold out at contract time and to refuse to play unless their conditions were met. Players were bound to negotiate a new contract to play another year for the same team or to ask to be released or traded. They had no freedom to change teams unless they were given an unconditional release. In the days of the reserve clause, that was the only way a player could be a free agent.

Once common in sports, the clause was abolished in baseball in 1975. The reserve clause system has, for the most part, been replaced by free agency.

==Baseball==

In the late 19th century, baseball in America became popular enough that its major teams began to be businesses of considerable value, and the players were paid sums that were well above the wages earned by common workers. To control player salary demands, team owners used a standardized contract for the players, in which the major variable was salary. The players unsuccessfully tried to fight the growing &quot;reserve system&quot; by forming a union, the Brotherhood, and founding their own Players&#x27; League in 1890, but the Player&#x27;s League lasted just one season. For the next 80 years, the &quot;reserve system&quot; ruled the game. All player contracts were for one year. There were no modern-day long-term contracts, because the reserve clause negated the need for them.

The reserve clause inception was in 1879, when it was proposed as a way to formalize an unofficial rule known as the &quot;five man rule&quot;. It would allow teams to reserve players for each season, unless a player opted out of his contract and did not play in the league for a year. While the previous informal rule was no secret, teams had started to sign other teams&#x27; &quot;reserved players&quot;, thus encroaching the rule. The resulting controversies caused the National League to instate the rule officially on December 6, 1879.

Teams realized that if players were free to go from team to team then salaries would escalate dramatically. Therefore, they seldom granted players (at least valuable ones) a release, but retained their rights, or traded them to other teams for the rights to other players, or sold them outright for cash. Players thus had a choice only of signing for what their team offered them, or &quot;holding out&quot; (refusing to play, and therefore, not being paid).

Under the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, two or more non-affiliated companies in any other interstate business were prohibited from colluding with each other to fix prices or establish schedules or rates. Enforcement of the act reached its apotheosis in 1910 when the Supreme Court affirmed the government&#x27;s order to dissolve the Standard Oil conglomerate. 

However, under the reasoning that keeping baseball (the only large-scale professional sport in America during the 1920s) prosperous required granting it immunity from the Sherman Act, the United States Supreme Court had held in 1922 in &quot;Federal Baseball Club v. National League&quot; (259 U.S. 200) that baseball was an &quot;amusement&quot;, and that organizing a schedule of games between independently owned and operated clubs operating in various states, and engaging in activities incidental thereto, did not constitute &quot;interstate commerce&quot; and therefore antitrust laws did not apply to such activity.

In 1951, Representative Emanuel Celler announced that he would hold hearings in the United States House Judiciary Committee to examine MLB&#x27;s antitrust exemption. Celler entered the hearings believing that MLB needed laws to support the reserve clause. Star players, such as Lou Boudreau and Pee Wee Reese, indicated their support of the reserve clause. Minor league veteran Ross Horning testified about his experiences in baseball, which he said were more common for rank-and-file players. Cy Block testified about his experiences and how the reserve clause prevented him from getting an extended trial in the major leagues. Celler&#x27;s final report suggested that the U.S. Congress should take no action, allowing for the matter to be settled in the federal judiciary of the United States. The Supreme Court of the United States upheld MLB&#x27;s antitrust exemption and the reserve clause in &quot;Toolson v. New York Yankees, Inc.&quot; in 1953.

This pass on &quot;trust-busting&quot; essentially codified the legal legitimacy of the reserve clause for many years, and gave what came to be known as Major League Baseball unprecedented power over both players and the independent organizations of the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues (NAPBL). MLB could dictate not only how and where professional players could move between major league clubs, but as they took the opportunity of the Great Depression to establish systems of farm teams of players wholly owned by the parent clubs placed on independent teams from the NA leagues around the country, they developed a way of expanding control of contracts of virtually the entire pool of professional baseball players.

When other team sports, particularly ice hockey, football, and basketball developed professional leagues, their owners essentially emulated baseball&#x27;s reserve clause. This system stood largely unchallenged other than by the occasional holdout for many years.
In October 1969, St. Louis Cardinals outfielder Curt Flood unsuccessfully challenged his trade to the Philadelphia Phillies and sacrificed the remainder of his playing career to pursue this litigation. In &quot;Flood v. Kuhn&quot; the Supreme Court established that the reserve clause was a legitimate basis for negotiation in collective bargaining between players and owners, and that the historic baseball antitrust exemption was valid for baseball only and not applicable to any other sport. Although the Court ruled in baseball&#x27;s favor 5–3, it admitted the original grounds for the antitrust exemption were tenuous at best, that baseball was indeed interstate commerce for purposes of the act and the exemption was an &quot;anomaly&quot; it had explicitly refused to extend to other professional sports or entertainment.

Removing the reserve clause from player contracts became the primary goal of negotiations between the Major League Baseball Players Association and the owners. The reserve clause was struck down in 1975 when arbitrator Peter Seitz ruled that since pitchers Andy Messersmith and Dave McNally had played for one season without a contract, they could become free agents. This decision essentially dismantled the reserve clause and opened the door to widespread free agency within North American professional baseball.

==Basketball==
The National Basketball Association (NBA) went through several phases of compensation and other arcane provisions before reaching almost unrestricted free agency. The first player in that league—and the first American major-league athlete—to challenge the reserve clause was Rick Barry. In 1969, he wanted to leave the San Francisco Warriors after his second season to play for the Oakland Oaks, who were coached by his father-in-law, Bruce Hale. Barry sat out a season before joining the Oaks.

==Football==
On June 18, 1921, the National Football League (NFL) ratified its first constitution. The reserve clause ratified in the constitution was similar to that of baseball&#x27;s at the time. The reserve clause stipulated that a team had the first opportunity to sign a player after the length of the contract had expired. If the team chose not to offer a contract, then the player could try to sign with a team of his choosing. Theoretically, the reserve clause bound the player &quot;...to his employer in perpetuity&quot;. The reserve clause had been abolished in the NFL constitution in 1948 when the option clause was created. The option clause stated that a team may choose to automatically keep a player on their team for another year, at the same pay, after his contract had expired. The term, option clause, was not used by the print media and it was instead referred to as the reserve clause. Nevertheless, in the NFL&#x27;s attempt to gain antitrust exemption from Congress in 1957, Bert Bell still referred to the clause as the option clause (and also as the &quot;option and reserve clause&quot;).

Decades later, NFL players&#x27; mobility was limited by the so-called &quot;Rozelle rule&quot;, named for the commissioner who first implemented it, which allowed the commissioner to &quot;compensate&quot; any team who lost a free agent to another team by taking something of equivalent value, usually draft picks, from the team that had signed the free agent and giving it to the team the player had left. Fear of losing several future high draft picks greatly limited free agency as no team wanted to sign a veteran player only to learn that it would lose, for example, its next two first-round draft picks.

The Rozelle rule was eventually replaced by &quot;plan B&quot;, which allowed a team to name a thirty-seven man roster the reserve clause would apply to, and all players not included on this list were free agents. Few top-echelon players were left off this thirty-seven man roster unless they happened to be injured. Judge Earl R. Larson declared that the rule was a violation of antitrust laws in &quot;Mackey v. National Football League&quot; on December 30, 1975, and something resembling true free agency came to pro football. Now, exclusive rights to a player are only for the first three years after his selection in the college draft. At the end of the first three years, a player can be a &quot;restricted free agent&quot;, allowing his former team to match any offer made to him by another. After four years in the NFL all contracts end with the player becoming an unrestricted free agent without reserve.

There is a franchise tag option that is similar to the reserve clause; however, teams can only tag one player each year, although they can tag the same player for consecutive years. Franchised players are eligible to receive at least 120% of their previous year&#x27;s salary, and players tagged &quot;non-exclusive&quot; can accept offers from other teams; if the original team does not match the offer, they receive draft picks as compensation. In recent years, many teams have opted not to exercise their right to designate the franchise tag.

==Hockey==
The reserve clause was the basis for the National Hockey League (NHL)&#x27;s injunction against the large number of players who had signed with the rival World Hockey Association in 1972, with all but one—against Chicago Black Hawks star Bobby Hull—ultimately thrown out by lower courts. The appellate court, however, sided strongly with the WHA and Hull, calling the NHL&#x27;s business practices monopolistic, conspiratorial, and illegal. While the reserve clause was not explicitly struck down, the court did effectively block any further injunctions based on the reserve clause, rendering it useless. (The WHA, meanwhile, voted at its founding to abolish the reserve clause.) The end of the reserve clause in hockey remains a significant part of the WHA&#x27;s legacy, as it ultimately resulted in the evolution of the NHL&#x27;s modern free agency system.

The highly contentious negotiations between NHL owners and players that led to a lockout, wiping out the entire 2004–05 NHL season, were in part about free agency; the previous system precluded unrestricted free agency before the player reached 31 years of age. Most younger hockey free agents were restricted free agents whose teams could retain them by matching an offer from another club or making a &quot;qualifying offer&quot;, which usually consisted of a ten percent raise above the pay in the former contract. Following the 2004-05 lockout, owners eventually agreed to phase in a much lower age for unrestricted free agency (27 years of age or 7 years in the NHL, whichever comes first) in exchange for the players meeting owners&#x27; principal demand in the new NHL Collective Bargaining Agreement—an overall salary cap. Nevertheless, the league demanded the re-imposition of the 31-year-old threshold for free agency in the most recent lockout, but when union responded by threatening to disclaim interest and file antitrust suits against the league, the owners backed down.

==Soccer==
Major League Soccer (MLS) is a professional soccer league representing the sport&#x27;s highest level in both the United States and Canada. MLS constitutes one of the major professional sports leagues of the United States and Canada.

Unlike the other four major leagues of North American professional sport, MLS still retains a reserve clause in every player&#x27;s contract. For Major League Soccer, this was initially to prevent clubs from competing with each other for player contracts, an aspect of single-entity designed to protect it from antitrust lawsuits. MLS is a single entity in which each team is owned and controlled by the league&#x27;s investors. The investor-operators control their teams as owners control teams in other leagues, and are commonly (but inaccurately) referred to as the team&#x27;s owners. In MLS&#x27;s view of the global professional sports marketplace, internal bidding leads to increased costs. The league takes an additional step, imposing the reserve clause for players indefinitely, making player rights a commodity within the team structure for long after the player has left the league.

==See also==
* Retain and transfer system, a similar system that restricted player movement in professional association football in England 
* Bosman ruling, a European Court of Justice decision that ended a similar system in European association football

==References==

==Sources==
* Algeo, Matthew (2006), &quot;Last Team Standing&quot;. Philadelphia: Da Capo Press. 
* Lyons, Robert S. (2010). &quot;On Any Given Sunday, A Life of Bert Bell&quot;. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
* Ruck, Rob; with Paterson, Maggie Jones and Weber, Michael P. (2010) &quot;Rooney:a Sporting Life&quot;. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 
* Willis, Chris (2010). &quot;The Man Who Built the National Football League:Joe F. Carr&quot;. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press, Inc. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="4" end="18" title="Reserve clause" label="reserve clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="23" end="37" title="North American" label="North American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369650" start="38" end="57" title="professional sports" label="professional sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="885" end="893" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="970" end="981" title="free agency" label="free agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="1024" end="1032" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276641" start="1494" end="1514" title="Players&amp;#x27; League" label="Players&amp;#x27; League"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="2262" end="2277" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="2801" end="2822" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="3343" end="3370" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440025" start="3397" end="3437" title="Federal Baseball Club v. National League" label="Federal Baseball Club v. National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="3691" end="3710" title="interstate commerce" label="interstate commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="3731" end="3740" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="3788" end="3802" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052621" start="3803" end="3817" title="Emanuel Celler" label="Emanuel Celler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131462" start="3863" end="3902" title="United States House Judiciary Committee" label="United States House Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="3925" end="3934" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q326781" start="4058" end="4070" title="Lou Boudreau" label="Lou Boudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q182485" start="4075" end="4088" title="Pee Wee Reese" label="Pee Wee Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q111143099" start="4158" end="4170" title="Ross Horning" label="Ross Horning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197295" start="4274" end="4282" title="Cy Block" label="Cy Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="4455" end="4468" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="4537" end="4575" title="federal judiciary of the United States" label="federal judiciary of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="4581" end="4615" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824102" start="4686" end="4719" title="Toolson v. New York Yankees, Inc." label="Toolson v. New York Yankees, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="4755" end="4768" title="trust-busting" label="trust-busting"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="4990" end="5043" title="National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues" label="National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5194" end="5210" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="5235" end="5244" title="farm team" label="farm team"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="5514" end="5524" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="5526" end="5534" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="5540" end="5550" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q623109" start="5574" end="5581" title="sports league" label="leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="5758" end="5777" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195372" start="5789" end="5799" title="Curt Flood" label="Curt Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="5843" end="5864" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460083" start="5952" end="5965" title="Flood v. Kuhn" label="Flood v. Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="6068" end="6089" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="6399" end="6418" title="interstate commerce" label="interstate commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867557" start="6674" end="6715" title="Major League Baseball Players Association" label="Major League Baseball Players Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273477" start="6770" end="6774" title="1975 in baseball" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761039" start="6829" end="6845" title="Andy Messersmith" label="Andy Messersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229363" start="6850" end="6862" title="Dave McNally" label="Dave McNally"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="7107" end="7138" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q434824" start="7378" end="7388" title="Rick Barry" label="Rick Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q157376" start="7422" end="7444" title="San Francisco Warriors" label="San Francisco Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q873250" start="7485" end="7497" title="Oakland Oaks (ABA)" label="Oakland Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645471" start="7538" end="7548" title="Bruce Hale" label="Bruce Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="7634" end="7658" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894971" start="8600" end="8609" title="Bert Bell" label="Bert Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="8733" end="8736" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745380" start="8795" end="8807" title="Pete Rozelle" label="Rozelle rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q31603" start="9021" end="9026" title="sports draft" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326051" start="9653" end="9667" title="Earl R. Larson" label="Earl R. Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277149" start="9710" end="9723" title="United States antitrust law" label="antitrust law"/>
<link wikidata="Q208947" start="9734" end="9740" title="John Mackey (American football)" label="Mackey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675778" start="10257" end="10270" title="franchise tag" label="franchise tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="10845" end="10867" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="10958" end="10982" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="11017" end="11036" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Black Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q456688" start="11042" end="11052" title="Bobby Hull" label="Bobby Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q936020" start="11747" end="11754" title="2004–05 NHL lockout" label="lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q377382" start="11778" end="11796" title="2004–05 NHL season" label="2004–05 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q961806" start="12438" end="12473" title="NHL Collective Bargaining Agreement" label="NHL Collective Bargaining Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369344" start="12485" end="12495" title="salary cap" label="salary cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628397" start="12601" end="12620" title="2012–13 NHL lockout" label="most recent lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="12764" end="12783" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="12808" end="12814" title="association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054125" start="12878" end="12891" title="United States soccer league system" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15306073" start="12896" end="12902" title="Canadian soccer league system" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409663" start="12931" end="12964" title="Major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada" label="major professional sports leagues"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13196" end="13201" title="MLS#Teams" label="clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316618" start="13910" end="13936" title="Retain and transfer system" label="Retain and transfer system"/>
<link wikidata="Q465550" start="14038" end="14051" title="Bosman ruling" label="Bosman ruling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="14055" end="14080" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="14130" end="14150" title="association football" label="association football"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795068" wikidata="Q1220419" url="?curid=795068" title="Diego Domínguez (rugby union)">
<text>Diego Dominguez (born 25 April 1966 in Córdoba, Argentina) is a former rugby union fly-half. After playing a couple of matches for Argentina, he spent the vast majority of his career with the Italy national rugby union team, winning 74 caps for the latter.

In 1988, Dominguez toured France with the Argentine national team, and in 1989 he scored 27 points in two games for Argentina against Chile and Paraguay. Because of the little opportunities, he decided that he would turn to Italy, his grandmother&#x27;s homeland. After the tour with Argentina, he played for a year in France, and then moved to Milan in Italy.

Dominguez then made his Italian debut in March 1991 against France. Dominguez played for the &quot;Azzurri&quot; at fly-half in three world cups in 1991, 1995 and 1999. He is one of only eight players (Dan Carter, Jonny Wilkinson, Ronan O&#x27;Gara, Neil Jenkins, Owen Farrell, Johnny Sexton and Florin Vlaicu) in history to have scored more than 1,000 international points.

In 1997 he moved to Stade Français and was part of the French champions&#x27; 1998 side. Stade also reached the final of the Heineken Cup in 2001 but despite Dominguez kicking 30 points, they lost to Leicester Tigers.

He announced his retirement in 2000 but was persuaded to return as there was no heir apparent. He played his last game for Italy on 22 February 2003 against Ireland.

==Honours==
 Stade Français
*French Rugby Union Championship/Top 14: 1997–98, 1999–2000, 2002–03, 2003–04

==References==
==External links==
*Planet-Rugby Argentina stats
*Planet-rugby stats for Italy and biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1220419" start="0" end="15" title="Diego Domínguez (rugby union)" label="Diego Dominguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q44210" start="39" end="46" title="Córdoba, Argentina" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="71" end="82" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583019" start="83" end="91" title="Fly-half (rugby union)" label="fly-half"/>
<link wikidata="Q646070" start="131" end="140" title="Argentina national rugby union team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q113135" start="192" end="223" title="Italy national rugby union team" label="Italy national rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="236" end="240" title="Cap (sport)" label="caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q646070" start="300" end="323" title="Argentina national rugby union team" label="Argentine national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="603" end="608" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="612" end="617" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q518116" start="680" end="686" title="France national rugby union team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583019" start="736" end="744" title="Fly-half (rugby union)" label="fly-half"/>
<link wikidata="Q726199" start="822" end="832" title="Dan Carter" label="Dan Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q318920" start="834" end="849" title="Jonny Wilkinson" label="Jonny Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q733831" start="851" end="868" title="Ronan O&amp;#x27;Gara" label="Ronan O&amp;#x27;Gara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381233" start="870" end="882" title="Neil Jenkins" label="Neil Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q718533" start="884" end="896" title="Owen Farrell" label="Owen Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400144" start="898" end="911" title="Johnny Sexton" label="Johnny Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074324" start="916" end="929" title="Florin Vlaicu" label="Florin Vlaicu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361000" start="1016" end="1030" title="Stade Français" label="Stade Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120374" start="1121" end="1133" title="Heineken Cup" label="Heineken Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071691" start="1196" end="1212" title="Leicester Tigers" label="Leicester Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="1372" end="1379" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361000" start="1395" end="1409" title="Stade Français" label="Stade Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q5798" start="1411" end="1449" title="Top 14" label="French Rugby Union Championship/Top 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136898" start="1451" end="1458" title="1997–98 French Rugby Union Championship" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q675116" start="1460" end="1469" title="1999–2000 French Rugby Union Championship" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q675126" start="1471" end="1478" title="2002–03 Top 16 season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q673483" start="1480" end="1487" title="2003–04 Top 16 season" label="2003–04"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795070" wikidata="Q1622735" url="?curid=795070" title="Mazda Bongo">
<text>The , also known as Mazda E-Series, Eunos Cargo, and the Ford Econovan, is a cabover van and pickup truck manufactured by the Japanese automobile manufacturer Mazda since 1966. The Bongo name was also used for the Bongo Friendee, which is not a cabover design.

It has been built with rear-, middle-, as well as front-mounted engines. It also formed the basis for the long-running Kia Bongo range. It is named for the African Bongo, a type of antelope.


== First generation (1966–1975) ==

Mazda first introduced its small van, the Bongo, in May 1966. It featured a rear-mounted 782 cc water-cooled OHV SA 4-stroke engine driving the rear wheels. The rear-engined Bongo was produced in two versions from 1968, as the F800 was joined by the bigger-engined F1000. This has a 987 cc PB overhead valve inline-four engine with at 5500 rpm. The chassis code for the 1-litre model is FPA. Its dimensions were long, wide, height, with a wheelbase of , and Vehicle weight of (commercial delivery van) (passenger coach), and (cab-over truck). Mazda also showed an electrically powered version of the van, which could reach , and with a range. but wasn&#x27;t put into production, and remained a prototype. The engines were shared with Mazda&#x27;s Familia small car range. Production ended in 1975, due to Mazda suffering serious economic troubles, and upcoming stricter emissions regulations for 1976, influenced by the original United States Federal Clean Air Act of 1963. This model retained the same body shape for its 10-year production life, the later models fitted with inertia-reel seat belts, and separate front parking indicator lights.

The rear-engined Bongos had a full chassis (using the same Mazda 1000 engine as other variants mounted to a four-speed transaxle at the rear), and were very strong, and due to the low gearing, able to carry half a ton. Due to rust and poor maintenance, these Bongos are now rare. The 1000 pickup which was built for commercial uses, and the cargo and passenger vans all used a double wishbone and coil spring suspension for the front wheels, and a trailing-arm suspension and coil springs at the rear wheels.

Due to the popularity of the Bongo, Mazda decided to manufacture a minibus, called the Mazda Parkway starting in 1974 until 1997, shared with the larger Mazda Titan truck platform.
== Second generation (1977–1983) ==

After a two-year hiatus, the next Bongo van appeared in September 1977. It was a mid-engine rear wheel drive vehicle. Ford sold this version of the van as the Ford Econovan, while Mazda sold it for export as the E1300, E1400, and E1600, depending on engine size. Beginning in October 1979 a 2.2-litre diesel engine was also available in commercial versions, sold in export as the E2200. This appeared in the passenger version &quot;Bongo Multi Wagon&quot; in February 1980. The Bongo Multi Wagon had originally been sold with a 1.8-liter petrol engine only. This model went on sale in Great Britain in 1982 as the E1600, only a year before it was replaced by the next generation. The British market only received the long wheelbase 1-tonne panel van version with small, twinned rear wheels, and a five-speed manual gearbox with a column-mounted shifter.

This generation was also manufactured by Kia in South Korea, as the Kia Bongo and Ceres. The Bongo/Ceres underwent a number of facelifts, and was still available as late as 1999.

The original version has round headlights, and no grille; after a January 1981 facelift the second generation Bongo/E-series had rectangular headlights, and a more traditional grille. The first generation of the Bongo was the best-selling Mazda vehicle from its introduction until 1981, when it was surpassed by the front-wheel drive Mazda Familia.

In Australia, rebadged versions were sold as the Ford Econovan as a SWB petrol van (with and without side windows), LWB petrol van (with and without side windows), and LWB diesel van guises (windowless). SWB and LWB window petrol vans also sold in passenger-carrying Ford Econowagon form. Luxury-oriented passenger models were sold under the Ford Spectron name as high-roof eight-seaters. The Spectron name was also introduced for the Japanese market in 1981, on the facelifted version of the second generation Bongo.

=== Engines ===
* 1977–October 1979 1,272 cc TC, / JIS (Japan) – BA2T8
* 1977–1983 1,586 cc NA, JIS (Japan) – BA2N9
* October 1978–198? 1,769 cc VC, JIS (Japan) – BA2V8/BA2V9
* October 1979 – 1983 1,415 cc UC, / JIS (Japan) – BA2U9
* October 1979 – 1983 2,209 cc S2, / JIS (Japan) - BA2S9

== Third generation (1983–1999) ==
The Bongo was redesigned in 1983 with new engines. It was also sold by Ford in Asia as the &quot;Spectron&quot; (passenger version) or as the &quot;J80&quot; (cargo model). In Australia, the Bongo was sold by Mazda as the E-series, with Ford also retailing the commercial version as the &quot;Ford Econovan&quot; and the passenger version as the &quot;Ford Spectron&quot; (1983–1990). From 1994 onwards, the Bongo was also sold by Nissan as the Vanette. In South Korea this was built as the Kia Wide Bongo. In South Africa, it was sold as the Ford Spectron.

During the 1980s, Toyota, Nissan, and Mitsubishi all sold versions of their utility vans in the United States, but only Toyota&#x27;s had any market success and as Mazda was a smaller company than the others, they were more risk-adverse and decided localizing the Bongo wasn&#x27;t worthwhile. Instead, they created the more passenger car-like MPV for the American market.

===Australia===
In Australia, it was sold as the Mazda E-series and the Mazda Traveller and also as the Ford Econovan and Ford Spectron. The entry-level Econovan offered a length, 1.8-litre petrol engine, five-speed manual of four-speed automatic, single rear wheels, in three-seater steel-sided or six seater XL window-sided forms. Prior to 1986, there was also a 1.4-litre engine and five-speed manual option available as a steel-sided van with single- or dual-rear wheels, and as a passenger-carrying XL van with single-rear wheels.

The long Econovan Maxi offered a high roof, 2.0-litre petrol engine with five-speed manual or four-speed automatic, single rear wheels, and three-seater steel-sided or six seater XL window-sided forms. Dual rear wheels were available for the 2.0-litre petrol or a 2.2-litre diesel, both with five-speed manual and as steel-sided vans.

The long Econovan Maxi van was also high roofed, but steel-sided only. Powertrain and rear wheel setups were the same as the 4.4-metre Maxi. In 1986, four-wheel drive became an option for the 4.7-metre long model in conjunction with the windowed body work, manual transmission, and 2.0-litre engine. A cab chassis version was offered on the 4.7-metre chassis, with 2.0-litre petrol engine with five-speed manual. It was available as a two-door, three-seater model with payload and as a four-door, six-seater &quot;Crew Cab&quot; with payload.

In December 1985, Ford updated the Econovan in Australia to upgrade the engines for unleaded petrol. The petrol engine fitted to 4.0-metre Econovan increased in displacement from 1.4 to 1.8 litres, and the 4.4-metre Maxi had its petrol engine increased from 1.8 to 2.0 litres. The 4.0- and 4.4-metre Econovan also gained the availability of four-speed automatic, previously fitted only to the Spectron vans. The 4.7-metre Maxi van, previously available only with dual rear wheels, was now also available with single rear wheels, although crew cab and cab chassis models remained as dual rear wheel propositions. Ford stated that all petrol manuals and the 4.4-metre petrol automatic Maxi were designed to run on both leaded and unleaded fuel, although the 4.0-metre petrol automatic will run only on unleaded. At the same time as these powertrain updates, Ford also made some cosmetic changes to the Spectron. The low-roof Spectron added colour-keyed bumpers and a new side stripe, matched to a new beige cloth interior trim, and on the XLT the old beige interior colour switched to grey.

=== Engines ===
Petrol
* 1984 - 1985 1,415 cc UC
* 1984 - 1994 1,490 cc D5 (This engine is simply a Mazda E5 that was configured for rear-wheel drive configurations)
* 1983 - 1999 1,789 cc F8
* 1983 - 1988 1,998 cc FE

Diesel
* 1984–1995 1,998 cc Diesel
* 1984–1995 2,184 cc R2 Diesel
* 1984–1995 1,998 cc RF Diesel

=== Bongo Brawny ===
A new long-wheelbase version known as the Bongo Brawny was also introduced, three months before the regular Bongo. The Brawny was larger than the regular Bongo in by all key measures (wheelbase, length, width, height, and weight). In export markets this model was again sold as the E-series. In Australia, Ford differentiated the long-wheelbase versions with the &quot;Econovan Maxi&quot; identifier. In Korea, it is also known as Kia Wide Bongo for truck variant and Kia Besta for van variant

== Fourth generation (SK/SL; 1999–2020) ==
In June 1999, a new generation of Bongo vans and trucks went on sale, which were also rebadged as the Mazda E-series, Ford Econovan, Mitsubishi Delica Van/Truck, and Nissan Vanette. This model adopted the SK platform which was based on the previous generation SS/SE model. This was sold at various Mazda, Mazda Anfini and Mazda Autozam dealers. On August 20, 2010, an upgraded Bongo truck/van were officially released in Japan.

Mazda&#x27;s difficult business environment at the time meant they could not afford to build a full brand new platform. A petrol 1.8-litre EGI &quot;F8-E&quot; with and a diesel 2.2-litre &quot;R2&quot; with were available. Mazda announced that this is the last generation of in-house designed Bongo vans and trucks in March 2012. Mazda discontinued the Bongo in 2020 and it will focus on fuel efficient passenger cars.
* November 1999: the Mitsubishi Delica Cargo was Rebadged and released in Japan only.
* December 2003: A new common rail direct fuel injection diesel model was introduced.
* November 2005: Minor updates on exterior lighting.
* 2006: the Australian-market E1800 (SKW0) is discontinued.
* August 2007: DPF introduced for diesel engine models. Power windows and central locking were also introduced for all truck models.
* May 2009: due to Nissan&#x27;s in-house NV200 Vanette, sales of the 2WD petrol models were stopped.
* August 2010: Minor updates for the entire range include the introduction of a new 1.8-litre L8 petrol engine. This required a larger center console box which reduced seating capacity. New model codes (SKP2T/SKP2L) were applied.
* 2011: The New Zealand market E1800 (SKW0) was discontinued.
* October 2011: The rebadged Mitsubishi Delica model was discontinued. and shifted to the Nissan NV200 Vanette model.
* March 2012: Mazda announced that this would be the last generation of in-house designed Bongo vans and trucks. They withdrew from commercial vehicle production to focus on fuel efficient passenger cars.
* June 2012: Minor safety updated. Rear decal renewed. MAZDA decal deleted (van only).
* February 2016: Minor updated. New engine tune-up and increase fuel economy, Auto now became five-speed, dual-rear wheels model discontinued, 4W-ABS and Keyless entry for all models, new model codes SLP2V/SLP2M applied.

=== Bongo Brawny (SK; 1999–2010) ===
The longer version of the Bongo, the Bongo Brawny was released in June 1999. This model also adopted the SK platform which is based on previous generation SS/SE model. Like the previous generation, the Bongo Brawny was larger in all key dimensions. It was available in both regular 2400 mm and long 2600 mm wheelbases. The Brawny retained many of the parts of the previous generation, such as the sliding side doors, and looks rather similar to the previous generation model. The E-series label continued to be used in export markets, although they were now fewer than before. The Bongo Brawny was discontinued in August 2010.

* November 1999: the Mitsubishi Delica Cargo was Rebadged and released in Japan only.
* October 2000: The truck model was discontinued due to the introduction of the Mazda Titan Dash 1-ton.
* December 2004: Minor changes include the introduction of a new Common rail direct injection diesel 2.0 RF-CDT engine and new model codes SKF6 applied for diesel models.
* November 2005: Minor updates include the addition of exterior lighting.
* 2006: The E2000 MWB (SKX0) and E2000 LWB (SKY0) is discontinued in Australia.
* August 2007: 4WD and GL Super trim levels are discontinued.
* August 2010: The New Zealand-market Bongo Brawny, E2000 (LWB), a rebadged Mitsubishi Delica Cargo, was discontinued.

=== Bongo Friendee (1995–2005) ===


The Bongo Friendee was introduced in June 1995, based on the SG platform. It was an eight-seater minivan, and was also sold on the Japanese home market as the Ford Freda.

It was usually, but not exclusively, available with an automatic transmission, and came in 2WD (SGL3), and 4WD (SGL5) versions. The 2.5-litre turbo-diesel was common in Japan, although there a 2.5-litre V6 petrol version was available.

The Mazda Bongo Friendee was an eight-seater minivan. Some had Mazda factory-fitted kitchens. Many were imported to the UK, and converted to camper vans. All of them had fold-down seats downstairs to make a double bed, and on many models there was an &quot;Auto Free Top&quot; elevating roof which could sleep two more people. Flat-top versions were also available in Hong Kong, and sold by official dealer.

In September 2001, a facelifted version appeared, with a revised body style and different engines, although the 2.5 turbo-diesel continued unchanged. Air conditioning and climate control was fitted as standard, and electronic blinds, and electric side door were commonly fitted options.

==== Engines ====
Petrol
* 2.0 L &quot;FE&quot; SOHC I4
* 2.5 L &quot;Mazda J engine#J5&quot; V6

Diesel
* 2.5 L &quot;WL-T&quot; turbo-diesel (the same engine is found in the Mazda B-series Pickup truck)
== Fifth generation ==

=== Bongo Van and Bongo Truck (S400; 2020–present) ===
The Bongo was reintroduced in July 2020 in Japan and based on the Daihatsu Gran Max. It is available in van and truck model.

=== Bongo Brawny (H200; 2019–present) ===
The Bongo Brawny was reintroduced in April 2019 in Japan as a badge engineered fifth-generation Toyota HiAce. Unlike the previous model, it is intended to be a larger commercial van as opposed to a passenger van.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1622735" start="20" end="34" title="Mazda Bongo" label="Mazda E-Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622735" start="36" end="47" title="Mazda Bongo" label="Eunos Cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622735" start="57" end="70" title="Mazda Bongo" label="Ford Econovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q370704" start="77" end="84" title="cabover" label="cabover"/>
<link wikidata="Q193468" start="85" end="88" title="van" label="van"/>
<link wikidata="Q215601" start="93" end="105" title="pickup truck" label="pickup truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="126" end="131" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35996" start="159" end="164" title="Mazda" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="214" end="228" title="#Friendee" label="Bongo Friendee"/>
<link wikidata="Q370704" start="245" end="252" title="cabover" label="cabover"/>
<link wikidata="Q484508" start="381" end="390" title="Kia Bongo" label="Kia Bongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193400" start="426" end="431" title="Bongo (antelope)" label="Bongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894" start="443" end="451" title="antelope" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q35996" start="491" end="496" title="Mazda" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155324" start="518" end="527" title="compact van" label="small van"/>
<link wikidata="Q267714" start="600" end="603" title="Overhead valve engine" label="OHV"/>
<link wikidata="Q191801" start="607" end="622" title="4-stroke engine" label="4-stroke engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="623" end="646" title="rear wheel drive" label="driving the rear wheels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="781" end="783" title="Mazda OHV engine#PB" label="PB"/>
<link wikidata="Q267714" start="784" end="798" title="overhead valve" label="overhead valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784109" start="799" end="817" title="inline-four engine" label="inline-four engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1239" end="1246" title="Mazda Familia#second" label="Familia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978744" start="1443" end="1464" title="Clean Air Act of 1963" label="Clean Air Act of 1963"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1568" end="1591" title="Seat belt#Locking retractors" label="inertia-reel seat belts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1923" end="1934" title="Mazda Familia#second" label="1000 pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359171" start="2236" end="2249" title="Mazda Parkway" label="Mazda Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543930" start="2302" end="2313" title="Mazda Titan" label="Mazda Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093045" start="2448" end="2458" title="MR layout" label="mid-engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="2459" end="2475" title="rear wheel drive" label="rear wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="2485" end="2489" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35349" start="3263" end="3266" title="Kia Motors" label="Kia"/>
<link wikidata="Q484508" start="3290" end="3299" title="Kia Bongo" label="Kia Bongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914618" start="3736" end="3749" title="Mazda Familia" label="Mazda Familia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4316" end="4318" title="Mazda C engine#TC" label="TC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4363" end="4365" title="Mazda C engine#NA" label="NA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4416" end="4418" title="Mazda F engine#VC" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4477" end="4479" title="Mazda C engine#UC" label="UC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4534" end="4536" title="Mazda diesel engines#Perkins" label="S2"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="5027" end="5033" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814517" start="5041" end="5048" title="Nissan Vanette" label="Vanette"/>
<link wikidata="Q484508" start="5087" end="5101" title="Kia Bongo" label="Kia Wide Bongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="5173" end="5179" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="5181" end="5187" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183275" start="5193" end="5203" title="Mitsubishi" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q660703" start="5499" end="5502" title="Mazda MPV" label="MPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q466511" start="7107" end="7119" title="engine displacement" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8082" end="8084" title="Mazda C engine#UC" label="UC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8108" end="8110" title="Mazda E engine#E5" label="D5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="8169" end="8185" title="rear-wheel drive" label="rear-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8225" end="8227" title="Mazda F engine#F8" label="F8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8251" end="8253" title="Mazda F engine#FE" label="FE"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="8283" end="8289" title="Diesel engine" label="Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8311" end="8313" title="Mazda diesel engines#R2" label="R2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8342" end="8344" title="Mazda diesel engines#RF" label="RF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128004" start="8385" end="8394" title="wheelbase" label="wheelbase"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9045" end="9072" title="Mitsubishi Delica#Bongo" label="Mitsubishi Delica Van/Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814517" start="9078" end="9092" title="Nissan Vanette" label="Nissan Vanette"/>
<link wikidata="Q632300" start="9120" end="9128" title="car platform" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="9810" end="9818" title="Rebadging" label="Rebadged"/>
<link wikidata="Q747223" start="9870" end="9903" title="common rail" label="common rail direct fuel injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134383" start="10061" end="10064" title="diesel particulate filter" label="DPF"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="11126" end="11132" title="anti-lock braking system" label="4W-ABS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521940" start="11137" end="11150" title="remote keyless system" label="Keyless entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="11919" end="11927" title="Rebadging" label="Rebadged"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12665" end="12676" title="Mazda S platform#SG" label="SG platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="12701" end="12708" title="minivan" label="minivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467786" start="12763" end="12773" title="Ford Freda" label="Ford Freda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536609" start="12867" end="12870" title="2WD" label="2WD"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="12883" end="12886" title="4WD" label="4WD"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="13058" end="13065" title="minivan" label="minivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357662" start="13154" end="13165" title="campervan" label="camper vans"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="13572" end="13588" title="Air conditioning" label="Air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="13593" end="13608" title="HVAC" label="climate control"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13749" end="13751" title="Mazda F engine#FE" label="FE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="13758" end="13762" title="SOHC" label="SOHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784109" start="13763" end="13765" title="Straight-four engine" label="I4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13780" end="13797" title="Mazda J engine#J5" label="Mazda J engine#J5"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="13804" end="13806" title="V6 engine" label="V6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13829" end="13833" title="Mazda diesel engines#WL-T 2.5" label="WL-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302203" start="13886" end="13900" title="Mazda B-series" label="Mazda B-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q11316925" start="14060" end="14077" title="Daihatsu Gran Max" label="Daihatsu Gran Max"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14241" end="14270" title="Toyota HiAce#H200" label="fifth-generation Toyota HiAce"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795071" wikidata="Q388315" url="?curid=795071" title="Afro-Brazilians">
<text>Afro-Brazilians (; ), also known as Black Brazilians (), are Brazilians of total or predominantly Sub-Saharan African ancestry. Most multiracial Brazilians also have a range of degree of African ancestry. Brazilians whose African features are more evident are generally seen by others as Blacks and may identify themselves as such, while the ones with less noticeable African features may not be seen as such. However, Brazilians rarely use the term &quot;Afro-Brazilian&quot; as a term of ethnic identity and never in informal discourse.

&quot;Preto&quot; (&quot;black&quot;) and &quot;pardo&quot; (&quot;brown/mixed&quot;) are among five ethnic categories used by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), along with &quot;branco&quot; (&quot;white&quot;), &quot;amarelo&quot; (&quot;yellow&quot;, ethnic East Asian), and &quot;indígena&quot; (indigenous). In the 2022 census, 20.7 million Brazilians (10,2% of the population) identified as &quot;preto&quot;, while 92.1 million (45,3% of the population) identified as &quot;pardo&quot;, together making up 55.5% of Brazil&#x27;s population. The term &quot;preto&quot; is usually used to refer to those with the darkest skin colour, so as a result of this many Brazilians of African descent identify themselves as &quot;pardos&quot;. The Brazilian Black Movement considers &quot;pretos&quot; and &quot;pardos&quot; together as part of a single category: &quot;negros&quot; (Blacks). In 2010, this perspective gained official recognition when Brazilian Congress passed a law creating the Statute of Racial Equality. However, this definition is contested since a portion of &quot;pardos&quot; are acculturated indigenous people or people with indigenous and European rather than African ancestry, especially in Northern Brazil. A survey from the early 2000s revealed that if the &quot;pardo&quot; category were removed from the census, at least half of those identifying as &quot;pardo&quot; would instead choose to identify as black.

During the slavery period between the 16th and 19th centuries, Brazil received approximately four to five million Africans, who constituted about 40% of all Africans brought to the Americas. Many Africans who escaped slavery fled to &quot;quilombos&quot;, communities where they could live freely and resist oppression. In 1850, Brazil determined the definitive prohibition of the transatlantic slave trade and in 1888 the country abolished slavery, making it the last one in the Americas to do so. With the largest Afro-descendant population outside of Africa, Brazil&#x27;s cultural, social, and economic landscape has been profoundly shaped by Afro-Brazilians. Their contributions are especially notable in sports, cuisine, literature, music, and dance, with elements like samba and capoeira reflecting their heritage. In contemporary times, Afro-Brazilians still face socioeconomic disparities and racial discrimination and continue the fight for racial equality and social justice.
==Brazilian census categories==

Currently, the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) uses five race or color categories in the census: &quot;branca&quot; (white), &quot;parda&quot; (brown/mixed), &quot;preta&quot; (black), &quot;amarela&quot; (yellow, ethnic East Asian) and &quot;indígena&quot; (indigenous). In the 1940 census, all individuals who did not identify as &quot;white&quot;, &quot;black&quot; or &quot;yellow&quot; were subsequently aggregated into the category &quot;&quot;pardo&quot;. In other words, people who identified as &quot;pardo&quot;, &quot;moreno&quot;, &quot;mulato&quot;, &quot;caboclo&quot;, indigenous, among others, were classified as &quot;pardos&quot;&quot;. In subsequent censuses, &quot;pardo&quot; was formalized as its own category, while Indigenous peoples gained a separate category only in 1991.

&quot;Pardo&quot; literally translates to brown, but it can also refer to racial mixture. Activists and scholars associated with the Brazilian Black movement argue that the inclusion of this category in the census distorts Brazil&#x27;s demographic depiction. They contend that the ideological privileging of whiteness in Brazilian society leads many Brazilians to ‘deny their blackness’ and ‘lighten’ themselves on the census by choosing the &quot;pardo&quot; category. Many black movement actors prefer the term &quot;negro&quot;, defining it as the sum of individuals who self-classify as brown (&quot;pardo&quot;) and black (&quot;preto&quot;) in the census. Many scholars and social scientists have also combined the brown and black categories in their studies, using terms such as &quot;Afro-descendente&quot;, Afro-Brazilian, or &quot;negro&quot;.
In 2010, the Brazilian Congress passed the Estatuto da Igualdade Racial (Statute of Racial Equality). The law adopts the racial term &quot;negro&quot; to refer to individuals who self-identify as black and brown according to the IBGE race or color classification. Although evidence suggests that blacks and browns have similar socio-economic profiles and indicators of material well-being compared to whites, some researchers note that it is problematic to collapse &quot;pretos&quot; and &quot;pardos&quot; into a collective black category because part of Brazilians who self-identify as &quot;pardo&quot; are of mixed European and indigenous ancestry, not African. A survey conducted in the early 2000s with a sample of 2,364 people from 102 municipalities showed that if the &quot;brown&quot; category were removed and Brazilians had to choose between &quot;black&quot; or &quot;white&quot;, the population would appear 68% white and 32% black. In this binary format, 44% of those identifying as brown would choose the white category. According to a 2000 survey held in Rio de Janeiro, the entire self-reported &quot;preto&quot; population reported to have African ancestry. 86% of the self-reported &quot;pardo&quot; and 38% of the self-reported white population reported to have African ancestors. It is notable that 14% of the &quot;pardos&quot; from Rio de Janeiro said they have no African ancestors. This percentage may be even higher in Northern Brazil, where there was a greater ethnic contribution from Amerindian populations.

The fusion of &quot;pretos&quot; and &quot;pardos&quot; into &quot;negros&quot; tends to be validated by the mainstream media, official bodies such as the Institute of Applied Economic Research (IPEA), ministries, government departments, and international organizations. However, not all people who identify as &quot;pardos&quot; are of African descent, especially in Northern Brazil, and identify with Blackness. Sociologist Demétrio Magnoli considers classifying all &quot;pretos&quot; and &quot;pardos&quot; as Blacks as an assault on the racial vision of Brazilians. Sociologist Simon Schwartzman points out that to &quot;substitute &quot;negro&quot; for &quot;preto&quot;, suppressing the &quot;pardo&quot; alternative would mean to impose unto Brazil a vision of the racial issue as a dichotomy, similar to that of the United States, which would not be true.&quot; Members of the black movement in Brazil seek to define their racial identity in political and socioeconomic terms; pardos are grouped with blacks based on shared realities of racial discrimination rather than merely as a result of having &quot;a drop of black blood.&quot; Research by Hasenbalg and Silva (1983) indicates that sociological racism is the primary factor uniting blacks and pardos.

Two IBGE surveys, the 1976 National Household Sample Survey (PNAD) and the July 1998 Monthly Employment Survey (PME), have been analyzed to assess how Brazilians think of themselves in racial terms. The results of these surveys show that a great number of racial terms are in use in Brazil, but most of these terms are used by small numbers of people. Edward Telles notes that 95% of the population used only six different terms (&quot;branco, moreno, pardo, moreno-claro, preto&quot; and &quot;negro&quot;). Petruccelli shows that the seven most common responses (the above plus &quot;amarela&quot;) sum up 97% of responses, and the 10 most common (the previous plus &quot;mulata&quot;, &quot;clara&quot;, and &quot;morena-escura&quot; – dark brunette) make 99%. Racial classifications in Brazil are based primarily on skin color and on other physical characteristics such as facial features, hair texture, etc. This is a poor scientific indication of ancestry, because only a few genes are responsible for someone&#x27;s skin color: a person who is considered White may have more African ancestry than a person who is considered Black, and vice versa. But, as race is a social construct, these classifications relate to how people are perceived and perceive themselves in society. In Brazil, class and economic status also affect how individuals are perceived.

In Brazil it is possible for two siblings of different colors to be classified as people of different races. Children who are born to a black mother and a European father would be classified as black if their features read more as African, and classified as white if their features appeared more European. The Brazilian emphasis on physical appearance rather than ancestry is evident from a large survey in which less than 10% of Brazilian black individuals cited Africa as one of their origins when allowed to provide multiple responses. In the July 1998 PME, the categories &quot;Afro-Brasileiro&quot; (&quot;Afro-Brazilian&quot;) and &quot;Africano Brasileiro&quot; (&quot;African Brazilian&quot;) were not used at all; the category &quot;Africano&quot; (&quot;African&quot;) was used by 0.004% of the respondents. In the 1976 PNAD, none of these terms was used even once.

Lighter-skinned mulattoes (who obviously were descendants of some Europeans) were easily integrated into the white population. Through years of integration and racial assimilation, a white Brazilian population has developed with more historic African ancestry, as well as a black population with European ancestry. In the United States, the efforts to enforce white supremacy resulted in southern states adopting a one-drop rule at the turn of the 20th century, so that people with any known African ancestry were automatically classified as Black, regardless of skin color. In the 21st century, many Black Americans have some degree of European ancestry, while few white Americans have African ancestry.

==History==
===Slavery===
The first Spaniards and Portuguese explorers in the Americas initially enslaved Amerindian populations. In the case of the Portuguese, the weakness of the political systems of the Tupi-Guarani Amerindian groups they conquered on the Brazilian coastline, and the inexperience of these Amerindians with systematic peasant labor, made them easy to exploit through non-coercive labor arrangements. However, several factors prevented the system of Amerindian slavery from being sustained in Brazil. For example, Native American populations were not numerous or accessible enough to meet all demands of the settlers for labor. In many cases, exposure to European diseases caused high levels of mortality among the Amerindian population, to such an extent that workers became scarce. Historians estimate that about 30,000 Amerindians under the rule of the Portuguese died in a smallpox epidemic in the 1560s. The Iberian conquerors could not attract sufficient settlers from their own countries to the colonies and, after 1570, they began increasingly to bring enslaved people who had been kidnapped in Africa as a primary labor force.
Over nearly three centuries from the late 1500s to the 1860s, Brazil was consistently the largest destination for African slaves in the Americas. In that period, approximately 4.9 million enslaved Africans were imported to Brazil. Brazilian slavery included a diverse range of labor roles. For example, gold mining in Brazil began to grow around 1690 in interior regions of Brazil, such as modern-day region of Minas Gerais. Slaves in Brazil also worked on sugar plantations, such as those found in the Captaincy of Pernambuco. Other products of slave labor in Brazil during that era in Brazilian history included tobacco, textiles, and cachaça, which were often vital items traded in exchange for slaves on the African continent.

The nature of the work that slaves did had a direct effect on aspects of slaves&#x27; lives such as life expectancy and family formation. An example from an early inventory of African slaves (1569–71) from the plantation of Sergipe do Conde in Bahia shows that he owned nineteen males and one female. These uneven gender-ratios combined with the high mortality rate related to the physical duress that working in a mine or on a sugar plantation (for example) could have on a slave&#x27;s body. The effect was often that many New World slave economies, including Brazil, relied on a constant importation of new slaves to replace those who had died.

With Brazil&#x27;s proximity to Africa, it was easy for the Portuguese to continue transporting Africans to Brazil when enslaved people ran away or died. Not all Africans and their descendants were enslaved, some were free and others were able to buy their freedom by earning money for their services. Despite the changes in the slave population demographic related to the constant importation of slaves through the 1860s, a creole generation in the African population emerged in Brazil. By 1800, Brazil had the largest single population of African and creole slaves in any one colony in the American continent.


In Africa, about 40% of Blacks died on the route between the areas of capture and the African coast. Another 15% died in the ships crossing the Atlantic Ocean between Africa and Brazil. From the Atlantic coast, the journey could take from 33 to 43 days. From Mozambique it could take as many as 76 days. Once in Brazil, from 10 to 12% of the slaves also died in the places where they were taken to be bought by their future masters. In consequence, only 45% of the Africans captured in Africa to become slaves in Brazil survived. Darcy Ribeiro estimated that, in this process, some 12 million Africans were captured to be brought to Brazil, even though the majority of them died before becoming slaves in the country. The African slaves in Brazil were known to have suffered various types of physical violence. Lashes on the back was the most common repressive measure. About 40 lashes per day were common and they prevented the mutilation of slaves. The colonial chroniclers recorded the extreme violence and sadism of White women against female slaves, usually due to jealousy or to prevent a relationship between their husbands and the slaves.

===Origins of Blacks===

&quot;The Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database&quot; project estimated that, during the slave trade, 4,821,126 Africans disembarked in Brazil. After thorough analyses in Africa and the Americas, researchers were able to trace the origins of the Africans brought to Brazil. About 70% of the slaves disembarked in Brazil came from Central-Western Africa. Today, this region includes the countries of Angola, the Republic of Congo, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Africans brought to Brazil belonged to two major groups: the West African and the Bantu people. The West Africans mostly belong to the Yoruba people, who became known as the &quot;nagô&quot;. The word derives from &quot;ànàgó&quot;, a derogatory term used by the Dahomey to refer to Yoruba-speaking people. The Dahomey enslaved and sold large numbers of Yoruba, largely of Oyo heritage. Slaves descended from the Yoruba are strongly associated with the Candomblé religious tradition. Other slaves belonged to the Fon people and other neighboring ethnic groups. Bantu people were mostly brought from present-day Angola and the Congo, most belonging to the Bakongo or Ambundu ethnic groups. Bantu slaves were also taken from coastal Mozambique. They were sent in large scale to Rio de Janeiro, Minas Gerais. The Yoruba and other people from Benin and Togo were sent, as for them in Northeastern Brazil, particularly in Bahia.

Gilberto Freyre noted the major differences between these groups. Some Sudanese peoples, such as Hausa, Fula and others, were Islamic and spoke Arabic and many of them could read and write in this language. Muslim slaves were brought from northern Mozambique. Freyre noted that many enslaved Africans were better educated than their masters, because many Muslim slaves were literate in Arabic, while many Portuguese Brazilian masters could not read or write in Portuguese. These slaves of greater Arab and Berber influence were largely sent to Bahia. These Muslim slaves, known as &quot;Malê&quot; in Brazil, produced one of the greatest slave revolts in the Americas, known as the Malê Revolt, when in 1835 they tried to take control of Salvador, until then the largest city of the American continent.

Despite the large influx of Islamic slaves, most of the slaves in Brazil were brought from the Bantu regions of the Atlantic coast of Africa where today Congo and Angola are located, and also from Mozambique. In general, these people lived in tribes, kingdoms or city-states. The people from Congo had developed agriculture, raised livestock, domesticated animals such as goat, pig, chicken and dog and produced sculpture in wood. Some groups from Angola were nomadic and did not know agriculture.

===Abolition of slavery===

According to Petrônio Domingues, by 1887 the slave struggles pointed to a real possibility of widespread insurrection. On 23 October, in São Paulo, for instance, there were violent confrontations between the police and rioting Blacks, who chanted &quot;long live freedom&quot; and &quot;death to the slaveowners&quot;. The president of the province, Rodrigues Alves, reported the situation as following:

:The massive flight of slaves from several &quot;fazendas&quot; threatens, in some places in the province, public order, alarming the proprietaries and the productive classes.

Uprisings erupted in Itu, Campinas, Indaiatuba, Amparo, Piracicaba and Capivari; ten thousand fugitive slaves grouped in Santos. Flights were happening in daylight, guns were spotted among the fugitives, who, instead of hiding from police, seemed ready to engage in confrontation.

It was as a response to such situation that, on 13 May 1888, slavery was abolished, as a means to restore order and the control of the ruling class, in a situation in which the slave system was almost completely disorganised.

As an abolitionist newspaper, &quot;O Rebate&quot;, put it, ten years later,

:Had the slaves not fled en masse from the plantations, rebelling against their masters ... Had they not, more than 20,000 of them, gone to the famous &quot;quilombo&quot; of Jabaquara (out of Santos, itself a center of abolitionist agitation), then maybe they would still be slaves today ... Slavery ended because slaves no longer wanted to be slaves, because slaves rebelled against their masters and against the law that enslaved them ... The law of 13 May was nothing more than the legal recognition – so as not to discredit public authority – of an act that had already been accomplished by the mass revolt of slaves.

=== Modern history ===
Political elites in Brazil actively promoted European immigration to &quot;whiten&quot; the population, banning African and Asian immigration in 1891. To incentivize European immigration, the federal government subsidized travel to Brazil until 1927. European and white Brazilian workers were favored in factory jobs over Brazilians of African descent, who were often relegated to domestic and plantation labor. Afro-Brazilians established their own social and cultural institutions to support each other. In Salvador, they founded religious brotherhoods like Rosário às Portas do Carmo (1888–1938). The Sociedade Protectora dos Desvalidos, created in 1832, was an early mutual aid society for Afro-Brazilians. There were also religiously affiliated groups led by Afro-Brazilian women, such as the Irmãndade de Boa Morte in Bahia. Facing exclusion from white social clubs, Afro-Brazilians formed their own organizations, including the Luvas Pretas in 1904 and the Palmares Civic Center in 1927, which served as a library and meeting place.

Afro-Brazilians challenged racial exclusion through cultural and political movements. Notably, in 1928, they protested a decree barring them from enlisting in the São Paulo Civil Guard. The Brazilian Black Front (Frente Negra Brasileira), Brazil&#x27;s first black political party, was founded in 1931 to fight racism but was disbanded six years later during Getúlio Vargas&#x27;s New State period (1937–1945), which restricted political activities. Although this period was repressive, Vargas&#x27;s 1931 Law of Naturalization of Labor, favoring Brazilian-born workers over European immigrants, garnered some Afro-Brazilian support for him. Before the 1940s, Afro-Brazilians also created their own newspapers and dance groups, with a small black elite leading intellectual thought in São Paulo’s Black Press.

==Demographics==


Before abolition, the growth of the black population was mainly due to the acquisition of new slaves from Africa. In Brazil, the black population had a negative growth. This was due to the low life expectancy of the slaves, which was around seven years. It was also because of the imbalance between the number of men and women. The vast majority of slaves were men, black women being a minority. Slaves rarely had a family and the unions between the slaves was hampered due to incessant hours of work. Another very important factor was that black women were held by white and mixed-race men. The Portuguese colonization, largely composed of men with very few women resulted in a social context in which white men disputed indigenous or African women.

According to Darcy Ribeiro the process of miscegenation between whites and blacks in Brazil, in contrast to an idealized racial democracy and a peaceful integration, was a process of sexual domination, in which the white man imposed an unequal relationship using violence because of his prime condition in society. As an official wife or as a concubine or subjected to a condition of sexual slave, the black woman was the responsible for the growth of the &quot;parda&quot; population. The non-White population has grown mainly through sexual intercourse between the black female slave and the Portuguese master, which, together with assortative mating, explains the high degree of European ancestry in the black Brazilian population and the high degree of African ancestry in the white population.

Historian Manolo Florentino refutes the idea that a large part of the Brazilian people is a result of the forced relationship between the rich Portuguese colonizer and the Amerindian or African slaves. According to him, most of the Portuguese settlers in Brazil were poor adventurers from Northern Portugal who immigrated to Brazil alone. Most of them were men (the proportion was eight or nine men for each woman) and then it was natural that they had relationships with the Amerindian or Black women. According to him the mixture of races in Brazil, more than a sexual domination of the rich Portuguese master over the poor slaves, was a mixture between the poor Portuguese settlers with the Amerindian and Black women.

The Brazilian population of more evident black physiognomy is more strongly present along the coast, due to the high concentration of slaves working on sugar cane plantations. Another region that had a strong presence of Africans was the mining areas in the center of Brazil. Freyre wrote that the states with strongest African presence were Bahia and Minas Gerais, but that there is no region in Brazil where the black people have not penetrated. Many blacks fled to the hinterland of Brazil, including the Northern region, and met Amerindian and Mameluco populations. Many of these acculturated blacks were accepted in these communities and taught them the Portuguese language and the European culture. In these areas the blacks were &quot;agents for transmitting European culture&quot; to those isolated communities in Brazil. Many blacks mixed with the Amerindian and caboclo women.

===Geographic distribution===
==== By region and state ====

The Northeast region has the highest proportion of self-identified Black Brazilians, comprising 13.0% of its population. It is followed by the Southeast at 10.6%, the Central-West at 9.1%, the North at 8.8%, and the South at 5.0%. In absolute numbers, the Southeast has the largest self-identified Black population, with 9,003,372 individuals, while the Northeast has 7,127,018. Together, the Southeast and Northeast account for 78.08% of Black Brazilians. The North ranks third with 1,530,418 Black Brazilians, followed by the South with 1,505,526, and the Central-West with 1,490,124.

==== By municipality ====
, the city of São Paulo has the largest self-identified Black population in Brazil, with 1,160,073 individuals identifying as &quot;pretos&quot;. It is followed by Rio de Janeiro with 968,428, Salvador with 825,509, Belo Horizonte with 312,920, Brasília with 301,765, Recife with 182,546, Feira de Santana with 180,190, Fortaleza with 171,018, Porto Alegre with 168,196, and São Luís with 167,885.

The 2022 census revealed that the brown population was the majority in 3,245 municipalities (58.3% of the total), while the self-identified black population was the majority in nine. More than half of the municipalities with a brown majority and all with a black majority are in the Northeast region of Brazil. With over 80% of its population being Afro-descendant, Salvador is considered the blackest city in the world outside the African continent.

==== &quot;Quilombos&quot; ====

The quilombola population in Brazil is 1,327,802 people, or 0.65% of the total population. The Northeast Region has 5,386 quilombola localities, 64% of the total. Bahia accounts for 29.90% of the quilombola population, followed by Maranhão, with 20.26%. Together, the two states are home to 50.16% of the country&#x27;s quilombola population.

==Genetic studies==
The research analysed the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), that is present in all human beings and passed down with only minor mutations through the maternal line. The other is the Y chromosome, that is present only in males and passed down with only minor mutations through the paternal line. Both can show from what part of the world a matrilineal or patrilineal ancestor of a person came from, but one can have in mind that they are only a fraction of the human genome, and reading ancestry from Y chromosome and mtDNA only tells 1/23rd the story, since humans have 23 chromosome pairs in the cellular DNA.

Analysing the Y chromosome, which comes from male ancestors through paternal line, it was concluded that half (50%) of Brazilian &quot;negros&quot; Y chromosomes come from Europe, 48% come from Africa and 1.6% come from Native Americans. Analysing their mitochondrial DNA, that comes from female ancestors though maternal line, 85% of them come from Africa, 12.5% come from Native Americans and 2.5% come from Europe. The high level of European ancestry in African Brazilians through paternal line exists because, for much of Brazil&#x27;s history, there were more Caucasian males than Caucasian females. So inter-racial relationships between Caucasian males and African or Native American females were widespread.
Over 75% of Caucasians from North and Northeastern Brazil would have over 10% native African genes, according to this particular study. Even in Southeastern and Southern Brazil, regions which received large waves of European immigration beginning in the 1820s and growing strongly in the late 19th century, 49% of the Caucasian population would have over 10% native African genes, according to that study. Thus, 86% of Brazilians would have at least 10% of genes that came from Africa. The researchers however were cautious about their conclusions: &quot;Obviously these estimates were made by extrapolation of experimental results with relatively small samples and, therefore, their confidence limits are very ample&quot;. An autosomal study from 2011, also led by Sérgio Pena, but with nearly 1000 samples this time, from all over the country, shows that in most Brazilian regions most Brazilians &quot;whites&quot; are less than 10% African in ancestry, and it also shows that the &quot;pardos&quot; are predominantly European in ancestry, the European ancestry being therefore the main component in the Brazilian population, in spite of a very high degree of African ancestry and significant Native American contribution. Other autosomal studies show a European predominance in the Brazilian population.

A 1981 study of blood polymorphisms examined 1,000 people from Porto Alegre in Southern Brazil and 760 from Natal in Northeastern Brazil. It found that people identified as White in Porto Alegre had 8% African ancestry, while those in Natal had a mix of 58% White, 25% Black, and 17% Amerindian ancestry. The study also showed that individuals identified as White or Pardo in Natal have a dominant European ancestry, while those identified as White in Porto Alegre have an overwhelming majority of European ancestry. According to an autosomal DNA genetic study from 2011, both &quot;whites&quot; and &quot;pardos&quot; from Fortaleza have a predominant degree of European ancestry (&gt;70%), with minor but important African and Native American contributions. &quot;Whites&quot; and &quot;pardos&quot; from Belém and Ilhéus also were found to be predominantly European in ancestry, with minor Native American and African contributions.

According to another study conducted at a school in the poor periphery of Rio de Janeiro, autosomal DNA study (from 2009), the &quot;pardos&quot; there were found to be on average over 80% European, and the &quot;whites&quot; were found out to carry very little Amerindian and/or African admixtures. In general, the test results showed that European ancestry is far more important than the students thought it would be. The &quot;blacks&quot; (pretos) of the periphery of Rio de Janeiro, according to this study, thought of themselves as predominantly African before the study and yet they turned out &quot;predominantly European&quot; (at 52%), the African contribution at 41% and the Native American 7%. According to another autosomal DNA study, those who identified as Whites in Rio de Janeiro turned out to have 86.4% – and self identified pardos 68.1% – European ancestry on average (autosomal). &quot;Pretos&quot; were found out to have on average 41.8% European ancestry.

An autosomal study from 2011 has also concluded that European ancestry is the predominant ancestry in Brazil, accounting for nearly 70% of the ancestry of the population. European ancestry ranged from 60.6% in the Northeast to 77.7% in the South. The 2011 autosomal study samples came from blood donors, public health personnel and health students. Brazilian homogeneity is, therefore, greater within regions than between them:

A 2015 autosomal genetic study, which also analyzed data of 25 studies of 38 different Brazilian populations concluded that: European ancestry accounts for 62% of the heritage of the population, followed by the African (21%) and the Native American (17%). The European contribution is highest in Southern Brazil (77%), the African highest in Northeast Brazil (27%) and the Native American is the highest in Northern Brazil (32%).

According to another study from 2008, by the University of Brasília, European ancestry dominates in the whole of Brazil in all regions, accounting for 65,90% of the heritage of the population, followed by the African contribution (24,80%) and the Native American (9,3%). According to an autosomal DNA study (from 2003) focused on the composition of the Brazilian population as a whole, &quot;European contribution [...] is highest in the South (81% to 82%), and lowest in the North (68% to 71%). The African component is lowest in the South (11%), while the highest values are found in the Southeast (18%–20%). Extreme values for the Amerindian fraction were found in the South and Southeast (7%–8%) and North (17%–18%)&quot;. The researchers were cautious with the results as their samples came from paternity test takers which may have skewed the results partly. Several other older studies have suggested that European ancestry is the main component in all Brazilian regions. Salzano (1997) reported 51% European, 36% African, and 13% Amerindian ancestry for the Northeastern population. Santos and Guerreiro (1995) found 47% European, 12% African, and 41% Amerindian ancestry in the north. In the southernmost state of Rio Grande do Sul, Dornelles et al. (1999) calculated 82% European, 7% African, and 11% Amerindian ancestries. Krieger et al. (1965) studied a Northeastern Brazilian population living in São Paulo and found that whites had 18% African and 12% Amerindian genetic contribution, while blacks had 28% European and 5% Amerindian genetic contribution. These Amerindian estimates, like others, have limitations. Compared to earlier studies, the 2002 study findings showed higher levels of bidirectional admixture between Africans and non-Africans.

In 2007 BBC Brasil launched the project &quot;Raízes Afro-Brasileiras&quot; (Afro-Brazilian Roots), in which they analyzed the genetic ancestry of nine famous Brazilian blacks and &quot;pardos&quot;. Three tests were based on analysis of different parts of their DNA: an examination of paternal ancestry, maternal ancestry and the genomic ancestry, allowing to estimate the percentage of African, European and Amerindian genes in the composition of an individual. Of the nine people analyzed, three had more European ancestry than African, while the other six people had more African ancestry, with varying degrees of European and Amerindian admixture. The African admixture varied from 19.5% in actress to 99.3% in singer Milton Nascimento. The European admixture varied from 0.4% in Nascimento to 70% in Silva. The Amerindian admixture from 0.3% in Nascimento to 25.4% in football player Obina.

==Media==
Afro-Brazilians, along with other non-European groups, are significantly underrepresented in Brazilian media. They have a low presence in telenovelas, which are the most-watched programs on Brazilian television. The Brazilian soap operas, as well as throughout Latin America, are accused of under-representing the Black, Mixed and Amerindian population and over-representing whites.

Brazil has produced soap operas since the 1960s, but it was only in 1996 that a black actress, Taís Araújo, was the protagonist of a telenovela, playing the role of the famous slave Chica da Silva. In 2002, Araújo was the protagonist of another soap opera, being the only Black actress to have a more prominent role in a TV production of Brazil. Black actors in Brazil are usually required to follow stereotypes and are usually in subordinate and submissive roles, as maids, drivers, servants, bodyguards, and poor favelados. Joel Zito Araújo wrote the book &quot;A Negação do Brasil&quot; (&quot;The Denial of Brazil&quot;) which talks about how Brazilian TV hides the Black population. Araújo analyzed Brazilian soap operas from 1964 to 1997 and only 4 black families were represented as being of middle-class. Black women usually appear under strong sexual connotation and sensuality. Black men usually appear as rascals or criminals.

Another common stereotype is of the &quot;old mammies&quot;. In 1970, in the soap &quot;A Cabana do Pai Tomás&quot; (based on American novel &quot;Uncle Tom&#x27;s Cabin&quot;) a white actor, Sérgio Cardoso, played Thomas, who was a black man in the book. The actor had to paint his body in black to look black. The choice of a White actor to play a black character caused major protests in Brazil. In 1975 the telenovela &quot;Gabriela&quot; was produced, based on a book by Jorge Amado, who described Gabriela, the main character, as a &quot;mulata&quot;. But to play Gabriela on television Rede Globo chose Sônia Braga, who is an olive-skinned woman. The producer claimed he &quot;did not find any talented Black actress&quot; for the role of Gabriela. In 2001 Rede Globo produced &quot;Porto dos Milagres&quot;, also based on a book by Jorge Amado. In the book Amado described a Bahia full of blacks. In the Rede Globo&#x27;s soap opera, on the other hand, almost all the cast was white. The same situation has been seen in the 2018 telenovela &quot;Segundo Sol&quot;, leading to new protests, mainly in social medias. But once again TV Globo denied racism, saying &quot;We base our cast selection by talent, not by race&quot;. In 2018, a survey conducted by UOL reported that Black actors represented approximately 7.98% of those employed in the drama departments of Brazil&#x27;s three major television networks. The data considered the soap operas that were either airing or in production at Globo, Record, and SBT.

In the fashion world Afro-Brazilians are also poorly represented. In Brazil there is a clear predominance of models from the South of Brazil, mostly of European descent. Many black models complained of the difficulty of finding work in the fashion world in Brazil. This reflects a Caucasian standard of beauty demanded by the media. To change this trend, the Black Movement of Brazil entered in court against the fashion show, where almost all the models were whites. In a fashion show during São Paulo Fashion Week in January 2008, of the 344 models only eight (2.3% of total) were blacks. A public attorney required the fashion show to contract Black models and demanded that during São Paulo Fashion Week 2009, at least 10% of the models should be &quot;Blacks, Afro-descendants or Indians&quot;, under penalty of fine of 250,000 reais.

== Culture ==

Carnival in Brazil is the traditional combination of a Roman Catholic festival with the lively celebrations of people of African ancestry. It evolved principally in urban coastal areas, notably in the former plantation zones along the coast between Recife and Rio de Janeiro. Salvador&#x27;s Carnival is less highly commercialized and has a stronger African component.

===Religion===

Most black people are Christians, mainly Catholics. Afro-Brazilian religions such as Candomblé and Umbanda have many followers. Although these religions have a higher proportion of Black practitioners, Whites also make up a significant portion, particularly in Umbanda. These religions are mainly practiced in large urban centers such as Salvador, Recife, Rio de Janeiro, Porto Alegre, Brasília, São Luís. Candomblé is closer to the original West African religions, and Umbanda blends Catholic and Kardecist Spiritism beliefs with African beliefs. Candomblé, Batuque, Xango and Tambor de Mina were introduced to Brazil by enslaved Africans.

These enslaved Africans would summon their gods, called Orixas, Voduns or Inkices with chants and dances they had brought from Africa. These religions have been persecuted in the past, mainly due to Catholic influence. However, the Brazilian government has legalized them. In current practice, Umbanda followers leave offerings of food, candles and flowers in public places for the spirits. The Candomblé terreiros are more hidden from general view, except in famous festivals such as Iemanjá Festival and the Waters of Oxalá in the Northeast. From Bahia northwards there is also different practices such as Catimbo, Jurema with heavy, though not necessarily authentic, indigenous elements.

Since the late 20th century, a large number of Afro-Brazilians became followers of Protestant denominations, mainly Neopentecostal churches. Among Brazil&#x27;s predominant ethnicities, Blacks make up the largest proportion of Pentecostal Protestants, while Whites make up the largest group of non-Pentecostal Protestants. As mentioned, some black Brazilians are Muslims of Sunni sect whose ancestors were called &quot;Malê&quot;.

===Cuisine===
The influence of African cuisine in Brazil is expressed in a wide variety of dishes. In the northeastern state of Bahia, an exquisite cuisine evolved when cooks improvised on African and traditional Portuguese dishes using locally available ingredients. Typical dishes include Vatapá and Moqueca, both with seafood and dendê palm oil (). This heavy oil extracted from the fruits of an African palm tree is one of the basic ingredients in Bahian or Afro-Brazilian cuisine, adding flavor and bright orange color to foods. There is no equivalent substitute, but it is available in markets specializing in Brazilian or African imports.

Acarajé is a dish made from peeled black-eyed peas formed into a ball and then deep-fried in &quot;dendê&quot; (palm oil). It is found in Nigerian and Brazilian cuisine. The dish is traditionally encountered in Bahia, especially in the city of Salvador, often as street food, and is also found in most parts of Nigeria, Ghana and Benin.

===Sports and dances===
Similar to other countries with large populations of African descent, there are many Black Brazilian footballers.

Capoeira is a martial art developed initially by enslaved Africans who came predominantly from Angola or Mozambique to Brazil, starting in the colonial period. Appeared in Quilombo dos Palmares, located in the Captaincy of Pernambuco. Documents, legends and literature of Brazil record this practice, especially in the port of Salvador. Despite being reprimanded, Africans continued to practice this martial art, on the pretext that it was just a dance. Until the present, Capoeira confuses dance and fight, and is an important part of the culture of Brazil. It is marked by deft, tricky movements often played on the ground or completely inverted. It also has a strong acrobatic component in some versions and is always played with music. Recently, the sport has been popularized by Capoeira performed in various computer games and movies, and Capoeira music has been featured in modern pop music.

===Music===

The music of Brazil is a mixture of Portuguese, Amerindian, and African music, making a wide variety of styles. Brazil is well known for the rhythmic liveliness of its music as in its Samba dance music.

==Notable people==


Many Afro-Brazilians have been prominent in Brazilian society, especially in the arts, music and sports. Many important figures in Brazilian literature have been of African descent, such as Machado de Assis, widely regarded as the greatest writer of Brazilian literature. Some of these individuals include João da Cruz e Souza, symbolist poet, João do Rio, chronicler, Maria Firmina dos Reis, abolitionist and author, José do Patrocínio, journalist, among others.

In popular music, the talents of Afro-Brazilians have found fertile ground for their development. Masters of samba, Pixinguinha, Cartola, Lupicínio Rodrigues, Geraldo Pereira, Wilson Moreira, and of MPB, Milton Nascimento, Jorge Ben Jor, Gilberto Gil, have built the Brazilian musical identity.

Another field where Afro-Brazilians have excelled is football: Pelé, Garrincha, right-forward Leônidas da Silva, nicknamed &quot;Black Diamond&quot;, are well known historic names of Brazilian football; Ronaldinho, Romário, Dida, Fernandinho, Vinícius Júnior and many others continue this tradition.

Important athletes in other sports include NBA players, Nenê and Leandro Barbosa, nicknamed &quot;The Brazilian Blur&quot;, referring to his speed. João Carlos de Oliveira Jadel Gregório, Nelson Prudêncio, Adhemar da Silva.

Particularly important among sports is capoeira, itself a creation of Black Brazilians; important &quot;Mestres&quot; (masters) include Mestre Amen Santo, Mestre Bimba, Mestre Cobra Mansa, Mestre João Grande, Mestre João Pequeno, Mestre Moraes, Mestre Pastinha, Mestre Pé de Chumbo.

Since the end of the 1980s, the political participation of Afro-Brazilians has increased. Some important politicians include former mayor of São Paulo Celso Pitta, former governor of Rio Grande do Sul, Alceu Collares, former governor of Espírito Santo, Albuíno Azeredo. Of the 170 justices who have served on the Supreme Federal Court since its inception during the imperial period, only three have been Black, with Joaquim Barbosa being the most recent, serving from 2003 to 2014.

Afro-Brazilians have also excelled as actors, such as Lázaro Ramos, Ruth de Souza, Lourdes de Oliveira, Zózimo Bulbul, Milton Gonçalves, Mussum, Zezé Motta, and as dancers, like Isa Soares.

==See also==

* Haitian Brazilians
* Nigerian Brazilians
* Angolans in Brazil
* Batuque 
* Kalunga
* Saro people
* Macumba
* Quimbanda
* Racial democracy
* Racism in Brazil
* Tambor de Mina

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q388315" start="0" end="15" title="Afro-Brazilians" label="Afro-Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q388315" start="36" end="52" title="Afro-Brazilians" label="Black Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q873625" start="61" end="71" title="Brazilians" label="Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="98" end="116" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="546" end="551" title="Black people#Brazil" label="Preto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587830" start="588" end="593" title="Pardo Brazilians" label="pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q268072" start="671" end="718" title="Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics" label="Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995285" start="744" end="750" title="White Brazilians" label="branco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624751" start="784" end="791" title="Asian Brazilians" label="amarelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="849" end="857" title="Indigenous peoples in Brazil" label="indígena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921366" start="1309" end="1333" title="Black movement in Brazil" label="Brazilian Black Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q478465" start="1780" end="1795" title="Northern Brazil" label="Northern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="2186" end="2194" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415423" start="2244" end="2253" title="quilombos" label="quilombos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="2386" end="2411" title="transatlantic slave trade" label="transatlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11403" start="2781" end="2786" title="samba" label="samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q159452" start="2791" end="2799" title="capoeira" label="capoeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q268072" start="3040" end="3087" title="Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics" label="Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995285" start="3151" end="3157" title="White Brazilians" label="branca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587830" start="3179" end="3184" title="Pardo Brazilians" label="parda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624751" start="3239" end="3246" title="Asian Brazilians" label="amarela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="3291" end="3299" title="Indigenous peoples in Brazil" label="indígena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976025" start="3890" end="3895" title="Brown (racial classification)" label="brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921366" start="3981" end="4005" title="Brazilian Black movement" label="Brazilian Black movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130557" start="4368" end="4373" title="negro" label="negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="5776" end="5790" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q478465" start="6150" end="6165" title="Northern Brazil" label="Northern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054574" start="6398" end="6436" title="Institute of Applied Economic Research" label="Institute of Applied Economic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276265" start="6669" end="6685" title="Demétrio Magnoli" label="Demétrio Magnoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519743" start="6826" end="6843" title="Simon Schwartzman" label="Simon Schwartzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q58812893" start="7863" end="7876" title="Edward Telles" label="Edward Telles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154577" start="10167" end="10180" title="one-drop rule" label="one-drop rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="10418" end="10433" title="white Americans" label="white Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="10532" end="10544" title="the Americas" label="the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="10564" end="10586" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Amerindian populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="11354" end="11362" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="12024" end="12036" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745556" start="12116" end="12139" title="Captaincy of Pernambuco" label="Captaincy of Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="12227" end="12234" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="12236" end="12243" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q744729" start="12250" end="12257" title="cachaça" label="cachaça"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="13867" end="13877" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165735" start="14138" end="14151" title="Darcy Ribeiro" label="Darcy Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285927" start="14618" end="14624" title="Sadistic personality disorder" label="sadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="15338" end="15343" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="15391" end="15404" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba people"/>
<link wikidata="Q468814" start="15519" end="15526" title="Dahomey" label="Dahomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="15629" end="15632" title="Oyo Empire" label="Oyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q752660" start="15709" end="15718" title="Candomblé" label="Candomblé"/>
<link wikidata="Q12257903" start="15769" end="15779" title="Fon people" label="Fon people"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="15817" end="15829" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="15867" end="15873" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="15882" end="15887" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q640090" start="15911" end="15918" title="Kongo people" label="Bakongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q460091" start="15922" end="15929" title="Ambundu" label="Ambundu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="15987" end="15997" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="16032" end="16046" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="16048" end="16060" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="16066" end="16072" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q677769" start="16181" end="16196" title="Gilberto Freyre" label="Gilberto Freyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="16278" end="16283" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="16285" end="16289" title="Fula people" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="16307" end="16314" title="Islamic" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615416" start="16586" end="16606" title="Portuguese Brazilian" label="Portuguese Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="16678" end="16682" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="16687" end="16693" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745211" start="16863" end="16874" title="Malê Revolt" label="Malê Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="16919" end="16927" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q957653" start="18115" end="18118" title="Itu, São Paulo" label="Itu"/>
<link wikidata="Q171617" start="18120" end="18128" title="Campinas" label="Campinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q616650" start="18130" end="18140" title="Indaiatuba" label="Indaiatuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q930321" start="18142" end="18148" title="Amparo, São Paulo" label="Amparo"/>
<link wikidata="Q330175" start="18150" end="18160" title="Piracicaba" label="Piracicaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750439" start="18165" end="18173" title="Capivari" label="Capivari"/>
<link wikidata="Q81882" start="18215" end="18221" title="Santos, São Paulo" label="Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279598" start="19403" end="19409" title="Branqueamento" label="whiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502804" start="20559" end="20580" title="Brazilian Black Front" label="Brazilian Black Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394474" start="20728" end="20766" title="Estado Novo (Brazil)" label="Getúlio Vargas&amp;#x27;s New State period"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="21154" end="21163" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165735" start="21964" end="21977" title="Darcy Ribeiro" label="Darcy Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="21993" end="22006" title="miscegenation" label="miscegenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495420" start="22072" end="22088" title="racial democracy" label="racial democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q875521" start="22335" end="22347" title="sexual slavery" label="sexual slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q27662" start="23040" end="23057" title="Northern Portugal" label="Northern Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="24007" end="24017" title="Indigenous peoples in Brazil" label="Amerindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12734768" start="24022" end="24030" title="Mameluco" label="Mameluco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024920" start="24346" end="24353" title="caboclo" label="caboclo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136194" start="24427" end="24443" title="Northeast Region, Brazil" label="Northeast region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088815" start="24566" end="24575" title="Southeast Region, Brazil" label="Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q980175" start="24590" end="24602" title="Central-West Region, Brazil" label="Central-West"/>
<link wikidata="Q478465" start="24616" end="24621" title="North Region, Brazil" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060042" start="24639" end="24644" title="South Region, Brazil" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="25051" end="25060" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="25201" end="25215" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="25230" end="25238" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="25253" end="25267" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="25282" end="25290" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="25305" end="25311" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q194343" start="25326" end="25342" title="Feira de Santana" label="Feira de Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q43463" start="25357" end="25366" title="Fortaleza" label="Fortaleza"/>
<link wikidata="Q40269" start="25381" end="25393" title="Porto Alegre" label="Porto Alegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q28441" start="25412" end="25420" title="São Luís, Maranhão" label="São Luís"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184121" start="25513" end="25527" title="Municipalities of Brazil" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="26311" end="26328" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="26460" end="26472" title="Y chromosome" label="Y chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="27062" end="27068" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="27084" end="27090" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="27110" end="27125" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q478465" start="27633" end="27638" title="Northern Brazil" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136194" start="27643" end="27662" title="Northeastern Brazil" label="Northeastern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088815" start="27749" end="27761" title="Southeastern Brazil" label="Southeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060042" start="27766" end="27781" title="Southern Brazil" label="Southern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27886" end="27910" title="Immigration to Brazil#Second Period: 1872–1903" label="in the late 19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q40269" start="28977" end="28989" title="Porto Alegre" label="Porto Alegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131620" start="29022" end="29027" title="Natal, Rio Grande do Norte" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43463" start="29538" end="29547" title="Fortaleza" label="Fortaleza"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829733" start="29721" end="29726" title="Belém" label="Belém"/>
<link wikidata="Q373705" start="29731" end="29737" title="Ilhéus" label="Ilhéus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="33464" end="33474" title="BBC Brasil" label="BBC Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q542847" start="34179" end="34196" title="Milton Nascimento" label="Milton Nascimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q23745" start="34502" end="34512" title="telenovela" label="telenovela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732423" start="34843" end="34854" title="Taís Araújo" label="Taís Araújo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789869" start="34930" end="34944" title="Chica da Silva" label="Chica da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q693827" start="35263" end="35269" title="favela" label="favela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844185" start="35729" end="35740" title="Mammy archetype" label="old mammies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222" start="35834" end="35856" title="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin" label="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184440" start="36163" end="36174" title="Jorge Amado" label="Jorge Amado"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36231" end="36237" title="mulatto#Brazil" label="mulata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587" start="36280" end="36290" title="Rede Globo" label="Rede Globo"/>
<link wikidata="Q238993" start="36297" end="36308" title="Sônia Braga" label="Sônia Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631798" start="36477" end="36495" title="Porto dos Milagres" label="Porto dos Milagres"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="36570" end="36575" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51697863" start="36741" end="36752" title="Segundo Sol" label="Segundo Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947550" start="37704" end="37726" title="São Paulo Fashion Week" label="São Paulo Fashion Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="38475" end="38485" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="38494" end="38502" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q752660" start="38538" end="38547" title="Candomblé" label="Candomblé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431297" start="38552" end="38559" title="Umbanda" label="Umbanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="38791" end="38799" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="38801" end="38807" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="38809" end="38823" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q40269" start="38825" end="38837" title="Porto Alegre" label="Porto Alegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="38839" end="38847" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q28441" start="38849" end="38857" title="São Luís, Maranhão" label="São Luís"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="38895" end="38906" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q214255" start="38951" end="38970" title="Kardecist Spiritism" label="Kardecist Spiritism"/>
<link wikidata="Q504296" start="39012" end="39019" title="Batuque (religion)" label="Batuque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547934" start="39021" end="39026" title="Shango" label="Xango"/>
<link wikidata="Q10378014" start="39031" end="39045" title="Tambor de Mina" label="Tambor de Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q290460" start="39151" end="39157" title="Orisha" label="Orixas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845823" start="39159" end="39165" title="Candomblé Jejé" label="Voduns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460155" start="39169" end="39176" title="Nkisi" label="Inkices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477162" start="39580" end="39587" title="Iemanjá" label="Iemanjá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008736" start="39615" end="39620" title="Oxalá" label="Oxalá"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="39644" end="39649" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q388202" start="39703" end="39710" title="Catimbo" label="Catimbo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39712" end="39718" title="Jurema (religion)" label="Jurema"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="39870" end="39880" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q350853" start="39903" end="39917" title="Neo-Pentecostalism" label="Neopentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="40014" end="40025" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="40150" end="40157" title="Islam" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="40161" end="40171" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q386284" start="40250" end="40265" title="African cuisine" label="African cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="40347" end="40352" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q386284" start="40408" end="40415" title="African cuisine" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q180817" start="40432" end="40449" title="Portuguese cuisine" label="Portuguese dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544629" start="40510" end="40516" title="Vatapá" label="Vatapá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929676" start="40521" end="40528" title="Moqueca" label="Moqueca"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="40540" end="40547" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="40558" end="40566" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q392935" start="40866" end="40873" title="Acarajé" label="Acarajé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246973" start="40901" end="40915" title="black-eyed pea" label="black-eyed pea"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="40978" end="40986" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033037" start="41004" end="41012" title="Nigerian cuisine" label="Nigerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q614394" start="41017" end="41034" title="Brazilian cuisine" label="Brazilian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="41110" end="41118" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316209" start="41129" end="41140" title="street food" label="street food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="41177" end="41184" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="41186" end="41191" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="41196" end="41201" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="41329" end="41340" title="Association football" label="footballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q159452" start="41343" end="41351" title="Capoeira" label="Capoeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088324" start="41486" end="41501" title="Colonial Brazil" label="colonial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542741" start="41515" end="41536" title="Palmares (quilombo)" label="Quilombo dos Palmares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745556" start="41553" end="41576" title="Captaincy of Pernambuco" label="Captaincy of Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="41670" end="41678" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717920" start="41883" end="41900" title="culture of Brazil" label="culture of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579987" start="42292" end="42302" title="Music of Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q369820" start="42320" end="42333" title="Music of Africa" label="African music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11403" start="42440" end="42445" title="Samba" label="Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q311145" start="42671" end="42687" title="Machado de Assis" label="Machado de Assis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609059" start="42787" end="42807" title="Cruz e Souza" label="João da Cruz e Souza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710229" start="42825" end="42836" title="João do Rio" label="João do Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895866" start="42850" end="42872" title="Maria Firmina dos Reis" label="Maria Firmina dos Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q359451" start="42899" end="42917" title="José do Patrocínio" label="José do Patrocínio"/>
<link wikidata="Q281086" start="43062" end="43073" title="Pixinguinha" label="Pixinguinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710419" start="43075" end="43082" title="Cartola" label="Cartola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791454" start="43084" end="43103" title="Lupicínio Rodrigues" label="Lupicínio Rodrigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289092" start="43105" end="43120" title="Geraldo Pereira (musician)" label="Geraldo Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023148" start="43122" end="43136" title="Wilson Moreira" label="Wilson Moreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046768" start="43145" end="43148" title="Música popular brasileira" label="MPB"/>
<link wikidata="Q542847" start="43150" end="43167" title="Milton Nascimento" label="Milton Nascimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q119015" start="43169" end="43182" title="Jorge Ben Jor" label="Jorge Ben Jor"/>
<link wikidata="Q221479" start="43184" end="43196" title="Gilberto Gil" label="Gilberto Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="43305" end="43309" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q180642" start="43311" end="43320" title="Garrincha" label="Garrincha"/>
<link wikidata="Q311739" start="43336" end="43353" title="Leônidas da Silva" label="Leônidas da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q39444" start="43445" end="43455" title="Ronaldinho" label="Ronaldinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q178649" start="43457" end="43464" title="Romário" label="Romário"/>
<link wikidata="Q188544" start="43466" end="43470" title="Dida (footballer, born 1973)" label="Dida"/>
<link wikidata="Q459356" start="43472" end="43483" title="Fernandinho (footballer, born May 1985)" label="Fernandinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q28973866" start="43485" end="43500" title="Vinícius Júnior" label="Vinícius Júnior"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="43586" end="43589" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q357438" start="43599" end="43603" title="Nenê" label="Nenê"/>
<link wikidata="Q58335" start="43608" end="43623" title="Leandro Barbosa" label="Leandro Barbosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q373793" start="43691" end="43714" title="João Carlos de Oliveira" label="João Carlos de Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q720335" start="43715" end="43729" title="Jadel Gregório" label="Jadel Gregório"/>
<link wikidata="Q138884" start="43731" end="43747" title="Nelson Prudêncio" label="Nelson Prudêncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q199631" start="43749" end="43765" title="Adhemar da Silva" label="Adhemar da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q159452" start="43807" end="43815" title="capoeira" label="capoeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742381" start="43904" end="43921" title="Mestre Amen Santo" label="Mestre Amen Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q713283" start="43923" end="43935" title="Mestre Bimba" label="Mestre Bimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291423" start="43937" end="43955" title="Mestre Cobra Mansa" label="Mestre Cobra Mansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6298182" start="43957" end="43975" title="Mestre João Grande" label="Mestre João Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977686" start="43977" end="43996" title="Mestre João Pequeno" label="Mestre João Pequeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291424" start="43998" end="44011" title="Mestre Moraes" label="Mestre Moraes"/>
<link wikidata="Q928687" start="44013" end="44028" title="Mestre Pastinha" label="Mestre Pastinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264648" start="44030" end="44049" title="Mestre Pé de Chumbo" label="Mestre Pé de Chumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857846" start="44203" end="44214" title="Celso Pitta" label="Celso Pitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823703" start="44254" end="44268" title="Alceu Collares" label="Alceu Collares"/>
<link wikidata="Q9594798" start="44305" end="44320" title="Albuíno Cunha de Azeredo" label="Albuíno Azeredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q519138" start="44365" end="44386" title="Supreme Federal Court" label="Supreme Federal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q867733" start="44468" end="44483" title="Joaquim Barbosa" label="Joaquim Barbosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750612" start="44589" end="44601" title="Lázaro Ramos" label="Lázaro Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10365428" start="44603" end="44616" title="Ruth de Souza" label="Ruth de Souza"/>
<link wikidata="Q96971098" start="44618" end="44637" title="Lourdes de Oliveira" label="Lourdes de Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144912" start="44639" end="44652" title="Zózimo Bulbul" label="Zózimo Bulbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4143127" start="44654" end="44670" title="Milton Gonçalves" label="Milton Gonçalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943157" start="44672" end="44678" title="Mussum" label="Mussum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069996" start="44680" end="44690" title="Zezé Motta" label="Zezé Motta"/>
<link wikidata="Q50358662" start="44713" end="44723" title="Isa Soares" label="Isa Soares"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639719" start="44742" end="44760" title="Haitian Brazilians" label="Haitian Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052722" start="44763" end="44782" title="Nigerian Brazilians" label="Nigerian Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976830" start="44785" end="44803" title="Angolans in Brazil" label="Angolans in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q504296" start="44806" end="44813" title="Batuque (religion)" label="Batuque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354616" start="44817" end="44824" title="Kalunga" label="Kalunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794926" start="44827" end="44838" title="Saro people" label="Saro people"/>
<link wikidata="Q591569" start="44841" end="44848" title="Macumba" label="Macumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128886" start="44851" end="44860" title="Quimbanda" label="Quimbanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495420" start="44863" end="44879" title="Racial democracy" label="Racial democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279734" start="44882" end="44898" title="Racism in Brazil" label="Racism in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q10378014" start="44901" end="44915" title="Tambor de Mina" label="Tambor de Mina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795072" wikidata="Q1435328" url="?curid=795072" title="Binder clip">
<text>A binder clip (also known as a foldback clip, paper clamp, banker&#x27;s clip, foldover clip, bobby clip, or clasp) is a simple device for binding sheets of paper together. It leaves the paper intact and can be removed quickly and easily, unlike the staple.

It is also sometimes referred to as a handbag clip because of resemblance to a handbag when its clips are folded up.

==Characteristics and methods of use==
A binder clip is a strip of spring steel bent into the shape of an isosceles triangle with loops at the . Tension along the base of the triangle forces the two sides closed, and the loops prevent the sharp steel edges from cutting into the paper. The loops also serve to hold two pieces of stiff wire, which are used as handles and allow the clip to be opened. The two slots cut in each loop are shaped so that the wire handles can be folded down once the clip has been attached, and the spring force of the wire holds them down on the surface of the paper. This holds the clip relatively flat, for easier stacking of paper. One handle can also be folded down while the other remains up to allow the stack of papers to be hung up. The handles can also be removed altogether by squeezing them sideways and pulling them out, allowing for more permanent binding. As compared to a paper clip, the binder clip is able to bind sheets of paper more securely, and is also resistant to rust.

There are several sizes of binder clips, ranging from a base size of 5 millimetres (0.2 in) to 50 mm (1.97 in). The sheet steel portion is customarily black oxide coated, but a variety of decorative painted color schemes are also available. The sheet steel portion is occasionally made of stainless steel, the more typical spring steel can also be finished in nickel, silver or gold. The handles are normally nickel-plated.

==Uses==
The binder clip is in common use in the modern office. It can hold a few to many sheets of paper, and is usually used in place of the paper clip for large volumes of paper. Various practical (and sometimes whimsical) alternative uses have been proposed. These include holding pieces of quilt together, creating a &quot;beer pyramid&quot; in a refrigerator with wire shelves, serving as a bookmark, a cheap alternative to a money clip or preventing computer cables from slipping behind desks. Smaller sized clips have been commonly used as &quot;quick fix&quot; fitting and sizing solutions in the fashion industry.

In 1966, test pilot Joseph F. Cotton used the shiny metal portion of such a clip to short-circuit an electrical circuit panel to force the landing gear of the XB-70 bomber on a flight.

The object is such a common sight in offices that, in late 2020, when restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic were lowered and people started returning to their offices, some missed and enjoyed the feeling of using a binder clip, after months without doing so. At around the same time, healthcare workers in at least one medical center used extra large binder clips as a cheap way to secure a plastic curtain between workers and patients infected with the airborne virus.

==History==
In 1909, the method of binding sheets of paper together was either to sew them together or to punch holes in them and tie them together with string. It was therefore time-consuming to remove a single sheet of paper from multiple bound sheets.

The binder clip was invented and patented in 1910 by Washington, D.C. area resident Louis E. Baltzley, to help his father, a writer and inventor, hold his manuscripts together more easily. While similar designs have since been patented five times, the most produced version remains the . Louis Baltzley produced the clips through the L.E.B. Manufacturing Company, and these early clips are stamped &quot;L.E.B.&quot; on one side. Manufacturing rights were later licensed to other companies.

== Gallery ==
==See also==
* Bulldog clip
* Clipboard
* Treasury tag

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1435328" start="2" end="13" title="Binder clip" label="binder clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435328" start="31" end="44" title="Binder clip" label="foldback clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435328" start="46" end="57" title="Binder clip" label="paper clamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435328" start="59" end="77" title="Binder clip" label="banker&amp;#x27;s clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435328" start="79" end="92" title="Binder clip" label="foldover clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435328" start="94" end="104" title="Binder clip" label="bobby clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435328" start="109" end="114" title="Binder clip" label="clasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q377164" start="250" end="256" title="Staple (fastener)" label="staple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435328" start="297" end="309" title="Binder clip" label="handbag clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q467505" start="338" end="345" title="handbag" label="handbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400720" start="444" end="456" title="spring steel" label="spring steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q875937" start="483" end="501" title="isosceles triangle" label="isosceles triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q206175" start="522" end="529" title="Tensile stress" label="Tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q551997" start="712" end="716" title="wire" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8353" start="1293" end="1303" title="paper clip" label="paper clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624219" start="1551" end="1562" title="black oxide" label="black oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875942" start="1809" end="1822" title="Nickel electroplating" label="nickel-plated"/>
<link wikidata="Q489760" start="2257" end="2267" title="money clip" label="money clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q24048878" start="2470" end="2486" title="Joseph F. Cotton" label="Joseph F. Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q729056" start="2609" end="2614" title="XB-70" label="XB-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2730" end="2747" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3420" end="3436" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4996733" start="3888" end="3900" title="Bulldog clip" label="Bulldog clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q204461" start="3903" end="3912" title="Clipboard" label="Clipboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15490381" start="3915" end="3927" title="Treasury tag" label="Treasury tag"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795074" wikidata="Q7875054" url="?curid=795074" title="USS Vengeance (1805)">
<text>The second USS &quot;Vengeance&quot; was a brig in the United States Navy during the First Barbary War.

&quot;Vengeance&quot; was purchased by the United States Navy at Boston, Massachusetts, in 1805 for use as a bomb ketch against the Barbary pirates.

Commanded by Lieutenant William Lewis, she left Boston for the Mediterranean on 19 June and was with Capt. John Rodgers&#x27; squadron of 13 warships when it appeared off Tunis on 1 August. Impressed by the American show of force, the Bey of Tunis elected to accept American peace terms, and &quot;Vengeance&quot; did not see action. Her subsequent movements are unknown, but she was broken up at New York City in 1818.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7875054" start="11" end="30" title="USS Vengeance (1805)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q202539" start="43" end="47" title="brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="55" end="73" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q468293" start="85" end="102" title="First Barbary War" label="First Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="170" end="176" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q753784" start="219" end="224" title="ketch" label="ketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="237" end="252" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="279" end="292" title="William Lewis (US Navy)" label="William Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="318" end="331" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733407" start="362" end="374" title="John Rodgers (naval officer, War of 1812)" label="John Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="426" end="431" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131285546" start="490" end="502" title="Bey of Tunis" label="Bey of Tunis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795075" wikidata="Q906622" url="?curid=795075" title="Administrative divisions of Ingushetia">
<text>*Cities under republic&#x27;s jurisdiction (as of 2010):
**
**
*Districts:
**
**

==Local self-government==
Due to problems of defining the border between Chechnya and Ingushetia, as well as those related to the military operations in the region (First and Second Chechen Wars), both republics have not established a system of local self-government until 2009.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q906622" start="1" end="55" title="Administrative divisions of Ingushetia" label="Cities under republic&amp;#x27;s jurisdiction (as of 2010)"/>
<link wikidata="Q906622" start="64" end="73" title="Administrative divisions of Ingushetia" label="Districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="155" end="163" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q29269" start="247" end="252" title="First Chechen War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q120843" start="257" end="275" title="Second Chechen War" label="Second Chechen War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="327" end="348" title="local self-government" label="local self-government"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795079" wikidata="Q7936997" url="?curid=795079" title="Vitaral Jelfa Jelenia Góra">
<text>MKS Karkonosze Jelenia Góra is a Polish women&#x27;s handball team, based in Jelenia Góra.

== See also ==
* Handball in Poland
* Sports in Poland

==References==
==External links==
* Always fresh news about Klub Piłki Ręcznej Jelenia Góra, statistics, photo gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7936997" start="0" end="27" title="Vitaral Jelfa Jelenia Góra" label="MKS Karkonosze Jelenia Góra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="53" end="61" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q147934" start="77" end="89" title="Jelenia Góra" label="Jelenia Góra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="109" end="127" title="Handball in Poland" label="Handball in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="130" end="146" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795094" wikidata="Q4572203" url="?curid=795094" title="1965–66 United States network television schedule">
<text>The following is the 1965–66 network television schedule for the three major English language commercial broadcast networks in the United States. The schedule covers primetime hours from September 1965 through August 1966. The schedule is followed by a list per network of returning series, new series, and series cancelled after the 1964–65 season.

During this season, ABC and CBS initiated the broadcast of a predominant portion of their prime-time programming in color, while nearly all of NBC&#x27;s autumn lineup was presented in color, except for the war drama &quot;Convoy&quot; and the fantasy sitcom &quot;I Dream of Jeannie&quot;. The former was terminated after 13 episodes, whereas the latter transitioned to color in the subsequent season. With the majority of prime-time content being produced in color, the scheduling for this season denoted the residual black-and-white programming with a &quot;(B/W)&quot; designation.

New series are highlighted in bold.

Each of the 30 highest-rated shows is listed with its rank and rating as determined by Nielsen Media Research.

: Yellow indicates the programs in the top 10 for the season.
: Cyan indicates the programs in the top 20 for the season.
: Magenta indicates the programs in the top 30 for the season.

== Schedule ==

=== Sunday ===
=== Monday ===
Note: &quot;Art Linkletter&#x27;s Hollywood Talent Scouts&quot; replaced &quot;The Steve Lawrence Show&quot; in December. &quot;The Avengers&quot; replaced &quot;Ben Casey&quot; in March. &quot;Vacation Playhouse&quot; was a summer anthology series made up entirely of unsold television pilots.

=== Tuesday ===
=== Wednesday ===
* formerly Burke&#x27;s Law

=== Thursday ===
=== Friday ===
Note: &quot;The Farmer&#x27;s Daughter&quot; took over the 9:30–10 time period on ABC, effective November 5, because many viewers were not home to watch &quot;Peyton Place&quot; on Fridays. Starting November 1, &quot;Peyton Place&quot; was seen Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday. In the winter of 1966, The Sammy Davis Jr. Show replaced &quot;Convoy&quot; on its timeslot, which was transmitted live in color. &quot;Summer Fun&quot; was a summer anthology series made up entirely of unsold television pilots.

=== Saturday ===
Note: Even though &quot;ABC Scope&quot; was scheduled at 10:30 PM, not one major station (including WABC-TV New York, the network&#x27;s flagship station) carried it in that time period, preferring to schedule local or syndicated programming in its place. Most affiliates aired it in &quot;fringe time&quot; during the weekend.

==By network==

===ABC===
Returning Series
*&quot;12 O&#x27;Clock High&quot;
*&quot;ABC Scope&quot;
*&quot;The ABC Sunday Night Movie&quot;
*&quot;The Addams Family&quot;
*&quot;The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet&quot;
*&quot;Amos Burke — Secret Agent&quot;
*&quot;The Avengers&quot;
*&quot;Ben Casey&quot;
*&quot;Bewitched&quot;
*&quot;Combat!&quot;
*&quot;The Donna Reed Show&quot;
*&quot;The Farmer&#x27;s Daughter&quot;
*&quot;The Flintstones&quot;
*&quot;The Fugitive&quot;
*&quot;The Hollywood Palace&quot;
*&quot;The Jimmy Dean Show&quot;
*&quot;The King Family Show&quot;
*&quot;The Lawrence Welk Show&quot;
*&quot;McHale&#x27;s Navy&quot;
*&quot;The Patty Duke Show&quot;
*&quot;Peyton Place&quot;
*&quot;Saga of Western Man&quot;
*&quot;Shindig!&quot;
*&quot;Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea&quot;
New Series
*The Baron
*Batman *
*The Big Valley
*Blue Light *
*Court Martial *
*The Double Life of Henry Phyfe *
*F Troop
*The F.B.I.
*Gidget
*Honey West
*The Legend of Jesse James
*The Long Hot Summer
*A Man Called Shenandoah
*O.K. Crackerby!
*Preview Tonight *
*Summer Fun *
*Tammy
Not returning from 1964–65:
*&quot;The Bing Crosby Show&quot;
*&quot;Broadside&quot;
*&quot;F.D.R.&quot;
*&quot;Jonny Quest&quot;
*&quot;Mickey&quot;
*&quot;My Three Sons&quot; (moved to CBS)
*&quot;No Time for Sergeants&quot;
*&quot;The Outer Limits&quot;
*&quot;The Tycoon&quot;
*&quot;Valentine&#x27;s Day&quot;
*&quot;Wagon Train&quot;
*&quot;Wendy and Me&quot;

===CBS===
Returning Series
*&quot;The Andy Griffith Show&quot;
*&quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot;
*&quot;Candid Camera&quot;
*&quot;CBS News Hour&quot;
*&quot;CBS Reports&quot;
*&quot;The Danny Kaye Show&quot;
*&quot;The Dick Van Dyke Show&quot;
*&quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;
*&quot;Gilligan&#x27;s Island&quot;
*&quot;Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C.&quot;
*&quot;Gunsmoke&quot;
*&quot;Hazel&quot; (moved from NBC)
*&quot;I&#x27;ve Got a Secret&quot;
*&quot;The Jackie Gleason Show&quot;
*&quot;Lassie&quot;
*&quot;The Lucy Show&quot;
*&quot;The Munsters&quot;
*&quot;My Favorite Martian&quot;
*&quot;My Three Sons&quot; (moved from ABC)
*&quot;Perry Mason&quot;
*&quot;Petticoat Junction&quot;
*&quot;Rawhide&quot;
*&quot;The Red Skelton Hour&quot;
*&quot;Secret Agent&quot;
*&quot;Slattery&#x27;s People&quot;
*&quot;To Tell the Truth&quot;
*&quot;The Twentieth Century&quot;
*&quot;Vacation Playhouse&quot;
*&quot;What&#x27;s My Line?&quot;
New Series
*Art Linkletter&#x27;s Hollywood Talent Scouts
*CBS Thursday Night Movie
*Continental Showcase
*Daktari *
*The Face Is Familiar *
*Green Acres
*The Hippodrome *
*Hogan&#x27;s Heroes
*The John Gary Show *
*The Loner
*Lost in Space
*The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour
*The Smothers Brothers Summer Show *
*The Steve Lawrence Show
*The Trials of O&#x27;Brien
*Wayne &amp; Shuster Take An Affectionate Look At... *
*The Wild Wild West
Not returning from 1964–65:
*&quot;The Baileys of Balboa&quot;
*&quot;The Cara Williams Show&quot;
*&quot;The Celebrity Game&quot;
*&quot;The Defenders&quot;
*&quot;The Doctors and the Nurses&quot;
*&quot;The Entertainers&quot;
*&quot;Fanfare&quot;
*&quot;For the People&quot;
*&quot;Glynis&quot;
*&quot;The Great Adventure&quot;
*&quot;The Joey Bishop Show&quot;
*&quot;Many Happy Returns&quot;
*&quot;Mr. Broadway&quot;
*&quot;Mister Ed&quot;
*&quot;My Living Doll&quot;
*&quot;On Broadway Tonight&quot;
*&quot;Our Private World&quot;
*&quot;Password&quot;
*&quot;The Reporter&quot;
*&quot;Summer Playhouse&quot;
*&quot;World War One&quot;
===NBC===
Returning Series
*&quot;Actuality Specials&quot;
*&quot;The Andy Williams Show&quot;
*&quot;The Bell Telephone Hour&quot;
*&quot;Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre&quot;
*&quot;Bonanza&quot;
*&quot;Branded&quot;
*&quot;Daniel Boone&quot;
*&quot;Dr. Kildare&quot;
*&quot;Flipper&quot;
*&quot;The Man from U.N.C.L.E.&quot;
*&quot;NBC Saturday Night at the Movies&quot;
*&quot;Perry Como&#x27;s Kraft Music Hall&quot;
*&quot;The Virginian&quot;
*&quot;Walt Disney&#x27;s Wonderful World of Color&quot;
New Series
*Camp Runamuck
*Convoy
*The Dean Martin Show
*The Dean Martin Summer Show *
*Get Smart
*Hank
*I Dream of Jeannie
*I Spy
*The John Forsythe Show
*Laredo
*Mickie Finn&#x27;s *
*Mister Roberts
*Mona McCluskey
*My Mother the Car
*Please Don&#x27;t Eat the Daisies
*Run for Your Life
*The Sammy Davis Jr. Show *
*The Wackiest Ship in the Army
Not returning from 1964–65:
*&quot;90 Bristol Court&quot;
*&quot;The Alfred Hitchcock Hour&quot;
*&quot;The Bill Dana Show&quot;
*&quot;Cloak of Mystery&quot;
*&quot;The Famous Adventures of Mr. Magoo&quot;
*&quot;Harris Against the World&quot;
*&quot;Hazel&quot; (moved to CBS)
*&quot;Hullabaloo&quot;
*&quot;International Showtime&quot;
*&quot;The Jack Benny Program&quot;
*&quot;The Jack Paar Program&quot;
*&quot;Kentucky Jones&quot;
*&quot;Kraft Suspense Theater&quot;
*&quot;Mr. Novak&quot;
*&quot;Moment of Fear&quot;
*&quot;Profiles in Courage&quot;
*&quot;The Rogues&quot;
*&quot;Tom, Dick and Mary&quot;
Note: The * indicates that the program was introduced in midseason.

==References==
===Additional sources===
* Castleman, H. &amp; Podrazik, W. (1982). &quot;Watching TV: Four Decades of American Television&quot;. New York: McGraw-Hill. 314 pp.
* McNeil, Alex. &quot;Total Television&quot;. Fourth edition. New York: Penguin Books. .
* Brooks, Tim &amp; Marsh, Earle (2007). &quot;The Complete Directory to Prime Time Network and Cable TV Shows&quot; (9th ed.). New York: Ballantine. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4572203" start="21" end="56" title="1965–66 United States network television schedule" label="1965–66 network television schedule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414913" start="105" end="144" title="List of United States over-the-air television networks" label="broadcast networks in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q745818" start="166" end="175" title="primetime" label="primetime"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="253" end="269" title="#By network" label="list per network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571813" start="334" end="348" title="1964-65 United States network television schedule" label="1964–65 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689907" start="574" end="580" title="Convoy (TV series)" label="Convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127337" start="616" end="634" title="I Dream of Jeannie" label="I Dream of Jeannie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572203" start="968" end="972" title="1965–66 United States network television schedule" label="bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="1062" end="1084" title="Nielsen Media Research" label="Nielsen Media Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q705630" start="1331" end="1376" title="Art Linkletter" label="Art Linkletter&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Talent Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339107" start="1398" end="1421" title="Steve Lawrence" label="The Steve Lawrence Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q113700" start="1441" end="1465" title="The Avengers (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Avengers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277494" start="1481" end="1490" title="Ben Casey" label="Ben Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246416" start="1513" end="1531" title="Vacation Playhouse" label="Vacation Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q23653" start="1551" end="1567" title="anthology series" label="anthology series"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="1595" end="1611" title="television pilot" label="television pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248480" start="1660" end="1676" title="Burke&amp;#x27;s Law (1963 TV series)" label="Burke&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733452" start="1722" end="1748" title="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Daughter (TV series)" label="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689907" start="2049" end="2055" title="Convoy (TV series)" label="Convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q126374477" start="2122" end="2132" title="Summer Fun (TV series)" label="Summer Fun"/>
<link wikidata="Q23653" start="2152" end="2168" title="anthology series" label="anthology series"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="2196" end="2212" title="television pilot" label="television pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650227" start="2257" end="2266" title="ABC Scope" label="ABC Scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699014" start="2333" end="2340" title="WABC-TV" label="WABC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="2581" end="2584" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857634" start="2612" end="2632" title="12 O&amp;#x27;Clock High (TV series)" label="12 O&amp;#x27;Clock High"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650227" start="2646" end="2655" title="ABC Scope" label="ABC Scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712049" start="2669" end="2695" title="The ABC Sunday Night Movie" label="The ABC Sunday Night Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q266532" start="2709" end="2726" title="The Addams Family (1964 TV series)" label="The Addams Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q952841" start="2740" end="2775" title="The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet" label="The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248480" start="2789" end="2814" title="Burke&amp;#x27;s Law (1963 TV series)" label="Amos Burke — Secret Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q113700" start="2828" end="2840" title="The Avengers (TV series)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277494" start="2854" end="2863" title="Ben Casey" label="Ben Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044635" start="2877" end="2886" title="Bewitched" label="Bewitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247850" start="2900" end="2907" title="Combat!" label="Combat!"/>
<link wikidata="Q63677" start="2921" end="2940" title="The Donna Reed Show" label="The Donna Reed Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733452" start="2954" end="2980" title="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Daughter (TV series)" label="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q201358" start="2994" end="3009" title="The Flintstones" label="The Flintstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q137034" start="3023" end="3035" title="The Fugitive (1963 TV series)" label="The Fugitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740000" start="3049" end="3069" title="The Hollywood Palace" label="The Hollywood Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743279" start="3083" end="3102" title="The Jimmy Dean Show" label="The Jimmy Dean Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744502" start="3116" end="3136" title="The King Family Show" label="The King Family Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987945" start="3150" end="3172" title="The Lawrence Welk Show" label="The Lawrence Welk Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q574907" start="3186" end="3204" title="McHale&amp;#x27;s Navy" label="McHale&amp;#x27;s Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988658" start="3218" end="3237" title="The Patty Duke Show" label="The Patty Duke Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247551" start="3251" end="3263" title="Peyton Place (TV series)" label="Peyton Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398918" start="3277" end="3296" title="Saga of Western Man" label="Saga of Western Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497306" start="3310" end="3318" title="Shindig!" label="Shindig!"/>
<link wikidata="Q123760" start="3332" end="3363" title="Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea (TV series)" label="Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192407" start="3382" end="3391" title="The Baron (TV series)" label="The Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247201" start="3393" end="3399" title="Batman (TV series)" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q582053" start="3403" end="3417" title="The Big Valley" label="The Big Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110648" start="3419" end="3429" title="Blue Light (TV series)" label="Blue Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178253" start="3433" end="3446" title="Court Martial (TV series)" label="Court Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822186" start="3450" end="3480" title="The Double Life of Henry Phyfe" label="The Double Life of Henry Phyfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q518816" start="3484" end="3491" title="F Troop" label="F Troop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234407" start="3493" end="3503" title="The F.B.I. (TV series)" label="The F.B.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q5559696" start="3505" end="3511" title="Gidget (TV series)" label="Gidget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248855" start="3513" end="3523" title="Honey West (TV series)" label="Honey West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822783" start="3525" end="3550" title="The Legend of Jesse James (TV series)" label="The Legend of Jesse James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748168" start="3552" end="3571" title="The Long Hot Summer (TV series)" label="The Long Hot Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658061" start="3573" end="3596" title="A Man Called Shenandoah" label="A Man Called Shenandoah"/>
<link wikidata="Q315723" start="3598" end="3613" title="Burl Ives" label="O.K. Crackerby!"/>
<link wikidata="Q126382106" start="3615" end="3630" title="Preview Tonight" label="Preview Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q126374477" start="3634" end="3644" title="Summer Fun (TV series)" label="Summer Fun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681558" start="3648" end="3653" title="Tammy (TV series)" label="Tammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571813" start="3673" end="3680" title="1964–65 United States network television schedule" label="1964–65"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718021" start="3689" end="3709" title="The Bing Crosby Show (1964 TV series)" label="The Bing Crosby Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972290" start="3723" end="3732" title="Broadside (TV series)" label="Broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664777" start="3766" end="3777" title="Jonny Quest (TV series)" label="Jonny Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838575" start="3791" end="3797" title="Mickey (TV series)" label="Mickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248011" start="3811" end="3824" title="My Three Sons" label="My Three Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3841" end="3844" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3853" end="3874" title="No Time for Sergeants#Television series" label="No Time for Sergeants"/>
<link wikidata="Q839437" start="3888" end="3904" title="The Outer Limits (1963 TV series)" label="The Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770986" start="3918" end="3928" title="The Tycoon (TV series)" label="The Tycoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7910908" start="3942" end="3962" title="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day (TV series)" label="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q772909" start="3976" end="3987" title="Wagon Train" label="Wagon Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982843" start="4001" end="4013" title="Wendy and Me" label="Wendy and Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="4024" end="4027" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q526035" start="4055" end="4077" title="The Andy Griffith Show" label="The Andy Griffith Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q941737" start="4091" end="4114" title="The Beverly Hillbillies" label="The Beverly Hillbillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087835" start="4128" end="4141" title="Candid Camera" label="Candid Camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="4155" end="4168" title="CBS News" label="CBS News Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009267" start="4182" end="4193" title="CBS Reports" label="CBS Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728881" start="4207" end="4226" title="The Danny Kaye Show" label="The Danny Kaye Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q530706" start="4240" end="4262" title="The Dick Van Dyke Show" label="The Dick Van Dyke Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="4276" end="4296" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141741" start="4310" end="4332" title="Gilligan&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Gilligan&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249300" start="4346" end="4366" title="Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C." label="Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="4380" end="4388" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266491" start="4402" end="4407" title="Hazel (TV series)" label="Hazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="4426" end="4429" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967302" start="4438" end="4460" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Got a Secret" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Got a Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742861" start="4474" end="4497" title="The Jackie Gleason Show" label="The Jackie Gleason Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q289537" start="4511" end="4517" title="Lassie (1954 TV series)" label="Lassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247523" start="4531" end="4544" title="The Lucy Show" label="The Lucy Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086390" start="4558" end="4570" title="The Munsters" label="The Munsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247907" start="4584" end="4603" title="My Favorite Martian" label="My Favorite Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248011" start="4617" end="4630" title="My Three Sons" label="My Three Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="4649" end="4652" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q165356" start="4661" end="4672" title="Perry Mason (1957 TV series)" label="Perry Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248820" start="4686" end="4704" title="Petticoat Junction" label="Petticoat Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247542" start="4718" end="4725" title="Rawhide (TV series)" label="Rawhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960406" start="4739" end="4759" title="The Red Skelton Hour" label="The Red Skelton Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247647" start="4773" end="4785" title="Danger Man" label="Secret Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538972" start="4799" end="4821" title="Slattery&amp;#x27;s People" label="Slattery&amp;#x27;s People"/>
<link wikidata="Q872948" start="4835" end="4852" title="To Tell the Truth" label="To Tell the Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711830" start="4866" end="4887" title="The Twentieth Century" label="The Twentieth Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246416" start="4901" end="4919" title="Vacation Playhouse" label="Vacation Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q660263" start="4933" end="4953" title="What&amp;#x27;s My Line?" label="What&amp;#x27;s My Line?"/>
<link wikidata="Q705630" start="4972" end="5017" title="Art Linkletter" label="Art Linkletter&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Talent Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645287" start="5019" end="5043" title="CBS Thursday Night Movie" label="CBS Thursday Night Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157768" start="5067" end="5074" title="Daktari" label="Daktari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733018" start="5078" end="5098" title="The Face Is Familiar" label="The Face Is Familiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230693" start="5102" end="5113" title="Green Acres" label="Green Acres"/>
<link wikidata="Q431917" start="5133" end="5152" title="Hogan&amp;#x27;s Heroes" label="Hogan&amp;#x27;s Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234945" start="5154" end="5172" title="John Gary" label="The John Gary Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663891" start="5176" end="5185" title="The Loner (TV series)" label="The Loner"/>
<link wikidata="Q536137" start="5187" end="5200" title="Lost in Space" label="Lost in Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764942" start="5202" end="5235" title="The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour" label="The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233993" start="5237" end="5270" title="Smothers Brothers" label="The Smothers Brothers Summer Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339107" start="5274" end="5297" title="Steve Lawrence" label="The Steve Lawrence Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828605" start="5299" end="5325" title="The Trials of O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="The Trials of O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612516" start="5327" end="5378" title="Wayne &amp;amp; Shuster" label="Wayne &amp;amp; Shuster Take An Affectionate Look At..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1278637" start="5382" end="5400" title="The Wild Wild West" label="The Wild Wild West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571813" start="5420" end="5427" title="1964–65 United States network television schedule" label="1964–65"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715346" start="5436" end="5457" title="The Baileys of Balboa" label="The Baileys of Balboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986204" start="5471" end="5493" title="The Cara Williams Show" label="The Cara Williams Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694456" start="5507" end="5525" title="The Celebrity Game (American game show)" label="The Celebrity Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248754" start="5539" end="5552" title="The Defenders (1961 TV series)" label="The Defenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754511" start="5566" end="5592" title="The Doctors and the Nurses" label="The Doctors and the Nurses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732293" start="5606" end="5622" title="The Entertainers" label="The Entertainers"/>
<link wikidata="Q658636" start="5636" end="5643" title="Al Hirt" label="Fanfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467115" start="5657" end="5671" title="For the People (1965 TV series)" label="For the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819216" start="5685" end="5691" title="Glynis (TV series)" label="Glynis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822598" start="5705" end="5724" title="The Great Adventure (American TV series)" label="The Great Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743342" start="5738" end="5758" title="The Joey Bishop Show (TV series)" label="The Joey Bishop Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753342" start="5772" end="5790" title="Many Happy Returns (TV series)" label="Many Happy Returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866768" start="5804" end="5816" title="Mr. Broadway (TV series)" label="Mr. Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185758" start="5830" end="5839" title="Mister Ed" label="Mister Ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3868865" start="5853" end="5867" title="My Living Doll" label="My Living Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969956" start="5914" end="5931" title="Our Private World" label="Our Private World"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153103" start="5945" end="5953" title="Password (American game show)" label="Password"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795515" start="5967" end="5979" title="The Reporter (TV series)" label="The Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386249" start="5993" end="6009" title="Summer Playhouse (1964 TV series)" label="Summer Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036467" start="6023" end="6036" title="World War One (TV series)" label="World War One"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="6046" end="6049" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677834" start="6077" end="6095" title="Actuality Specials" label="Actuality Specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713728" start="6109" end="6131" title="The Andy Williams Show" label="The Andy Williams Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716400" start="6145" end="6168" title="The Bell Telephone Hour" label="The Bell Telephone Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565710" start="6182" end="6220" title="Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre" label="Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q862187" start="6234" end="6241" title="Bonanza" label="Bonanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521255" start="6255" end="6262" title="Branded (TV series)" label="Branded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160120" start="6276" end="6288" title="Daniel Boone (1964 TV series)" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793868" start="6302" end="6313" title="Dr. Kildare (TV series)" label="Dr. Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428962" start="6327" end="6334" title="Flipper (1964 TV series)" label="Flipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264983" start="6348" end="6371" title="The Man from U.N.C.L.E." label="The Man from U.N.C.L.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q6952793" start="6385" end="6417" title="NBC Saturday Night at the Movies" label="NBC Saturday Night at the Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435809" start="6431" end="6465" title="Kraft Music Hall" label="Perry Como&amp;#x27;s Kraft Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214471" start="6479" end="6492" title="The Virginian (TV series)" label="The Virginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247718" start="6506" end="6549" title="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Wonderful World of Color" label="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Wonderful World of Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027555" start="6568" end="6581" title="Camp Runamuck" label="Camp Runamuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689907" start="6583" end="6589" title="Convoy (TV series)" label="Convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993498" start="6591" end="6611" title="The Dean Martin Show" label="The Dean Martin Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q215359" start="6613" end="6640" title="Dean Martin" label="The Dean Martin Summer Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247268" start="6644" end="6653" title="Get Smart" label="Get Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783039" start="6655" end="6659" title="Hank (1965 TV series)" label="Hank"/>
<link wikidata="Q127337" start="6661" end="6679" title="I Dream of Jeannie" label="I Dream of Jeannie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249413" start="6681" end="6686" title="I Spy (1965 TV series)" label="I Spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q315217" start="6688" end="6710" title="John Forsythe" label="The John Forsythe Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q941025" start="6712" end="6718" title="Laredo (TV series)" label="Laredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838845" start="6720" end="6738" title="Mickie Finn&amp;#x27;s (TV series)" label="Mickie Finn&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866812" start="6742" end="6756" title="Mister Roberts (TV series)" label="Mister Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897697" start="6758" end="6772" title="Mona McCluskey" label="Mona McCluskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981865" start="6774" end="6791" title="My Mother the Car" label="My Mother the Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899527" start="6793" end="6826" title="Please Don&amp;#x27;t Eat the Daisies (TV series)" label="Please Don&amp;#x27;t Eat the Daisies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298256" start="6828" end="6845" title="Run for Your Life (TV series)" label="Run for Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q297816" start="6847" end="6871" title="Sammy Davis Jr." label="The Sammy Davis Jr. Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989899" start="6875" end="6904" title="The Wackiest Ship in the Army (TV series)" label="The Wackiest Ship in the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571813" start="6924" end="6931" title="1964–65 United States network television schedule" label="1964–65"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645628" start="6940" end="6956" title="90 Bristol Court" label="90 Bristol Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247206" start="6970" end="6995" title="The Alfred Hitchcock Hour" label="The Alfred Hitchcock Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717983" start="7009" end="7027" title="The Bill Dana Show" label="The Bill Dana Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q30645963" start="7041" end="7057" title="Cloak of Mystery" label="Cloak of Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053184" start="7071" end="7105" title="The Famous Adventures of Mr. Magoo" label="The Famous Adventures of Mr. Magoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645628" start="7119" end="7143" title="90 Bristol Court" label="Harris Against the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266491" start="7157" end="7162" title="Hazel (TV series)" label="Hazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="7179" end="7182" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996103" start="7191" end="7201" title="Hullabaloo (TV series)" label="Hullabaloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q310413" start="7215" end="7237" title="Don Ameche" label="International Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565777" start="7251" end="7273" title="The Jack Benny Program" label="The Jack Benny Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587581" start="7287" end="7308" title="The Jack Paar Program" label="The Jack Paar Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795430" start="7322" end="7336" title="Kentucky Jones" label="Kentucky Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128559" start="7350" end="7372" title="Suspense Theater" label="Kraft Suspense Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866801" start="7386" end="7395" title="Mr. Novak" label="Mr. Novak"/>
<link wikidata="Q30645967" start="7409" end="7423" title="Moment of Fear" label="Moment of Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248277" start="7437" end="7456" title="Profiles in Courage (TV series)" label="Profiles in Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476466" start="7470" end="7480" title="The Rogues (TV series)" label="The Rogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645628" start="7494" end="7512" title="90 Bristol Court" label="Tom, Dick and Mary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795097" wikidata="Q5322605" url="?curid=795097" title="Start Elbląg">
<text>EKS Start Elbląg is a Polish women&#x27;s handball team, based in Elbląg, playing in PGNiG Superliga.

== Titles ==

* Ekstraklasa
** Winners (2) : 1992, 1994
* Polish Handball Cup
** Winners (3) : 1993, 1994, 1999

==European record ==

== Team ==
=== Current squad ===

:&quot;Squad for the 2017–18 season&quot;
;Goalkeepers
* Alicja Klarkowska
* Klaudia Powaga
* Solomija Szywerska

;Wingers
;RW:
* Magda Balsam
* Aleksandra Jedrzejczyk
;LW: 
* Daria Gerej
* Dominika Hawryszko
;Line Players: 
* Aleksandra Stokłosa
* Aleksandra Dorsz

;Back players
* Sylwia Lisewska
* Patrycja Swierczewska
* Joanna Waga 
* Hanna Yashchuk
* Katarzyna Kozimur
* Aleksandra Kwiecinska 
==References==
==External links==
* Official website
* EHF Club profile

==See also==
* Handball in Poland
* Sports in Poland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5322605" start="0" end="16" title="Start Elbląg" label="EKS Start Elbląg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="42" end="50" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q104712" start="66" end="72" title="Elbląg" label="Elbląg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129048" start="85" end="100" title="Polish Women&amp;#x27;s Superliga (women&amp;#x27;s handball)" label="PGNiG Superliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129048" start="119" end="130" title="Polish Ekstraklasa Women&amp;#x27;s Handball League" label="Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55819732" start="499" end="518" title="Aleksandra Stokłosa" label="Aleksandra Stokłosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43379618" start="555" end="570" title="Sylwia Lisewska" label="Sylwia Lisewska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="612" end="626" title="Hanna Yashchuk" label="Hanna Yashchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="760" end="778" title="Handball in Poland" label="Handball in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="781" end="797" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795100" wikidata="Q8070041" url="?curid=795100" title="Zgoda Ruda Śląska">
<text>Zgoda Ruda Śląska is a Polish women&#x27;s handball team, based in Ruda Śląska.

== See also ==
* Handball in Poland
* Sports in Poland

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8070041" start="0" end="17" title="Zgoda Ruda Śląska" label="Zgoda Ruda Śląska"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="43" end="51" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q108679" start="67" end="78" title="Ruda Śląska" label="Ruda Śląska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="98" end="116" title="Handball in Poland" label="Handball in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="119" end="135" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795102" wikidata="Q6626735" url="?curid=795102" title="List of lost Russian or Soviet submarines">
<text>These Russian or Soviet submarines either suffered extensive crew casualties or were entirely lost to enemy action or to &quot;storm or perils of the sea.&quot; A dagger (†) indicates that the boat was lost. 

This list is not known to be complete.

According to the U.S. Navy, &quot;The former Soviet Union secretly disposed of about 16 submarines by sinking them in the northern oceans.&quot;

See also the list of Russian or Soviet submarines.

== Before the Russian Revolution ==
* &quot;Дельфин&quot; (&quot;Delfin&quot;) (1904) †

== Before World War II ==
* Shch-103 (1935, storm)
* D-1 (1940, sea trials)
* S-2 (1940, Winter War)

== During World War II ==

=== 1941 ===
;Baltic Fleet
* &quot;L-2&quot;
* &quot;M-71&quot; (scuttled)
* &quot;M-74&quot;
* &quot;M-80&quot; (scuttled)
* &quot;M-81&quot;
* &quot;M-83&quot; (scuttled)
* &quot;M-94&quot;
* &quot;M-98&quot;
* &quot;M-99&quot;
* &quot;M-103&quot;
* &quot;S-1&quot; (scuttled)
* &quot;S-3&quot; 
* &quot;S-5&quot;
* &quot;S-6&quot;
* &quot;S-8&quot;
* &quot;S-10&quot;
* &quot;S-11&quot;
* &quot;Kalev&quot;
* &quot;Ronis&quot; (scuttled)
* &quot;Spidola&quot; (scuttled)
* &quot;Shch-301&quot;
* &quot;Shch-319&quot;
* &quot;Shch-322&quot;
* &quot;Shch-324&quot;

;Black Sea Fleet
* &quot;D-6&quot; (scuttled)
* &quot;M-34&quot;
* &quot;M-58&quot;
* &quot;M-59&quot;
* &quot;S-34&quot;
* &quot;Shch-204&quot;
* &quot;Shch-206&quot;
* &quot;Shch-211&quot;

;Pacific Fleet
* &quot;L-16&quot;
* &quot;M-57&quot;
* &quot;M-63&quot;

=== 1942 ===
;Baltic Fleet
* &quot;M-95&quot; †
* &quot;M-97&quot; †
* &quot;S-7&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-302&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-304&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-305&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-306&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-308&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-311&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-317&quot; † 
* &quot;Shch-320&quot; †

;Black Sea Fleet
* &quot;A-1&quot; (scuttled)
* &quot;M-31&quot; †
* &quot;M-33&quot; †
* &quot;M-60&quot; † 
* &quot;M-118&quot; †
* &quot;S-32&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-208&quot; † 
* &quot;Shch-210&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-212&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-213&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-214&quot; †

;Northern Fleet
* &quot;D-3&quot; † 
* &quot;L-24&quot; †
* &quot;K-2&quot; †
* &quot;K-23&quot; †
* &quot;M-121&quot; †
* &quot;M-173&quot; †
* &quot;M-175&quot; †
* &quot;M-176&quot; † 
* &quot;Shch-401&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-405&quot; † 
* &quot;Shch-421&quot; † (intentionally sunk after hitting mines)

;Pacific Fleet
* &quot;L-16&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-138&quot; (blew up due to torpedo explosion)

=== 1943 ===
;Baltic Fleet
* &quot;S-9&quot; †
* &quot;S-12&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-323&quot;
* &quot;Shch-406&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-408&quot; †

;Black Sea Fleet
* &quot;A-3&quot; †
* &quot;D-4&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-203&quot; †

;Northern Fleet
* &quot;К-1&quot; † 
* &quot;К-3&quot; †
* &quot;К-22&quot; †
* &quot;M-106&quot; †
* &quot;M-122&quot; †
* &quot;M-172&quot; †
* &quot;M-174&quot; †
* &quot;S-55&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-403&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-406&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-408&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-422&quot; †

=== 1944 ===
;Baltic Fleet
* &quot;M-96&quot; †

;Black Sea Fleet
* &quot;L-6&quot; †
* &quot;L-23&quot; †
* &quot;M-36&quot; †
* &quot;Shch-216&quot; † 

;Northern Fleet
* &quot;M-108&quot; †
* &quot;S-54&quot; † 

=== 1945 ===
;Baltic Fleet
* &quot;S-4&quot; †

;Pacific Fleet
* &quot;L-19&quot; †

== After World War II ==
* &quot;S-117&quot; (1952) †
* &quot;M-200&quot; Месть (&quot;Mest&quot;) (1956) †
* (1957) †
* &quot;К-19&quot; (1961)
* &quot;S-80&quot; (1961)
* &quot;B-37&quot; (1962) †
* (1962)
* (1968) †
* &quot;K-27&quot; (1968) †
* &quot;K-8&quot; (1970) †
* (1973)
* &quot;S-178&quot; (1981)
* &quot;K-429&quot; (1983)
* &quot;K-131&quot; (1984)
* &quot;K-219&quot; (1986) †
* (1989) †

== After the fall of the Soviet Union ==
* (2000) †
* &quot;K-159&quot; (2003) †
* &quot;B-237&quot; (2023) 

The &quot;Komsomolets&quot; Nuclear Submarine Memorial Society aids the dependents of sailors lost in these disasters.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6626735" start="6" end="34" title="List of lost Russian or Soviet submarines" label="Russian or Soviet submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="267" end="276" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="295" end="307" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572456" start="409" end="445" title="list of Russian or Soviet submarines" label="list of Russian or Soviet submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="462" end="480" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988511" start="486" end="526" title="Russian submarine Delfin" label="&amp;quot;Дельфин&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Delfin&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="547" end="559" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="649" end="661" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q805787" start="680" end="692" title="Baltic Fleet" label="Baltic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786766" start="731" end="739" title="Scuttling" label="scuttled"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="1234" end="1249" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165355" start="1426" end="1439" title="Pacific Fleet (Russia)" label="Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3293" end="3305" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4528313" start="3317" end="3322" title="Soviet submarine S-117" label="S-117"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571808" start="3340" end="3382" title="Soviet submarine M-200" label="&amp;quot;M-200&amp;quot; Месть (&amp;quot;Mest&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q580124" start="3411" end="3415" title="Soviet submarine K-19" label="К-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507680" start="3437" end="3441" title="Soviet submarine S-80" label="S-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q794983" start="3463" end="3467" title="Soviet submarine B-37" label="B-37"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718023" start="3511" end="3515" title="Soviet submarine K-27" label="K-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718032" start="3539" end="3542" title="Soviet submarine K-8" label="K-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204400" start="3575" end="3580" title="Soviet submarine S-178" label="S-178"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718026" start="3602" end="3607" title="Soviet submarine K-429" label="K-429"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571804" start="3629" end="3634" title="Soviet submarine K-131" label="K-131"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718019" start="3656" end="3661" title="Soviet submarine K-219" label="K-219"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409928" start="3702" end="3726" title="History of the Soviet Union (1985-1991)" label="fall of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q657518" start="3749" end="3754" title="Soviet submarine K-159" label="K-159"/>
<link wikidata="Q18399867" start="3778" end="3783" title="Russian submarine B-237" label="B-237"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428641" start="3803" end="3861" title="Komsomolets Nuclear Submarine Memorial Society" label="&amp;quot;Komsomolets&amp;quot; Nuclear Submarine Memorial Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795103" wikidata="Q5488647" url="?curid=795103" title="Multiple drafts model">
<text>Daniel Dennett&#x27;s multiple drafts model of consciousness is a physicalist theory of consciousness based upon cognitivism, which views the mind in terms of information processing. The theory is described in depth in his book, &quot;Consciousness Explained&quot;, published in 1991. As the title states, the book proposes a high-level explanation of consciousness which is consistent with support for the possibility of strong AI.

Dennett describes the theory as &quot;first-person operationalism&quot;. As he states it:
==The thesis of multiple drafts==
Dennett&#x27;s thesis is that our modern understanding of consciousness is unduly influenced by the ideas of René Descartes. To show why, he starts with a description of the phi illusion. In this experiment, two different coloured lights, with an angular separation of a few degrees at the eye, are flashed in succession. If the interval between the flashes is less than a second or so, the first light that is flashed appears to move across to the position of the second light. Furthermore, the light seems to change colour as it moves across the visual field. A green light will appear to turn red as it seems to move across to the position of a red light. Dennett asks how we could see the light change colour &quot;before&quot; the second light is observed.

Dennett claims that conventional explanations of the colour change boil down to either &quot;Orwellian&quot; or &quot;Stalinesque&quot; hypotheses, which he says are the result of Descartes&#x27; continued influence on our vision of the mind. In an Orwellian hypothesis, the subject comes to one conclusion, then goes back and changes that memory in light of subsequent events. This is akin to George Orwell&#x27;s &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;, where records of the past are routinely altered. In a Stalinesque hypothesis, the two events would be reconciled prior to entering the subject&#x27;s consciousness, with the final result presented as fully resolved. This is akin to Joseph Stalin&#x27;s show trials, where the verdict has been decided in advance and the trial is just a rote presentation.
Dennett argues that there is no principled basis for picking one of these theories over the other, because they share a common error in supposing that there is a special time and place where unconscious processing becomes consciously experienced, entering into what Dennett calls the &quot;Cartesian theatre&quot;. Both theories require us to cleanly divide a sequence of perceptions and reactions into before and after the instant that they reach the seat of consciousness, but he denies that there is any such moment, as it would lead to infinite regress. Instead, he asserts that there is no privileged place in the brain where consciousness happens. Dennett states that, &quot;[t]here does not exist ... a process such as &#x27;recruitment of consciousness&#x27; (into what?), nor any place where the &#x27;vehicle&#x27;s arrival&#x27; is recognized (by whom?)&quot;

With no theatre, there is no screen, hence no reason to re-present data after it has already been analysed. Dennett says that, &quot;the Multiple Drafts model goes on to claim that the brain does not bother &#x27;constructing&#x27; any representations that go to the trouble of &#x27;filling in&#x27; the blanks. That would be a waste of time and (shall we say?) paint. The judgement is already in so we can get on with other tasks!&quot;

According to the model, there are a variety of sensory inputs from a given event and also a variety of interpretations of these inputs. The sensory inputs arrive in the brain and are interpreted at different times, so a given event can give rise to a succession of discriminations, constituting the equivalent of multiple drafts of a story. As soon as each discrimination is accomplished, it becomes available for eliciting a behaviour; it does not have to wait to be presented at the theatre.

Like a number of other theories, the Multiple Drafts model understands conscious experience as taking time to occur, such that percepts do not instantaneously arise in the mind in their full richness. The distinction is that Dennett&#x27;s theory denies any clear and unambiguous boundary separating conscious experiences from all other processing. According to Dennett, consciousness is to be found in the actions and flows of information from place to place, rather than some singular view containing our experience. There is no central experiencer who confers a durable stamp of approval on any particular draft.

Different parts of the neural processing assert more or less control at different times. For something to reach consciousness is akin to becoming famous, in that it must leave behind consequences by which it is remembered. To put it another way, consciousness is the property of having enough influence to affect what the mouth will say and the hands will do. Which inputs are &quot;edited&quot; into our drafts is not an exogenous act of supervision, but part of the self-organizing functioning of the network, and at the same level as the circuitry that conveys information bottom-up.

The conscious self is taken to exist as an abstraction visible at the level of the intentional stance, akin to a body of mass having a &quot;centre of gravity&quot;. Analogously, Dennett refers to the self as the &quot;centre of narrative gravity&quot;, a story we tell ourselves about our experiences. Consciousness exists, but not independently of behaviour and behavioural disposition, which can be studied through heterophenomenology.

The origin of this operationalist approach can be found in Dennett&#x27;s immediately preceding work. explains consciousness in terms of &quot;access consciousness&quot; alone, denying the independent existence of what Ned Block has labeled &quot;phenomenal consciousness&quot;. He argues that &quot;Everything real has properties, and since I don&#x27;t deny the reality of conscious experience, I grant that conscious experience has properties&quot;. Having related all consciousness to properties, he concludes that they cannot be meaningfully distinguished from our judgements about them. He writes: 
In other words, once we&#x27;ve explained a perception fully in terms of how it affects us, there is nothing left to explain. In particular, there is no such thing as a perception which may be considered in and of itself (a quale). Instead, the subject&#x27;s honest reports of how things seem to them are inherently authoritative on how things seem to them, but not on the matter of how things actually are.
The key to the multiple drafts model is that, after removing qualia, explaining consciousness boils down to explaining the behaviour we recognise as conscious. Consciousness is as consciousness does.

==Critical responses==
Psychobiologist John Staddon contrasts a simple &quot;new behaviorism&quot; interpretation of color phi with Dennett and Kinsbourne&#x27;s account. The basic idea is that because of well-known processes such as lateral inhibition, the internal states created by the two stimuli are identical, hence are so reported. points out that the brain is bilaterally symmetrical. That being the case, if Cartesian materialism is true, there might be &quot;two&quot; Cartesian theatres, so arguments against only one are flawed. argues that the phi effect and the cutaneous rabbit illusion demonstrate that there is a delay whilst modelling occurs and that this delay was discovered by Benjamin Libet.

It has also been claimed that the argument in the multiple drafts model does not support its conclusion.

===&quot;Straw man&quot;===
Much of the criticism asserts that Dennett&#x27;s theory attacks the wrong target, failing to explain what it claims to. Chalmers (1996) maintains that Dennett has produced no more than a theory of how subjects report events. Some even parody the title of the book as &quot;Consciousness Explained Away&quot;, accusing him of greedy reductionism. Another line of criticism disputes the accuracy of Dennett&#x27;s characterisations of existing theories:
===Unoriginality===
Multiple drafts is also attacked for making a claim to novelty. It may be the case, however, that such attacks mistake which features Dennett is claiming as novel. Korb states that, &quot;I believe that the central thesis will be relatively uncontentious for most cognitive scientists, but that its use as a cleaning solvent for messy puzzles will be viewed less happily in most quarters.&quot; In this way, Dennett uses uncontroversial ideas towards more controversial ends, leaving him open to claims of unoriginality when uncontroversial parts are focused upon.

Even the notion of consciousness as drafts is not unique to Dennett. According to Hankins, Dieter Teichert suggests that Paul Ricoeur&#x27;s theories agree with Dennett&#x27;s on the notion that &quot;the self is basically a narrative entity, and that any attempt to give it a free-floating independent status is misguided.&quot; [Hankins] Others see Derrida&#x27;s (1982) representationalism as consistent with the notion of a mind that has perceptually changing content without a definitive present instant.

To those who believe that consciousness entails something more than behaving in all ways conscious, Dennett&#x27;s view is seen as eliminativist, since it denies the existence of qualia and the possibility of philosophical zombies. However, Dennett is not denying the existence of the mind or of consciousness, only what he considers a naive view of them. The point of contention is whether Dennett&#x27;s own definitions are indeed more accurate: whether what we think of when we speak of perceptions and consciousness can be understood in terms of nothing more than their effect on behaviour.

===Information processing and consciousness===
The role of information processing in consciousness has been criticised by John Searle who, in his Chinese room argument, states that he cannot find anything that could be recognised as conscious experience in a system that relies solely on motions of things from place to place. Dennett sees this argument as misleading, arguing that consciousness is not to be found in a specific part of the system, but in the actions of the whole. In essence, he denies that consciousness requires something in addition to capacity for behaviour, saying that philosophers such as Searle, &quot;just can&#x27;t imagine how understanding could be a property that emerges from lots of distributed quasi-understanding in a large system&quot;.

==See also==

* Artificial consciousness
* Cognitive model
* Conceptual space
* Global Workspace Theory
* Image schema

==References==
==Bibliography==

* Reprinted in ; 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* HTML (Response to and )
* 
* 
* 
* Summarized in 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="0" end="14" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Daniel Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488647" start="22" end="60" title="Multiple drafts model" label="multiple drafts model of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q269114" start="66" end="77" title="physicalism" label="physicalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="88" end="101" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q23382" start="113" end="124" title="cognitivism (psychology)" label="cognitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="142" end="146" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q750843" start="159" end="181" title="Information processing (psychology)" label="information processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q962560" start="235" end="258" title="Consciousness Explained" label="Consciousness Explained"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264109" start="422" end="432" title="Artificial general intelligence" label="strong AI."/>
<link wikidata="Q286017" start="485" end="499" title="operationalism" label="operationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="667" end="681" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148635" start="732" end="744" title="color phi phenomenon" label="phi illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="1742" end="1762" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="2002" end="2015" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177253" start="2023" end="2033" title="show trial" label="show trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q977850" start="2415" end="2432" title="Cartesian theatre" label="Cartesian theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044475" start="5220" end="5238" title="intentional stance" label="intentional stance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137694" start="5555" end="5574" title="heterophenomenology" label="heterophenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722354" start="5796" end="5805" title="Ned Block" label="Ned Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q282250" start="6406" end="6411" title="quale" label="quale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196710" start="7368" end="7393" title="cutaneous rabbit illusion" label="cutaneous rabbit illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q817604" start="7490" end="7504" title="Benjamin Libet" label="Benjamin Libet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601716" start="7967" end="7986" title="greedy reductionism" label="greedy reductionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192066" start="8801" end="8813" title="Paul Ricoeur" label="Paul Ricoeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="9031" end="9038" title="Derrida" label="Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329497" start="9322" end="9335" title="eliminativism" label="eliminativist"/>
<link wikidata="Q282250" start="9370" end="9376" title="qualia" label="qualia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664539" start="9400" end="9420" title="philosophical zombie" label="philosophical zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q295012" start="9909" end="9920" title="John Searle" label="John Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q304726" start="9933" end="9945" title="Chinese room" label="Chinese room"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993663" start="10577" end="10601" title="Artificial consciousness" label="Artificial consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382939" start="10604" end="10619" title="Cognitive model" label="Cognitive model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158431" start="10622" end="10638" title="Conceptual space" label="Conceptual space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570791" start="10641" end="10664" title="Global Workspace Theory" label="Global Workspace Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912668" start="10667" end="10679" title="Image schema" label="Image schema"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795104" wikidata="Q8081181" url="?curid=795104" title="Łącznościowiec Szczecin">
<text>Łącznościowiec Szczecin is a Polish women&#x27;s handball team, based in Szczecin.

== See also ==
* Handball in Poland
* Sports in Poland

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8081181" start="0" end="23" title="Łącznościowiec Szczecin" label="Łącznościowiec Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="49" end="57" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="73" end="81" title="Szczecin" label="Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="101" end="119" title="Handball in Poland" label="Handball in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="122" end="138" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795105" wikidata="Q11764958" url="?curid=795105" title="Piotrcovia Piotrków Trybunalski">
<text>Piotrcovia Piotrków Trybunalski is a women&#x27;s Polish handball team, based in Piotrków Trybunalski.

== Current squad ==
:&quot;Squad for the 2018–19 season&quot;

;Goalkeepers
*1 Natalia Kolasińska
* 16 Daria Opelt 
* 69 Karolina Sarnecka

;Wingers
;LW
*5 Marta Osuch
* 51 Vladyslava Belmas 
* 57 Zuzanna Gajewska 
;RW 
* 19 Patrycja Ciura
* 10 Aleksandra Zaleśny 
;Line players 
*7 Sylwia Klonowska
* 29 Andleja Ivanović

;Back players
;LB
* 11 Monika Kopertowska
* 23 Klaudia Cygan
* 55 Zorica Despodovska
;CB
* 15 Agata Wypych
* 17 Anna Wasilewska
* 22 Kinga Gutkowska
;RB
*8 Żaneta Senderkiewicz
* 73 Kornelia Małecka
==See also==
* Handball in Poland
* Sports in Poland

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11764958" start="0" end="31" title="Piotrcovia Piotrków Trybunalski" label="Piotrcovia Piotrków Trybunalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="50" end="56" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="57" end="65" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q158004" start="81" end="101" title="Piotrków Trybunalski" label="Piotrków Trybunalski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="183" end="201" title="Natalia Kolasińska" label="Natalia Kolasińska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="207" end="218" title="Daria Opelt" label="Daria Opelt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="225" end="242" title="Karolina Sarnecka" label="Karolina Sarnecka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="260" end="271" title="Marta Osuch" label="Marta Osuch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="277" end="294" title="Vladyslava Belmas" label="Vladyslava Belmas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="301" end="317" title="Zuzanna Gajewska" label="Zuzanna Gajewska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="329" end="343" title="Patrycja Ciura" label="Patrycja Ciura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="349" end="367" title="Aleksandra Zaleśny" label="Aleksandra Zaleśny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="387" end="403" title="Sylwia Klonowska" label="Sylwia Klonowska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="409" end="425" title="Andleja Ivanović" label="Andleja Ivanović"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="450" end="468" title="Monika Kopertowska" label="Monika Kopertowska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="474" end="487" title="Klaudia Cygan" label="Klaudia Cygan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074458" start="493" end="511" title="Zorica Despodovska" label="Zorica Despodovska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="521" end="533" title="Agata Wypych" label="Agata Wypych"/>
<link wikidata="Q20900591" start="539" end="554" title="Anna Wasilewska" label="Anna Wasilewska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="560" end="575" title="Kinga Gutkowska" label="Kinga Gutkowska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="583" end="603" title="Żaneta Senderkiewicz" label="Żaneta Senderkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="609" end="625" title="Kornelia Małecka" label="Kornelia Małecka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="641" end="659" title="Handball in Poland" label="Handball in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="662" end="678" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795108" wikidata="Q1532" url="?curid=795108" title="Ramesses IV">
<text>Usermaatre Heqamaatre Setepenamun Ramesses IV (also written Ramses or Rameses) was the third pharaoh of the Twentieth Dynasty of the New Kingdom of Ancient Egypt. He was the second son of Ramesses III and became crown prince when his elder brother Amenherkhepshef died aged 15 in 1164 BC, when Ramesses was only 12 years old. His promotion to crown prince:
is suggested by his appearance (suitably entitled) in a scene of the festival of Min at the Ramesses III temple at Karnak, which may have been completed by Year 22 [of his father&#x27;s reign]. (the date is mentioned in the poem inscribed there)

As his father&#x27;s chosen successor, the prince employed three distinctive titles: &quot;Hereditary Prince&quot;, &quot;Royal scribe&quot; and &quot;Generalissimo.&quot; The latter two titles are mentioned in a text at the temple of Amenhotep III at Soleb and all three titles appear on a lintel now in Florence, Italy. As heir-apparent he took on increasing responsibilities; for instance, in Year 27 of his father&#x27;s reign, he is depicted appointing a certain Amenemope to the important position of Third Prophet of Amun in the latter&#x27;s TT 148 tomb. Amenemope&#x27;s Theban tomb also accords prince Ramesses all three of his aforementioned sets of royal titles. Despite the 31-year reign of his father Ramesses III, Ramesses IV was only 21 when he became pharaoh. His rule has been dated to 1155 to 1149 BC.

==Family==
It is now believed that Ramesses IV&#x27;s mother was most likely Queen Tyti from recently discovered notes published in the 2010 issue of the &quot;Journal of Egyptian Archaeology&quot;. They reveal that Tyti—who was a king&#x27;s daughter, a king&#x27;s wife and a king&#x27;s mother in her own right—was identified in Papyrus BM EA 10052 (i.e., the tomb-robbery papyri) to be a queen of Ramesses III, Ramesses IV&#x27;s father. The 2010 JEA article authors—including Aidan Dodson—write that since Ramesses VI&#x27;s mother is known to be a certain lady named Iset Ta-Hemdjert or Isis:
only Ramesses IV and Ramesses VIII remain as candidates [for the son of Tyti]. Given that Ramesses VIII only reigned briefly some 25 years after his father’s death, it is hardly likely that the decoration of QV52, with the &quot;mwt-nsw&quot; (i.e., king&#x27;s mother) title intimately mixed with Tyti’s other titles, could have been delayed this late to refer to him. This leaves Ramesses IV as the only credible primary &#x27;subject&#x27; of the &quot;mwt-nsw&quot; title in the tomb. As for which--if any--of the other sons of Ramesses III were borne to Tyti, no unequivocal data is available, other than the fact that Amenhirkhopeshef B, buried in QV55, was &quot;ms n Hmt-nTr mwt-nTr Hmt-nsw-wrt&quot;, paralleling Tyti&#x27;s titles so closely that he may with some confidence be proposed as her son.
Thus, the identity of Ramesses IV&#x27;s mother has been resolved in favour of Queen Tyti who was once erroneously thought to be the mother of another king in the mid-1980s: Ramesses XI. Ramesses IV was succeeded to the throne by his 13-year-old son Ramesses V.

==Projects==


Ramesses IV came to the throne in difficult circumstances. Ramesses III, his father, was assassinated by conspirators led by Tiye, one of his secondary wives, to establish Pentawer, her own son and Ramesses IV&#x27;s half-brother, on the throne. Ramesses IV, however, was able to secure himself on the throne, and had the conspirators arrested and executed.

At the start of his reign, the pharaoh initiated a substantial building program on the scale of Ramesses II by doubling the size of the work gangs at Deir el-Medina to a total of 120 men and dispatching numerous expeditions to the stone quarries of Wadi Hammamat and the turquoise mines of the Sinai. The Great Rock stela of Ramesses IV at Wadi Hammamat records that the largest expedition—dated to his Year 3, third month of Shemu day 27—consisted of 8,368 men alone including 5,000 soldiers, 2,000 personnel of the Amun temples, 800 Apiru and 130 stonemasons and quarrymen under the personal command of the High Priest of Amun, Ramessesnakht. The scribes who composed the text also noted that this figure included 900 men &quot;who are dead and omitted from this list.&quot; Consequently, once this omitted figure is included to the tally of 8,368 men who served in the Year 3 quarry expedition, a total of 900 men out of an original expedition of 8,368 men perished during this endeavour for a mortality rate of 10.7%. Some of the stones which were dragged 60 miles to the Nile from Wadi Hammamat weighed 40 tons or more. Other Egyptian quarries including Aswan were located much closer to the Nile which enabled them to use barges to transport stones long distances.

Part of the king&#x27;s program included the extensive enlargement of his father&#x27;s Temple of Khonsu at Karnak and the construction of a large mortuary temple near the Temple of Hatshepsut. Ramesses IV also sent several expeditions to the turquoise mines in the Sinai; a total of four expeditions are known prior to his fourth year. The Serabit el-Khadim stela of the Royal Butler Sobekhotep states: &quot;Year 3, third month of Shemu. His Majesty sent his favoured and beloved one, the confident of his lord, the Overseer of the Treasury of Silver and Gold, Chief of the Secrets of the august Palace, Sobekhotep, justified, to bring for him all that his heart desired of turquoise (on) &quot;his fourth expedition&quot;.&quot; This expedition dates to either Ramesses III or IV&#x27;s reign since Sobekhotep is attested in office until at least the reign of Ramesses V. Ramesses IV&#x27;s final venture to the turquoise mines of the Sinai is documented by the stela of a senior army scribe named Panufer. Panufer states that this expedition&#x27;s mission was both to procure turquoise and to establish a cult chapel of king Ramesses IV at the Hathor temple of Serabit el-Khadim. The stela reads:
Year 5, second month of Shomu [i.e., summer]. The sending by His Majesty &lt;to&gt; build the Mansion of Millions of Years of Ramesses IV in the temple of Hathor, Lady of Turquoise, by Panefer, the Scribe of the Commands of the Army, son of Pairy, justified.
While little is known regarding the route that the mining missions took from Egypt to Serabit el-Khadim, A. J. Peden, who wrote a biography of Ramesses IV in 1994, states that there were &quot;two obvious routes&quot; to reach this site:
The first was a straightforward march from a Delta base, such as Memphis, east south-east and then south into Sinai. Surviving a march in this inhospitable land would have presented formidable logistical obstacles, perhaps forcing an alternative route to be adopted. This would involve a departure from the Delta to a site near the modern port of Suez. From here they could have proceeded by boat to the ports of Abu Zenima or El-Markha on the west coast of the Sinai peninsula and from there it is a short journey inland of only a day or two to the actual site of Serabit el-Khadim.

==Attestations==

Ramesses IV is attested by his aforementioned building activity at Wadi Hammamat and Serabit el-Khadim in the Sinai as well as several papyri and even one obelisk. The creation of a royal cult in the Temple of Hathor is known under his reign at Serabit el-Khadim while Papyrus Mallet (or P. Louvre 1050) dates to Years 3 and 4 of his reign. Papyrus Mallet is a six column text dealing partly with agricultural affairs; its first column lists the prices for various commodities between Year 31 of Ramesses III until Year 3 of Ramesses IV. The final four columns contain a memorandum of 2 letters composed by the Superintendent of Cattle of the Estate of Amen-Re, Bakenkhons, to several mid-level administrators and their subordinates. Meanwhile, surviving monuments of Ramesses IV in the Delta consists of an obelisk recovered in Cairo and a pair of his cartouches found on a pylon gateway both originally from Heliopolis.

The most important document to survive from this pharaoh&#x27;s rule is Papyrus Harris I, which honours the life of his father, Ramesses III, by listing the latter&#x27;s many accomplishments and gifts to the temples of Egypt, and the Turin papyrus, the earliest known geologic map. Ramesses IV was perhaps the last New Kingdom king to engage in large-scale monumental building after his father as &quot;there was a marked decline in temple building even during the longer reigns of Ramesses IX and VI. The only apparent exception was the attempt of Ramesses V and VI to continue the vast and uncompleted mortuary temple of Ramesses IV at the Assasif.&quot;

===Levant===
At Beirut, a 12th century burial shaft included a bone amulet with the cartouche of Ramesses IV.

==Death==

Despite Ramesses IV&#x27;s many endeavours for the gods and his prayer to Osiris—preserved on a Year 4 stela at Abydos—that &quot;thou shalt give me the great age with a long reign [as my predecessor]&quot;, the king did not live long enough to accomplish his ambitious goals. Ramesses IV&#x27;s highest known date in the archaeological records is a Year 7, III Akhet day 23 ostracon which, under the Egyptian dating system, meant that this ruler had a reign of just more than 6 full years.

After a short reign of about six and a half years, Ramesses IV died and was buried in tomb KV2 in the Valley of the Kings. His mummy was found in the royal cache of Amenhotep II&#x27;s tomb KV35 in 1898. His chief wife is Queen Duatentopet or Tentopet or who was buried in QV74. His son, Ramesses V, would succeed him to the throne.

Originally, Ramesses IV had a tomb built for him in the Valley of the Queens, QV53.

In April 2021 his mummy was moved from the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities to the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization along with those of 17 other kings and 4 queens in an event termed the Pharaohs&#x27; Golden Parade.

==Gallery==


==References==
==Further reading==
*Dembitz, Gabriella; Les inscriptions de Ramsès IV de l&#x27;allée processionnelle nord-sud à Karnak révisées. Karnak Varia (§6), in: Cahiers de Karnak 16 (2017), 167-178.
*Wieczorek, David F., A Rock Inscription of Ramesses IV at Gebelein, a previously unknown New Kingdom expedition, in: Études et Travaux XXVIII (2015), 217-229.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1532" start="34" end="45" title="Ramesses IV" label="Ramesses IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532" start="60" end="66" title="Ramesses IV" label="Ramses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532" start="70" end="77" title="Ramesses IV" label="Rameses"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="93" end="100" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q583501" start="108" end="125" title="Twentieth Dynasty" label="Twentieth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="133" end="144" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="148" end="161" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528" start="188" end="200" title="Ramesses III" label="Ramesses III"/>
<link wikidata="Q207293" start="212" end="224" title="crown prince" label="crown prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q696272" start="248" end="263" title="Amun-her-khepeshef (20th dynasty)" label="Amenherkhepshef"/>
<link wikidata="Q42606" start="839" end="852" title="Amenhotep III" label="Amenhotep III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457914" start="856" end="861" title="Soleb" label="Soleb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370517" start="895" end="901" title="lintel" label="lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528" start="1319" end="1331" title="Ramesses III" label="Ramesses III"/>
<link wikidata="Q739331" start="1509" end="1513" title="Tyti" label="Tyti"/>
<link wikidata="Q301654" start="1586" end="1617" title="Journal of Egyptian Archaeology" label="Journal of Egyptian Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q386713" start="1999" end="2015" title="Iset Ta-Hemdjert" label="Iset Ta-Hemdjert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045" start="2046" end="2059" title="Ramesses VIII" label="Ramesses VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q739331" start="2233" end="2237" title="QV52" label="QV52"/>
<link wikidata="Q739331" start="2919" end="2923" title="Tyti" label="Tyti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064" start="3084" end="3094" title="Ramesses V" label="Ramesses V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994789" start="3201" end="3229" title="Harem Conspiracy" label="assassinated by conspirators"/>
<link wikidata="Q969767" start="3237" end="3241" title="Tiye (20th dynasty)" label="Tiye"/>
<link wikidata="Q708476" start="3284" end="3292" title="Pentawer" label="Pentawer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="3567" end="3578" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q750212" start="3621" end="3635" title="Deir el-Medina" label="Deir el-Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479250" start="3720" end="3733" title="Wadi Hammamat" label="Wadi Hammamat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="3765" end="3770" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="3787" end="3792" title="Stele" label="stela"/>
<link wikidata="Q618656" start="4006" end="4011" title="Apiru" label="Apiru"/>
<link wikidata="Q520759" start="4101" end="4114" title="Ramessesnakht" label="Ramessesnakht"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="4630" end="4635" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4831" end="4847" title="Precinct of Amon-Re#Temple of Khons" label="Temple of Khonsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q522862" start="4851" end="4857" title="Karnak" label="Karnak"/>
<link wikidata="Q660692" start="4915" end="4935" title="Temple of Hatshepsut" label="Temple of Hatshepsut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462523" start="5909" end="5926" title="Serabit el-Khadim" label="Serabit el-Khadim"/>
<link wikidata="Q191687" start="7955" end="7965" title="Heliopolis (Ancient Egypt)" label="Heliopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578003" start="8040" end="8056" title="Papyrus Harris I" label="Papyrus Harris I"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="8188" end="8193" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889662" start="8203" end="8216" title="Turin Papyrus Map" label="Turin papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193842" start="8237" end="8249" title="geologic map" label="geologic map"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="8643" end="8649" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="8823" end="8829" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="8852" end="8857" title="stela" label="stela"/>
<link wikidata="Q192268" start="8861" end="8867" title="Abydos, Egypt" label="Abydos"/>
<link wikidata="Q770568" start="9111" end="9116" title="Season of the Inundation" label="Akhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q834459" start="9124" end="9132" title="ostracon" label="ostracon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347523" start="9332" end="9335" title="KV2" label="KV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q133423" start="9343" end="9362" title="Valley of the Kings" label="Valley of the Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633253" start="9431" end="9435" title="KV35" label="KV35"/>
<link wikidata="Q910463" start="9469" end="9480" title="Duatentopet" label="Duatentopet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064" start="9529" end="9539" title="Ramesses V" label="Ramesses V"/>
<link wikidata="Q260386" start="9631" end="9651" title="Valley of the Queens" label="Valley of the Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q201219" start="9703" end="9733" title="Museum of Egyptian Antiquities" label="Museum of Egyptian Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017001" start="9741" end="9781" title="National Museum of Egyptian Civilization" label="National Museum of Egyptian Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q106353524" start="9853" end="9881" title="Pharaohs&amp;#x27; Golden Parade" label="Pharaohs&amp;#x27; Golden Parade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795110" wikidata="Q11732981" url="?curid=795110" title="Kolporter Kielce">
<text>Kolporter Kielce is a Polish women&#x27;s handball team, based in Kielce.

==See also==
* Handball in Poland
* Sports in Poland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11732981" start="0" end="16" title="Kolporter Kielce" label="Kolporter Kielce"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="42" end="50" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q102317" start="66" end="72" title="Kielce" label="Kielce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="90" end="108" title="Handball in Poland" label="Handball in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="111" end="127" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795111" wikidata="Q797065" url="?curid=795111" title="BTSC">
<text>BTSC may refer to:

* BTSC (from Broadcast Television Systems Committee), an alternative name of Multichannel Television Sound, a television audio standard of the United States
* Bangkok Mass Transit System Company, a Thai transport company</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q904840" start="97" end="126" title="Multichannel Television Sound" label="Multichannel Television Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q104817495" start="179" end="206" title="Bangkok Mass Transit System" label="Bangkok Mass Transit System"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795115" wikidata="Q19722118" url="?curid=795115" title="Sośnica Gliwice">
<text>Sośnica Gliwice is a Polish women&#x27;s handball team, based in Gliwice.

== See also ==
* Handball in Poland
* Sports in Poland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19722118" start="0" end="15" title="Sośnica Gliwice" label="Sośnica Gliwice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="41" end="49" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q105084" start="65" end="72" title="Gliwice" label="Gliwice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="92" end="110" title="Handball in Poland" label="Handball in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="113" end="129" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795117" wikidata="Q6804355" url="?curid=795117" title="Meble-Rys Gościbia Sułkowice">
<text>Meble-Rys Gościbia Sułkowice is a Polish women&#x27;s handball team, based in Sułkowice.

==See also==
* Handball in Poland
* Sports in Poland

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6804355" start="0" end="28" title="Meble-Rys Gościbia Sułkowice" label="Meble-Rys Gościbia Sułkowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="54" end="62" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003272" start="78" end="87" title="Sulkowice" label="Sułkowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="105" end="123" title="Handball in Poland" label="Handball in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="126" end="142" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795121" wikidata="Q17053184" url="?curid=795121" title="The Famous Adventures of Mr. Magoo">
<text>The Famous Adventures of Mr. Magoo is an American animated television series produced by United Productions of America that aired for one season on NBC from September 19, 1964 to April 24, 1965. It is the follow-up to the 1960/61 series &quot;Mister Magoo&quot;, with Jim Backus reprising the title role.
== Premise ==

Unlike the theatrical cartoons, which focused on the extremely nearsighted Quincy Magoo&#x27;s bumbling, the show features the Magoo character as an actor in adaptations of such literary classics as &quot;Don Quixote&quot; and &quot;Gunga Din&quot;. Each of these roles is played seriously, with few, if any, references to Magoo&#x27;s nearsightedness. However, introductory segments in each program feature Magoo backstage stumbling into scenery and talking to props, thus connecting the older cartoons to this series. Some stories are contained in a single half-hour episode, but others run for two to four episodes. As UPA did not have its own studio facility, the production was farmed out to the Grantray-Lawrence and Format Films studios.
== Stories adapted ==
Among the most ambitious adaptations mounted in this format were the four-part &quot;Robin Hood&quot;, in which he took the role of Friar Tuck; &quot;Treasure Island&quot;, in which he played the villainous Long John Silver; and a version of &quot;Snow White&quot; in which he portrayed all seven of the Seven Dwarfs.
== Background ==
The series was inspired by the success of the 1962 television special &quot;Mister Magoo&#x27;s Christmas Carol&quot;, a serious remake of the Charles Dickens classic novel with Magoo playing Ebenezer Scrooge.
== Reruns ==
The series was re-shown in the early 1970s on early Saturday mornings and the early 1980s as part of certain channels&#x27; weekday afternoon cartoon blocs. Certain episodes were released on VHS, but these have since gone out of print.
== Material not intended for children ==
The series was originally shown in prime time and not as part of an animated block for juvenile viewers. Therefore, certain more mature elements were present. These included death threats (&quot;William Tell&quot;, &quot;Robin Hood&quot;, &quot;Don Quixote&quot;, &quot;The Three Musketeers&quot;, &quot;Sherlock Holmes&quot;), children in danger (&quot;Treasure Island&quot;, &quot;Gunga Din&quot;, &quot;William Tell&quot;), insanity (&quot;Don Quixote&quot;, &quot;Moby Dick&quot;), heroic self-sacrifice (&quot;Gunga Din&quot;), religious themes (&quot;Noah&#x27;s Ark&quot;), and realistic, although mostly bloodless, violence; including swordplay, shooting, clubbing, drowning and character deaths in most of the episodes.

== Episodes ==
==Home video==
In November 2011, Shout! Factory released &quot;Mr. Magoo: The Television Collection 1960-1977&quot; on DVD in Region 1. This 11-disc collection contains all the episodes from all three Mr. Magoo television series, including all 26 episodes of &quot;The Famous Adventures of Mr. Magoo&quot;.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="50" end="58" title="animated" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q642996" start="89" end="118" title="United Productions of America" label="United Productions of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="148" end="151" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16664790" start="243" end="255" title="Mister Magoo" label="Mister Magoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236412" start="268" end="278" title="Jim Backus" label="Jim Backus"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="525" end="536" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120849" start="553" end="562" title="Gunga Din" label="Gunga Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q168403" start="656" end="671" title="nearsightedness" label="nearsightedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="682" end="702" title="Framing device" label="introductory segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="1172" end="1182" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074170" start="1219" end="1229" title="Friar Tuck" label="Friar Tuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q185118" start="1237" end="1252" title="Treasure Island" label="Treasure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428628" start="1294" end="1310" title="Long John Silver" label="Long John Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q11831" start="1335" end="1345" title="Snow White" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880179" start="1498" end="1533" title="Mister Magoo&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol" label="Mister Magoo&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="1565" end="1580" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q626756" start="1614" end="1630" title="Ebenezer Scrooge" label="Ebenezer Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q745818" start="1957" end="1967" title="prime time" label="prime time"/>
<link wikidata="Q50832308" start="1999" end="2004" title="Programming block" label="block"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="2700" end="2714" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795123" wikidata="Q4655248" url="?curid=795123" title="AZS AWF Katowice">
<text>AZS AWF Katowice is a Polish women&#x27;s multi-sport club, based in Katowice.

Some of its most prominent sports include:

* Team handball
* Sport of athletics

==See also==
* Handball in Poland
* Sports in Poland

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4655248" start="0" end="16" title="AZS AWF Katowice" label="AZS AWF Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q847017" start="42" end="58" title="multi-sport club" label="multi-sport club"/>
<link wikidata="Q588" start="69" end="77" title="Katowice" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="126" end="139" title="Team handball" label="Team handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="142" end="160" title="Sport of athletics" label="Sport of athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="177" end="195" title="Handball in Poland" label="Handball in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="198" end="214" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795127" wikidata="Q11765135" url="?curid=795127" title="Pogoń 1922 Żory">
<text>MTS Żory is a Polish women&#x27;s handball team, based in Żory.

==See also==
* Handball in Poland
* Sports in Poland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11765135" start="0" end="8" title="Pogoń 1922 Żory" label="MTS Żory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="34" end="42" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q393171" start="58" end="62" title="Żory" label="Żory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="80" end="98" title="Handball in Poland" label="Handball in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="101" end="117" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795128" wikidata="Q4655249" url="?curid=795128" title="AZS Politechnika Koszalin">
<text>Energa AZS Koszalin (formerly AZS Politechnika Koszalin) is a Polish women&#x27;s handball team, based in Koszalin. The club was founded in 1999 and debut it first debut in the Polish Ekstraklasa in 2004.

They play their home matches in Hala Widowiskowo-Sportowa, which have capacity for 2,250 spectators. They play mostly in green shirts and black shorts.

==Honours==
*Polish Superliga:
**&quot;Bronze&quot;: 2013, 2018, 2019
*Polish Cup:
**&quot;Winner&quot;: 2008
**&quot;Finalist&quot;: 2009
*Women&#x27;s EHF Challenge Cup
**&quot;Quarterfinalist&quot;: 2012/13

== Arena ==
*Arena: Hala Widowiskowo-Sportowa
*City: Koszalin 
*Capacity: 2,250
*Address: Śniadeckich 4, 75-453 Koszalin

==Team==
===Current squad===
:&quot;Squad for the 2021–22 season&quot;

;Goalkeepers
*1 Katarzyna Zimny
* 12 Natalia Filończuk
* 88 Alekxandra Ivanytsia
;Left wingers
* 5 Gabriela Urbania
* 9 Żaneta Lipok
;Right wingers
* 10 Aleksandra Zalesny
* 24 Emilia Kowalik
;Line players
* 27 Hanna Rycharska
* 91 Daria Somionka

;Left backs
* 6 Paula Mazurek
* 7 Anna Mączka
* 55 Adrianna Nowicka
;Centre backs
* 23 Martyna Żukowska
* 71 Martyna Borysławska
;Right backs
* 11 Gabriela Haric
* 31 Adrianna Kurdzielewicz
=== Transfers ===
:&quot;Transfers for the 2022-23 season&quot;
; Joining
; Leaving

==See also==
* Handball in Poland
* Sports in Poland

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4655249" start="0" end="19" title="AZS Politechnika Koszalin" label="Energa AZS Koszalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655249" start="30" end="55" title="AZS Politechnika Koszalin" label="AZS Politechnika Koszalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="82" end="90" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q62868" start="106" end="114" title="Koszalin" label="Koszalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129048" start="177" end="195" title="Polish Ekstraklasa Women&amp;#x27;s Handball League" label="Polish Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129048" start="372" end="388" title="Polish Women&amp;#x27;s Superliga (women&amp;#x27;s handball)" label="Polish Superliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999109" start="499" end="529" title="Women&amp;#x27;s EHF Challenge Cup" label="Women&amp;#x27;s EHF Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q62868" start="623" end="631" title="Koszalin" label="Koszalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47466877" start="975" end="990" title="Hanna Rycharska" label="Hanna Rycharska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="1302" end="1320" title="Handball in Poland" label="Handball in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="1323" end="1339" title="Sports in Poland" label="Sports in Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795130" wikidata="Q315953" url="?curid=795130" title="Didier Ratsiraka">
<text>Didier Ignace Ratsiraka (; 4 November 1936 – 28 March 2021) was a Malagasy politician and naval officer who was the third President of Madagascar from 1975 to 1993 and the fifth from 1997 to 2002. At the time of his death, he was the longest-serving President of Madagascar.

He was first appointed president in 1975 by the military leadership, he was then reelected twice in 1982 and 1989. While he lost to Albert Zafy in 1992, Ratsiraka returned to office after winning the 1997 election. After the 2001 election, he and his opponent Marc Ravalomanana engaged in a lengthy standoff after the latter refused to participate in a runoff election; Ratsiraka eventually stepped down.

==Early life==
Didier Ratsiraka was born in Vatomandry, Atsinanana Region, French Madagascar, on 4 November 1936. His father, Albert Ratsiraka, was a member of the Parti des déshérités de Madagascar in the Moramanga District and a Malagasy official in the French colonial administration.

Ratsiraka attended Lycée Henri-IV, a prestigious public secondary school in Paris. He then graduated from École navale, the French naval academy, as a naval officer with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in 1962. He returned to Madagascar, where he began his career as a naval ensign at the French naval and military base in Diego-Suarez.

In 1964, Ratsiraka married Céline Velonjara in a Roman Catholic wedding ceremony. The couple had four children, namely Olga, Sophie, Annick and Xavier.

==Second Republic==
Ratsiraka initially served as a military attaché at the Embassy of Madagascar in Paris, before being appointed as Minister of Foreign Affairs with President Gabriel Ramanantsoa&#x27;s transitional government from 1972 until 1975. As foreign minister, Ratsiraka renegotiated the Franco-Malagasy cooperation agreements, which had originally been signed in 1960. He also oversaw Madagascar&#x27;s departure from the CFA franc zone in 1972.

Known as the &quot;Red Admiral&quot;, he was made head of state, as President of the Supreme Revolutionary Council, by the military leadership on 15 June 1975. He was also nicknamed &quot;Deba&quot;, a Malagasy word which translates in English to &quot;the Big Man&quot;. He began setting up a socialist system, guided by the Charter of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution, which was approved in a referendum held on 21 December 1975, establishing the Second Republic; Ratsiraka was also elected President for a seven-year term in this referendum, which received the backing of 95% of voters according to official results. The political party AREMA was founded in 1976 with Ratsiraka as its secretary-general; together with five other parties, AREMA formed the political alliance called the Vanguard of the Malagasy Revolution (FNDR). All politicians were required to be members of FNDR; AREMA was the dominant party in election results.

In the midst of a poor economic situation, Ratsiraka abandoned socialist policies after a few years in power and implemented reforms recommended by the International Monetary Fund. He was re-elected as President with 80% of the vote in 1982 and with 63% of the vote in 1989. The latter election was condemned as fraudulent by the opposition, which protested, and at least 75 people were killed in the resulting violence.

Ratsiraka faced intense opposition to his rule in 1991. On 10 August 1991, tens of thousands people marched on the Presidential Palace, The government placed the death toll at 11, although other reports placed the toll higher. The incident severely undermined his already precarious position. On 31 October, he signed the Panorama Convention, which established a provisional government and stripped him of most of his powers; although he remained President, opposition leader Albert Zafy became head of the newly established High Authority of the State.

==1990s elections and second presidency==
Ratsiraka ran in the multiparty November 1992 presidential election, placing second behind Zafy in the first round. In the second round, held in February 1993, Ratsiraka lost to Zafy, taking about one-third of the vote, and left office on 27 March. Zafy was impeached by the National Assembly of Madagascar in 1996, and Ratsiraka, who had been in exile in France, mounted a political comeback in late 1996 when he won that year&#x27;s presidential election, running as the candidate of the AREMA party. He came in first place in the first round with 36.6% of the vote, ahead of his three main opponents: Zafy, Herizo Razafimahaleo, and Prime Minister/Acting President Norbert Ratsirahonana. He narrowly defeated Zafy in the runoff with 50.7% of the vote and took office again on 9 February 1997.

Members of the opposition, including Zafy, unsuccessfully attempted to impeach Ratsiraka in February 1998, accusing him of violating the constitution through decentralizing reforms that would increase his own power at the expense of that of the National Assembly. The impeachment motion also accused him of perjury, nepotism, and failing to act as supreme arbiter of disputes, and it cited his ill-health. In the National Assembly vote on 4 February 60 deputies voted for the impeachment motion, well short of the required 92.

On 15 March 1998, a constitutional referendum was held and approved by a narrow majority of voters; this resulted in a major increase in the president&#x27;s powers, enabling him to dissolve the National Assembly and appoint the prime minister and government without the National Assembly&#x27;s agreement. It also provided for decentralization, with the provinces gaining autonomy.

==2001 elections==
Ratsiraka announced on 26 June 2001 that he would be a candidate for the presidential election to be held in December of that year. In the election, he took second place; according to the government, Marc Ravalomanana won first place with 46% of the vote, while Ratsiraka took 40%. Because, according to the official results, no candidate won a majority, a runoff was to take place, but due to disputes over the election it was never held. Ravalomanana claimed to have won over 50 percent of the vote, enough to win the presidency in a single round. Ravalomanana was sworn in as President by his supporters on 22 February 2002, and the two governments fought for control of the country. By the end of February 2002, Ravalomanana had control over the capital, which had always been his base, but Ratsiraka largely maintained control over the provinces and established himself at Toamasina, his primary support base. However, within a few months Ravalomanana had gained the upper hand in a struggle. In mid-June Ratsiraka went to France, leading many to believe he had fled into exile and lowering the morale of his supporters, although Ratsiraka said he would return. He did return to Madagascar after more than a week, but his position was continuing to weaken militarily. On 5 July, Ratsiraka fled Toamasina, taking a flight to the nearby Seychelles. Two days later he arrived in France.

==In exile==
On 6 August 2003, Ratsiraka—who was accused of stealing nearly eight million dollars in public funds from the annex of the central bank in Toamasina in June 2002, just before going into exile—was sentenced to ten years of hard labor in Madagascar. Because he was living in France, he was tried &quot;in absentia&quot;. The lawyer appointed for Ratsiraka by the court accepted the verdict and sentence as &quot;fair&quot; and said he would not appeal.

On 4 August 2009, Ratsiraka met with President of the High Authority of Transition of Madagascar Andry Rajoelina, as well as Ravalomanana (who had himself been ousted and forced into exile) and former president of the Malagasy Republic Albert Zafy, in crisis talks mediated by former Mozambican President Joaquim Chissano and held in Maputo. Ratsiraka&#x27;s amnesty issue, related to the court sentence that prevented him from returning to Madagascar, was resolved at the talks.

Ratsiraka&#x27;s nephew Roland Ratsiraka is also a politician. He became the mayor of Toamasina and ran unsuccessfully in the 2006 presidential election, placing third.

==Return from exile and death==
Ratsiraka returned from exile on 24 November 2011, a move that was welcomed by the Rajoelina government as well as by former presidents (and former opponents) Ravalomanana and Zafy. Ratsiraka called for resolution of the political crisis through direct talks between all four political leaders, talks that should also involve other parties and civil society groups according to him.

Ratsiraka wrote a book with Cécile Lavrard-Meyer, a lecturer at Sciences Po in Paris, which was published by Éditions Karthala in July 2015.

On 22 March 2021, Ratsiraka and his wife, Celine, were both admitted to the Soavinandriana Military Hospital (CENHOSOA) in Antananarivo, for treatment of a &quot;small flu&quot;, according to their relatives. Ratsiraka had received a PCR diagnostic test for COVID-19, but the results were negative for coronavirus, according to relatives cited by &quot;Jeune Afrique&quot;. Several days later, Ratsiraka died from cardiac arrest at CENHOSOA hospital in the early morning of 28 March 2021, at the age of 84.

Ratsiraka was buried in the Ambohitsaina Mausoleum (&quot;Mausolée d&#x27;Ambohitsaina&quot;) in Antananarivo on 29 March 2021. President Andry Rajoelina also declared 29 March as a national day of mourning.

==Awards and honors==
* Grand Cordon of the National Order of Madagascar
* First Class of Order of the National Flag (North Korea, 1978)

==See also==
*Elysé Ratsiraka

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q315953" start="0" end="23" title="Didier Ratsiraka" label="Didier Ignace Ratsiraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="66" end="74" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293232" start="90" end="103" title="Madagascar Navy" label="naval officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q853010" start="122" end="145" title="President of Madagascar" label="President of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q853010" start="250" end="273" title="List of presidents of Madagascar" label="President of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q559672" start="408" end="419" title="Albert Zafy" label="Albert Zafy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155554" start="536" end="553" title="Marc Ravalomanana" label="Marc Ravalomanana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638549" start="726" end="736" title="Vatomandry" label="Vatomandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q757783" start="738" end="748" title="Atsinanana" label="Atsinanana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501842" start="757" end="774" title="French Madagascar" label="French Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366351" start="846" end="880" title="Parti des déshérités de Madagascar" label="Parti des déshérités de Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031553" start="888" end="906" title="Moramanga District" label="Moramanga District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878600" start="990" end="1004" title="Lycée Henri-IV" label="Lycée Henri-IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="1027" end="1043" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1047" end="1052" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q974394" start="1077" end="1089" title="École navale" label="École navale"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1143" end="1165" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q218928" start="1287" end="1299" title="Diego-Suarez" label="Diego-Suarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q56192230" start="1329" end="1345" title="Céline Ratsiraka" label="Céline Velonjara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1351" end="1365" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q302691" start="1507" end="1523" title="military attaché" label="military attaché"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1556" end="1561" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901295" start="1589" end="1616" title="foreign minister" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q365387" start="1632" end="1651" title="Gabriel Ramanantsoa" label="Gabriel Ramanantsoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191511" start="1888" end="1897" title="CFA franc" label="CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645088" start="1998" end="2027" title="Supreme Revolutionary Council (Madagascar)" label="Supreme Revolutionary Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="2115" end="2123" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="2207" end="2223" title="Socialist state" label="socialist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902637" start="2239" end="2283" title="Charter of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution" label="Charter of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456447" start="2363" end="2378" title="Second Republic of Madagascar" label="Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q514599" start="2554" end="2559" title="Malagasy Revolutionary Party" label="AREMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q514599" start="2702" end="2737" title="Vanguard of the Malagasy Revolution" label="Vanguard of the Malagasy Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="3002" end="3029" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q59281" start="3635" end="3657" title="provisional government" label="provisional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q559672" start="3748" end="3759" title="Albert Zafy" label="Albert Zafy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741030" start="3901" end="3936" title="Malagasy presidential election, 1992–93" label="November 1992 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089534" start="4304" end="4325" title="1996 Malagasy presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134026" start="4479" end="4499" title="Herizo Razafimahaleo" label="Herizo Razafimahaleo"/>
<link wikidata="Q727140" start="4537" end="4558" title="Norbert Ratsirahonana" label="Norbert Ratsirahonana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141206" start="4911" end="4928" title="National Assembly (Madagascar)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q864133" start="5549" end="5558" title="provinces of Madagascar" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741033" start="5670" end="5727" title="2001 Malagasy presidential election" label="presidential election to be held in December of that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q155554" start="5797" end="5814" title="Marc Ravalomanana" label="Marc Ravalomanana"/>
<link wikidata="Q105560647" start="6249" end="6282" title="2002 Malagasy political crisis" label="fought for control of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q178067" start="6475" end="6484" title="Toamasina" label="Toamasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6625" end="6631" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="6937" end="6947" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q853010" start="7489" end="7548" title="President of Madagascar" label="President of the High Authority of Transition of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q57363" start="7549" end="7564" title="Andry Rajoelina" label="Andry Rajoelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q559672" start="7688" end="7699" title="Albert Zafy" label="Albert Zafy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7704" end="7716" title="2009 Malagasy political crisis#Mediation crisis talks" label="crisis talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q208355" start="7757" end="7773" title="Joaquim Chissano" label="Joaquim Chissano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="7786" end="7792" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440231" start="7957" end="7973" title="Roland Ratsiraka" label="Roland Ratsiraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q178067" start="8019" end="8028" title="Toamasina" label="Toamasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586621" start="8059" end="8085" title="2006 Malagasy presidential election" label="2006 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q859363" start="8583" end="8594" title="Sciences Po" label="Sciences Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579376" start="8628" end="8645" title="Éditions Karthala" label="Éditions Karthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915" start="8784" end="8796" title="Antananarivo" label="Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="8895" end="8898" title="Polymerase chain reaction" label="PCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q86901049" start="8899" end="8914" title="COVID-19 testing" label="diagnostic test"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="8919" end="8927" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252739" start="9014" end="9027" title="Jeune Afrique" label="Jeune Afrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="9075" end="9089" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9197" end="9219" title="Ambohitsaina Mausoleum" label="Ambohitsaina Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q57363" start="9307" end="9322" title="Andry Rajoelina" label="Andry Rajoelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127742" start="9351" end="9375" title="national day of mourning" label="national day of mourning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885159" start="9422" end="9450" title="National Order of Madagascar" label="National Order of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q742789" start="9468" end="9494" title="Order of the National Flag" label="Order of the National Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q109875174" start="9530" end="9545" title="Elysé Ratsiraka" label="Elysé Ratsiraka"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795134" wikidata="Q194734" url="?curid=795134" title="Valorous Unit Award">
<text>The Valorous Unit Award (VUA) is the second highest United States Army unit decoration which may be bestowed upon an Army unit after the Presidential Unit Citation (PUC). The VUA is awarded by the United States Army to units of the United States Armed Forces or cobelligerent nations which display extraordinary heroism in action against an armed enemy of the United States on or after 3 August 1963. The unit degree of heroism required is considered the equivalent of the individual degree of heroism required for the Silver Star which is awarded for gallantry in action.

==Background==
As a result of a request from the Commander, USMACV, to expand the scope of the Meritorious Unit Commendation to include acts of valor, a review of the unit awards program was conducted in 1965. The study concluded that a gap did exist in the awards program. The Distinguished Unit Citation (renamed Army Presidential Unit Citation on November 3, 1966) was awarded for gallantry in action for heroism that would warrant the Distinguished Service Cross for an individual. There was no lesser unit award for heroism. Based on the study, it was recommended the scope of the Meritorious Unit Commendation be expanded to include acts of heroism. The CSPER disapproved the recommendation and in a memorandum to the CSA, dated 7 January 1966, it recommended a Valorous Unit Award be adopted to signify unit gallantry in combat to a degree equivalent to that required for award of a Silver Star to an individual. The recommendation with the proposed design was approved by the Chief of Staff, Army, on 12 January 1966.

The Valorous Unit Award Emblem is awarded and worn by all members of the cited unit. The emblem is considered an individual decoration, and those members of the unit awarded the VUA continue to wear the emblem after they leave the unit. Other personnel assigned to the unit awarded the VUA who were not members of the unit during the time of action for the award, may wear the emblem to indicate the unit they serve in has received the VUA, but these members of the unit can no longer wear the emblem once they leave the unit.

==Criteria==
The Valorous Unit Award (VUA) is to be awarded to units of the United States Armed Forces for extraordinary heroism in action against an armed enemy of the United States while engaged in military operations involving conflict with an opposing foreign force or while serving with friendly foreign forces engaged in an armed conflict against an opposing armed force in which the United States is not a belligerent part for actions occurring on or after 3 August 1963. The VUA requires a lesser degree of gallantry, determination, and esprit de corps than that required for the Presidential Unit Citation (PUC). Nevertheless, the unit must have performed with marked distinction under difficult and hazardous conditions in accomplishing its mission so as to set it apart from the other units participating in the same conflict. The degree of heroism required is the same as that which would warrant award of the Silver Star to an individual. Extended periods of combat duty or participation in a large number of operational missions, either ground or air, is not sufficient. This award will normally be earned by units that have participated in single or successive actions covering relatively brief time spans. It is not reasonable to presume that entire units can sustain Silver Star performance for extended time periods under the most unusual circumstances. Only on rare occasions will a unit larger than a battalion qualify for this award.

==Description and components==

The ribbon worn to represent award of the Valorous Unit Award is 1 7/16 inches wide and 9/16 inch in height. The emblem consists of a 1/16 inch wide Gold frame with laurel leaves which encloses a ribbon of the pattern of the Silver Star Medal ribbon centered on a Red ribbon. The stripe dimensions of the ribbon are: 3/8 inch Old Glory Red 67156; 1/16 inch Ultramarine Blue 67118; 1/64 inch White 67101; 3/32 inch Ultramarine Blue; 3/32 inch White; center 3/32 inch Old Glory Red; 3/32 inch White; 3/32 inch Ultramarine Blue; 1/64 inch White; 1/16 inch Ultramarine Blue; and 3/8 inch Old Glory Red. The streamers are the same pattern as the Silver Star Medal ribbon.
The current components of the award are the VUA emblems, certificates, and citations awarded to the members of the unit, and the VUA streamer for display on the unit flag/guidon.
* Valorous Unit Award: MIL-D-3943/32 (frame) and MIL-R-11589/154 (ribbon). NSN-8455-00-964-4296.
* Streamer: MIL-S-14650/5. Manual requisition in accordance with Chapter 9, Army Regulation (AR) 840–10.

==References==
==See also==

*Awards and decorations of the United States military
*Awards and decorations of the United States Army
*List of military decorations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q194734" start="4" end="23" title="Valorous Unit Award" label="Valorous Unit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="52" end="70" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607946" start="137" end="169" title="Presidential Unit Citation (US)" label="Presidential Unit Citation (PUC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="197" end="215" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="232" end="258" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="360" end="373" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q852071" start="519" end="530" title="Silver Star" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q852071" start="1464" end="1475" title="Silver Star" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q852071" start="3051" end="3062" title="Silver Star" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q784242" start="4696" end="4748" title="Awards and decorations of the United States military" label="Awards and decorations of the United States military"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042873" start="4750" end="4798" title="Awards and decorations of the United States Army" label="Awards and decorations of the United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q743201" start="4800" end="4828" title="List of military decorations" label="List of military decorations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795137" wikidata="Q668822" url="?curid=795137" title="Imperial (automobile)">
<text>Imperial was the Chrysler Corporation&#x27;s luxury automobile brand from 1955 until 1975 and again from 1981 through 1983.

The Imperial name had been used since 1926 as a Chrysler luxury model, the Chrysler Imperial. In 1955, the automaker repositioned the Imperial as a separate make and division to better compete with its North American rivals, Lincoln and Cadillac.

The Imperial would feature new or modified body styles introduced every two to three years, all with V8 engines and automatic transmissions, as well as technologies that would later be introduced in Chrysler Corporation&#x27;s other models.


== Background ==
Initially, the Chrysler Imperial was introduced in 1926 as Chrysler&#x27;s flagship vehicle for much of its history. It was based on extended-length platforms of the company&#x27;s full-size cars and competed with the likes of rival Cadillac, Continental, Lincoln, Duesenberg, Pierce Arrow, Cord, and Packard.

Production started due to Walter P. Chrysler wanting a share of the luxury car market in the United States and also expand the company&#x27;s lineup since their most expensive car by that time only had a six-cylinder engine. The new model called the Imperial shared the same body as the lower-priced Chrysler Six but included a larger engine. Subsequent generations were based on the Chrysler Royal, Airflow, Saratoga, and New Yorker.

In 1954, Chrysler dropped its brand identification from the car and named it simply the &quot;Imperial&quot;. The objective was to separate the line from the Chrysler models and to better compete with other luxury manufacturers. Lincoln would make a similar move two years later when they made the Continental Division a standalone brand.

== First generation (1955–1956): A separate make ==


For the 1955 model year, the Imperial was launched and registered as a separate marque (make), &quot;apart&quot; from the Chrysler brand. It was a product of the new Imperial Division of Chrysler Corporation, meaning that the Imperial would be a make and division unto itself, and not bear the Chrysler name. Chrysler Corporation sent notices to all State Motor Vehicle Licensing agencies in the then-48 states, informing them, that the Imperial, beginning in 1955, would no longer be registered as a Chrysler, but as a separate make . Chrysler introduced the &quot;100 Million Look&quot; Styling by Virgil Exner, who would define Imperial&#x27;s look (and the look of cars from the other four Chrysler divisions) from 1955 until 1963.

Even as early as in 1954, Chrysler Corporation marketing ads began to separate The Imperial from the Chrysler Division car line to prepare for the big change coming in 1955. Once the &quot;Imperial&quot; brand was introduced, Cadillac no longer used the &quot;Imperial&quot; name for its top-level limousines starting in 1955.

Chrysler was also the supplier of engines and transmissions used in the Imperial with French automaker Facel Vega, which offered the Facel Vega Excellence, while Chinese automaker Hongqi used an Imperial locally found in China to manufacture the Hongqi CA72.

=== 1955 ===
The 1955 models are said to be inspired by Exner&#x27;s own 1952 Chrysler Imperial Parade Phaeton show cars (which were themselves later updated to match the 1955-56 Imperials). The platform and bodyshell were shared with that year&#x27;s big Chryslers, but the Imperial had a wheelbase that was longer, providing it with more rear-seat legroom, had a wide-spaced split egg-crate grille, the same as that used on the Chrysler 300 &quot;executive hot rod&quot;, and had free-standing &quot;gunsight&quot; taillights mounted above the rear quarters, which were similar to those on the Exner&#x27;s 1951 Chrysler K-310 concept car. Gunsight taillights were also known as &quot;sparrow-strainer&quot; taillights, named after the device used to keep birds out of jet engines. Such taillights were separated from the fender and surrounded by a ring and became an Imperial fixture through 1962, although they would only be free-standing in 1955-56 and again in 1961-62. Two C-69 models were available, including the two-door &quot;Newport&quot; hardtop coupe (3,418 built) and pillared four-door sedan (7,840 built), along with an additional C-70 Crown limousine (172 built). The Newport nameplate was only used for 1955 and renamed the Southampton beginning in 1956. The FirePower V8 engine was Chrysler&#x27;s first-generation Hemi with a displacement of , developing . Power brakes and power steering were standard, along with Chrysler&#x27;s PowerFlite automatic transmission. One major option on the 1955 and 1956 Imperials was air conditioning, at a cost of $535. Production totaled 11,430, more than twice the 1954 figure, positioning the Imperial as much more exclusive in comparison to more widely available and affordable Lincoln and Cadillac. Manufacturers list price for the Newport hardtop was $4,720, while the Imperial Crown limousine was $7,737.

=== 1956 ===


The 1956 models were similar, but had small tailfins. The Hemi V8 was enlarged to with , and a four-door Southampton hardtop sedan was added to the range. 10,268 were produced. With a wheelbase of , longer than the previous year&#x27;s by , they had the longest wheelbase ever for an Imperial. This also contributed to an increase in their overall length to , making them the longest non-limousine post-WWII American cars until the advent of the Imperials of the &quot;Fuselage Look&quot; era in the 1970s.

1956 was the year that Chrysler introduced the push button PowerFlite automatic transmission becoming available mid-year with the control pod installed to the left of the driver; Packard also introduced a similar system called the Touchbutton Ultramatic in the Imperial&#x27;s competitor, the Packard Caribbean and the Patrician. For 1957, Mercury introduced its version called &quot;Keyboard Control&quot; for the Merc-O-Matic, which also included a pushbutton to place the transmission in neutral so the engine could be started and a push/pull control to set the parking brake and lock the transmission in gear. The Mercury and Chrysler versions were operated mechanically while the Packard and the controversial and short lived Edsel Teletouch version used electric solenoids to change gears.
On April 28, 1955, Chrysler and Philco announced the development and production of the world&#x27;s first all-transistor car radio, the Mopar model 914HR. It was developed and produced by Chrysler and Philco and was a $150 option on 1956 Imperials. Philco manufactured the Mopar 914HR starting in the fall of 1955 at its Sandusky Ohio plant, for Chrysler.

== Second generation (1957–1966) ==

For the 1957 model year, the Imperial received its own platform, setting it apart from any other division of Chrysler and shared the all-new &quot;Forward Look&quot; appearance, showing many styling features introduced with the concept car Chrysler Norseman. Imperials during this period were substantially wider, both inside and out, than other Chrysler Corporation products, with front and rear shoulder room equal to and respectively. The front seat shoulder room measurement remains an unsurpassed record for Imperial and would remain the record for any car until the 1971–1976 GM full-size models. Exterior width reached a maximum of for 1961–1963, which remains the record for the widest non-limousine American car. After Lincoln downsized for 1961, this generation of Imperial had no real competitor for the title of largest car for the remainder of its decade-long lifespan. The Imperial Crown convertible was listed at US$5,598, and 1,167 were manufactured.
Unlike the rest of the Chrysler Corporation makes (Chrysler, De Soto, Dodge, and Plymouth) that began unibody construction for 1960, the Imperial retained separate full perimeter frames for rigidity through the 1966 model year. These substantial frames had a box cross-section with strong crossmembers connecting the frame. The convertible had extra strength built into its crossmembers that formed an &quot;X&quot;. The driveshaft passed through a hole in the &quot;X&quot; frame. The parking brake gripped the driveshaft and was not connected to the rear drum brakes prior to the 1963 model year.

The Imperial, and all Chrysler-built cars, incorporated &quot;Torsion-Aire&quot; suspension for 1957. This was an indirect-acting, torsion-bar front suspension system that reduced unsprung weight and shifted the car&#x27;s center of gravity downward and rearward. Torsion-bar suspension on the front combined with multi-leaf springs on the rear provided a smoother ride and improved handling.

Imperial&#x27;s handling was better than its competitors of the time due to its stiffness from the torsion-bars combined with a thick anti roll bar in the front. Pillarless hardtops, in both two and four-door configurations, received the Southampton designation.

=== 1957 (Series IMI-1, 2, 4) ===
The 1957 model year was based to an even greater degree on Virgil Exner&#x27;s &quot;Forward Look&quot; styling (also used on other full-size Chryslers of the period). It featured a &quot;biplane&quot; front bumper, a full-width egg-crate grille, and quad headlights (where legal). Taller tailfins now encompassed the trademark gunsight taillights and framed a downward tapering decklid that met the rear bumper. Curved side glass was employed for the first time in a U.S. production car. The Hemi engine with a displacement enlarged to was standard for 1957-58. Power seats and dual exhaust were made standard across the line. A convertible was available for the first time on an Imperial and only offered in the mid-range Crown series. Sales were helped by Exner&#x27;s &quot;ahead of the competition&quot; styling, with 1957 becoming the best-selling Imperial model year ever: 37,593 were produced; the more commonly available Cadillac sold over 120,000 cars in 1957.

Cadillac was shocked by the new popular design from Chrysler. Cadillac retaliated by implementing training to its sales force to call Imperial a Chrysler Imperial to try to dampen the sales of its competitor. This tactic was to create the thought that you were buying an over priced Chrysler.

Quality control also slipped considerably, a consequence of the second total redesign in two years. Failing torsion-bars that were made incorrectly was also a problem from being produced too quickly.

Starting in the 1957 model year, Imperials were available in three levels of trim: standard Imperial, mid-range Imperial Crown, and the new top-of-the-line Imperial LeBaron (a reference to LeBaron, Carrossiers). The custom-built Imperial Crown limousine was also offered. Through the late 1950s and into the early 1960s styling would continue to become &quot;Longer, Lower, Wider&quot;, with the addition of some of the wildest fins on a car. The &quot;FliteSweep Deck Lid&quot;, a simulated Continental tire bulge, was an option for 1957 through 1961 and again in 1963. It was shared with contemporary Mopars, including the Valiant. Exner&#x27;s design extended to early-fifties concept cars like the 1953 Chrysler D&#x27;Elegance.

=== 1958 (Series LY1-L, M, H) ===
Styling changes for 1958 were limited to the front grille and bumper. Quad headlights became standard. The 1958 Imperial is credited with the introduction of cruise control, which was called &quot;Auto-Pilot&quot;, and was available on the Imperial, and on Chrysler New Yorker, 300, Saratoga and Windsor models. Power door locks were another new option. Sales slipped to 16,133 in a recession year. Dealers were frustrated with buyers referring to the cars as a Chrysler Imperial, which impacted sales as Imperial was not seen as having Cadillac&#x27;s or Lincoln&#x27;s prestige. It didn&#x27;t help that Imperial continued to be sold at Chrysler dealerships, instead of standalone dealers, although it did have a separate Imperial dealership sign.
=== 1959 (Series MY1-L, M, H) ===

Production was moved from the traditional Jefferson Avenue Assembly plant in Detroit to an exclusive facility on Warren Avenue, north of the Jefferson Avenue factory. Other than a toothy new grill and revisions to side trim little changed in terms of exterior styling for the 1959 model year. A new option was the Silvercrest roof which featured a stainless steel front with a rear canopy that could be ordered either in any of the basic car colors or in the Landau version which had a black canopy with the appearance of leather. The previously unnamed standard Imperial model gained the Imperial Custom name this year.

A new option for 1959 was Swivel Seats (with 6-way power). With this extra cost option the front seats could be swiveled 40 degrees outward using a release lever on the side of the seat bottom. When swiveled back to the forward facing position the seat would re-latch automatically. This was a separate, extra cost option from the regular 6-way power seat that was optional on the Custom model but standard for Crown and LeBaron.

The Hemi was replaced with the less expensive &quot;wedge&quot;-head V8 that nevertheless had more horsepower and weighed 101 lbs less, improving the power-to-weight ratio. For the model year 17,710 Imperials were produced, ahead of Lincoln, as the Packard luxury brand withdrew from the marketplace. The few Ghia-built 1959 Imperial Crown limousines continued to use the 392 cubic-inch Hemi, due to slow production. These cars got the 413 engine for 1960.
===1960 (Series PY1-L, M, H)===


The 1960 Imperial adopted wildly exaggerated styling, featuring front fascia with a swooping bumper, gaping mesh grille, giant chrome eagle, and hooded quad headlights, and tall rear fins. Soaring fins had bullet-style tail lamps at the peak of the fin, with a chrome ring surrounding it. The grille and bumper on the front of the 1960 used large pieces of heavy chrome, and the &#x27;furrowed brows&#x27; of the fenders over the double sets of headlights gave the car a ponderous look. In common with most other 1960 Chrysler products, the Imperial featured the new &quot;High-Tower&quot; seat with the driver-side back individually contoured and raised above of the rest of the front seat for increased driver comfort and shoulder support. This would last through the 1962 model year. Also for 1960, Imperial changed back to 15-inch wheels from the 14-inch wheels that had been standard since the 1957 model. Imperial LeBarons now featured a distinctive smaller &quot;formal rear window&quot; for greater rear-seat privacy. Sales increased to 17,719. Imperial again finished ahead of Lincoln, but never did so again. While the rest of Chrysler&#x27;s lineup adopted unibody construction, Imperial retained its body on frame construction.

The Swivel Seat option became &quot;Automatic&quot; for 1960 by adding hidden cables to the door hinges and additional helper springs to the previous design. The cable triggered stronger helper springs to automatically swivel the seat outward or latch it back in as the corresponding door was opened or closed. This resolved a previous issue with the manual swivel release handle sometimes hitting/damaging the door panel if the door was closed with the seat still swiveled out. It was discontinued by Chrysler Corp. within the first few months. The cables were deleted leaving the manual release handles as the only remaining operation method for the rest of 1960 and all of 1961. Although the specific reason is not clearly documented, many assume this was for safety reasons due to an increased risk of falling out of the vehicle if a door came open at speed or during an accident.

The design of the 1960–1963 period had elicited some controversy. At that time, Exner was increasingly struggling with the Chrysler president and board. &quot;It was during 1962 Exner was dethroned as president of design in Highland Park. His successor was Elwood Engel, lured away from Ford to lead Chrysler Corporation along a more conventional path. Exner continued as a consultant through 1964, after which he had no further involvement.&quot; This source also states, &quot;When he was good, he was very good ( re: styling). When he was bad... it was the epitome of excessive design. Sales dropped off and the board stepped in.&quot; Exner&#x27;s son went on further, in a 1976 interview, &quot;it was time for a change. Their image needed changing. Dad was a great designer and he was always ahead of his time. He gained more freedom from Chrysler in his designs of the modern Stutz.&quot; This same source gives accounts of how Chrysler Corporation was revived through corporate changes in leadership. &quot;But on the product front, the influence of Tex Colbert (ousted President of Chrysler in 1961) and Virgil Exner was still present, and it wouldn&#x27;t be entirely washed away until 1965&quot;.

Despite the annual styling changes, all 1960-63 models featured a similar space age dashboard. The steering wheel was squared-off at top and bottom, designed for better legroom and view through the windshield in the straight-ahead position. Dashboard lighting was electroluminescent : electricity running through a five-layer laminate caused the phosphorescent ceramic layer to glow in the dark. Chrysler called it &quot;Panelescent&quot;, and it was shared on some Chrysler models. The effect was eerie and surprisingly modern, with its glowing blue-green face, bright red needles, and extremely faint hum. The 61-63 dash lighting used no incandescent bulbs, although 2 bulbs did illuminate the shifter and HVAC buttons in 1960. The 1960-63 models were also united by a distinctive side trim that started above the headlights and that ran at a slight downward angle almost to the end of the rear fender (except in 1963 when it would actually wrap all the way around the rear of the car) that was undercut by a slight indent in the sides from the front until just before the rear wheel housing.

A significant change in the car&#x27;s proportions had occurred between the 1959 and 1960 model years. Although, at 226.3 inches, the 1960 Imperials were exactly the same length as the previous year, the whole body had been shifted forward, with a 2.1 inch reduction in the rear overhang, and a corresponding increase at the front.
=== 1961 (Series RY1-L, M, H) ===

The 1961 model year brought a new front end design with free-standing headlights on short stalks in cut-away front
fenders (a classical throwback favored by Virgil Exner, used commonly in the 1930s Chryslers. He would continue his look with the modern Stutz), and the largest tailfins ever. Inside, the Imperial gained an improved dash layout with an upright rectangular bank of gauges. The pillared four-door sedan was canceled and would not return until the 1967 model year. With the downsizing of Lincoln, at 227.1 inches (later increased to 227.8 inches in 1963), the Imperial would once again be the longest non-limousine car made in America through 1966. Sales fell to 12,258, the result of bizarre styling and continued poor quality control while the retail price for the LeBaron was US$6,428.
=== 1962 (Series SY1-L, M, H) ===

The tailfins were largely truncated in 1962, topped with free-standing gunsight taillights, but these were elongated and streamlined. The front grille was split, as was on the 1955 and 1956 models, and a large round eagle hood ornament was fitted for the first time. The 1962 models had a new, slimmer TorqueFlite A727 automatic transmission, which allowed a smaller transmission &quot;hump&quot; in the floor. This provided greater comfort for middle front-seat passengers. Dual exhaust were only standard on convertibles. 1962 also marked the closing of Imperial&#x27;s dedicated assembly plant. All later Imperials were once again built in the same Jefferson Avenue facilities in Detroit as Chryslers, as sales were insufficient to maintain a separate facility. 1962 production totaled 14,337. Shortly before leaving Chrysler, Virgil Exner had planned for a smaller Imperial to go along with the downsized 1962 Mopars, but the idea never went anywhere.
=== 1963 (Series TY1-L, M, H) ===


The 1963 models saw the split grille replaced by a cluster of chromed rectangles, and the taillights were now inside the rear fenders, in ordinary fashion, for the first time. In addition, the designers redesigned the rooflines of Custom and Crown, two and four-door models to be more squared off with thicker c pillars. 1963 models were the last Virgil Exner–styled Imperials, however Elwood Engel began applying some of his own touches to them, especially in the form of the redesigned base and Crown roofs. The LeBaron roofs remained the same with formal styling and closed in the rear window. 14,121 cars were produced for 1963.

In 1961, Chrysler scored a coup by hiring Engel away from Ford, where he had designed the 1961 Lincoln Continental. Engel&#x27;s design themes at Chrysler were a major departure from the fins of Virgil Exner, and instead featured a more familiar three-box design, but with more extreme rectilinear styling. And, at first glance, the total re-styling of the Imperial in 1964 was thought to strongly resemble Elwood Engel&#x27;s previous efforts for the 1961 Lincoln Continental. Both cars shared clean, slab-sided body panels, thick C-pillars, and a chrome molding outlining the top of the fender line. However, Engel used subtle curves and parallelogram angles to give the Imperial a distinct and novel look.

=== 1964 (Series VY1-M, H) ===


The 1964 Imperials were the first designed entirely by Engel. Predictably, they bore a strong resemblance to the Lincoln Continental. The dashboards seemed more conventional because the squared-off steering wheel and electroluminescent dash lighting were gone, though the ribbon-style speedometer remained. A split grille returned after one year&#x27;s absence, inspired by the 1955 model&#x27;s appearance, and the faux spare tire bulge atop the trunk lid became squared-off and stylized. A central boss the fuel filler cap, covered with a large Imperial Eagle. Horizontal spear-shaped housings in the rear held a taillight and backup light. The defroster became standard for the windshield, optional was rear defroster.

The base Imperial Custom model was dropped, with available body styles including a four-door hardtop offered in the Crown and LeBaron levels of trim, and a two-door hardtop and convertible only in the Crown level of trim. As a result, power windows were now standard on all Imperials. Imperial Crown coupes adopted the smaller style LeBaron &quot;formal rear window&quot; that had been introduced in 1960, and both body styles could now be ordered with a vinyl roof. A total of 23,295 Imperials were sold, making 1964 its second-best sales year. A padded dash, power seats, power steering, power brakes, and headrests were standard on the convertible and Crown Coupe. A new option this year was an adjustable steering wheel.

Tom McCahill, an automobile critic with a reputation for colorful metaphors, quipped that Imperial &quot;cornered at speed flatter than a tournament billiard table&quot;, unusual for a car of its prodigious weight and extreme dimensions. McCahill had already become a loyal customer, buying a new Imperial yearly through 1962. His visible and enthusiastic endorsement helped Imperial forge a reputation as the &quot;driver&#x27;s car&quot; among the big three luxury makes. McCahill observed in 1964:

&lt;poem&gt;This is what I told them in California. When I hit the road with hundreds of pounds of baggage, typewriters and testing equipment, I&#x27;m not out there just to have fun. I want to get from here to there, which may be thousands of miles away, with as much comfort as possible. Besides, Boji [his dog] now demands comfort. So does my wife.

I&#x27;ve been on some pretty fancy trains, including private cars, and to this writing, I have never found anything quite as comfortable or more capable of getting me to my destination as the &#x27;64 Imperial LeBaron. It&#x27;s a great automobile.
&lt;/poem&gt;

=== 1965 (Series AY1-M, H) ===

Changes for 1965 were largely confined to the front fascia and to trim, and replacement of the push-button automatic transmission gear selection system with a more conventional steering column-mounted shift lever. The split grille was gone, replaced by a large chromed crossbar and surround, and the headlights were inset into the grill behind glass covers (similar to that year&#x27;s Chrysler 300 and New Yorker models) with etched horizontal lines imitating the grill. As pointed out by the sales literature, 100-year-old Claro Walnut trim was added to the interior. Production totaled 18,409.

=== 1966 (Series BY1-M, H) ===
This was the final year for the Imperial platform first introduced in 1956 for the 1957 model year. All subsequent years through 1966 used this same basic platform with annual changes to the body sheetmetal. However, the Imperial still used the wrap-around windshield that had been dropped by most other makes to facilitate egress when they almost all simultaneously downsized for 1961.

The 1966 model year saw a change to an egg-crate grille. The glass headlight covers lost the etched lines but gained twin 24k gold bands around the perimeter. The trunk lid bulge became more squared off with a smaller Imperial script off to the side. The backup lights were moved to the lower bumper, nearly doubling taillight size. The Claro Walnut trim that had been introduced the previous year was used more extensively and would be replaced the following year. The engine that had been standard since 1959 was replaced with a engine.

Production totaled 13,752. There was a 1966 LeBaron that was presented to Pope Paul VI at the UN in New York for his use. Also this year, Imperial was the basis for &quot;The Black Beauty,&quot; a rolling arsenal on the ABC-TV series &quot;The Green Hornet&quot;, starring Van Williams and Bruce Lee. A black Imperial of this year would also be restored as a wedding anniversary gift for Richard &quot;The Old Man&quot; Harrison who used to be on the History Channel show, &quot;Pawn Stars&quot;.
== Third generation (1967–1968) ==
Imperial styling was completely new for the 1967 and 1968 models. Using a two-inch shorter wheelbase, Imperial switched from the body-on-frame platform (D-body) to a unibody platform (C-body platform used in other full-size Mopars.) While Imperial&#x27;s front K member was longer than a Chrysler&#x27;s, dimensions behind the front fenders were similar. One reason for the change was that Chrysler had gained experience with unibody construction and was ready to apply it to the company&#x27;s flagship line.

The economic component was that the switch to the C-body was less expensive than maintaining a separate platform for Imperial, which was increasingly difficult to justify given Imperial&#x27;s relatively low sales volume. The new platform resulted in a significant reduction in weight as well as in exterior and interior dimensions. With the partnership gone between Ghia and Chrysler, limousines based on the Imperial were produced by &quot;Armbruster-Stageway&quot; of Fort Smith Arkansas. The limousines were lengthened , most of it between the front and back doors with a few inches added between the rear door and the rear wheel, allowing room for two rear-facing seats with a small console/bar in between. The limousine conversions were longer than the earlier Ghia cars, and longer than the Cadillac Series 75 limousines.
=== 1967 (Series CY1-M, H) ===
Imperial shared the unibody platform with other full-sized Chrysler Corporation cars, but retained a unique bodyshell. The styling kept the overall straight-line, sharp-edged Engel theme, but there were many detail changes intended to make Imperial look less like Lincoln and more into its own territory. The spare tire bulge was completely gone from the rear, although the boss remained. The practically full-width taillights spread out from it, straight, but ended before chrome-tipped rear wings. A base Imperial model, simply called Imperial, returned for the first time since 1963, complementing the Crown and LeBaron levels of trim. It was the first four-door pillared Imperial sedan since 1960. New standard features included dual brakes with upfront discs and lane-change blinkers. Dual exhaust was no longer standard on the convertible. The only way to get it was to order the &quot;TNT&quot; version of the 440 engine, an option that promised more power.

An option on Crown coupes was the Mobile Director. Essentially the front passenger seat turned to face rearward and a small table and high-intensity light folded out over the back seat. The idea was that an executive could turn around and do work while being driven to the office, or he could sit behind the driver and a secretary could take dictation in the rear-facing front seat. The concept originated with the 1966 Mobile Executive Show Car that was an Imperial Coupe fitted with a telephone, Dictaphone, writing table, typewriter, television, reading lamp, and stereo. Chrysler also used the reversed front seat idea in the 300X show car. Costing $597.40 ($317.60 in 1968), at a time when a Crown coupe started at US$6,011, it was a very expensive option. Only 81 Crown coupes were ordered this way, and only a handful so equipped are known to survive. The option was canceled at the end of the 1968 model year. Sales increased to 17,614.

=== 1968 (Series DY1-M, H) ===
The 1968 Imperial was little changed from the previous year. The grille changed to a brightly chromed one with thin horizontal bars, split in the middle by vertical chrome and a round Imperial Eagle badge. This badge replaced the stand-up hood ornament used on the 1967s. The cornering lamp lenses were now covered by matching grilles. At the rear, the horizontal bars over the taillights remained, but the gas filler door pull was changed to a cast metal eagle instead of a round knob containing a plastic emblem. 1968 cars also gained rear reflectors. All 1968s came with a Federally mandated energy-absorbing steering column. The base-level model was canceled after only one year and the four-door sedan became part of the Crown level of trim. At US$7,599, the Imperial LeBaron was one of the most expensive American cars available at the time. This was also the last year for the Imperial convertible. A total of 15,367 Imperials were sold in 1968.

== Fourth generation (1969–1973) ==
The &quot;Fuselage Look&quot; was how Chrysler described its new styling for 1969. Instead of the square lines of the 1964 through 1968 models, the new Imperials featured tumblehome sides, bulging at the beltline like an airliner&#x27;s fuselage and tucking in down to the rocker panels. The new styling made the cars look longer and wider, and strongly curved side glass increased shoulder room without expanding overall body width compared to the previous C-body. Front and rear shoulder room increased from on four-door hardtops.

To reduce development and tooling costs, and bring overall expenditures more in line with actual sales, Imperial began to share some of its bodyshell with the Chrysler New Yorker for the first time since 1956. Consequently, glass and roofs were common with the entry-level Chrysler Newport. In other respects, however, little had changed; construction was still unibody, the wheelbase was still stretched longer than a Chrysler&#x27;s in front of the passenger section, the engine and transmission were the same, and the torsion bar front suspension was still used.

=== 1969 (Series EY-L, M) ===
In keeping with the times, the look was sleeker, with a reduced, more subtle level of trim. For the first time, the lights were hidden behind doors, giving a fashionable at the time full-width grille look using &quot;loop&quot; bumpers. Only this year the Imperial featured sequential turn signals. The 1969 model year was the last for pillared sedans, and it was also the first year for the Imperial LeBaron coupe. At , the Imperial once again became the longest non-limousine car made in America, and would remain so through 1973 when it would set the post-WW II record for non-limousine car length. A total of 22,083 were produced, making it Imperial&#x27;s third-best ever year. &quot;Ambruster-Stageway&quot; of Fort Smith Arkansas continued with limousine conversions using the 1969 through 1971 design. Twelve conversions were delivered over the three years, including one for then New York governor Nelson Rockefeller.

=== 1970 (Series FY-L, M) ===
The 1970 models differed only in minor ways. The grill pattern changed to a larger egg-crate design; the front cornering lamps were rectangular instead of the &quot;shark gill&quot; pattern of 1969 models. A wide chrome strip was added at the rocker panels, vinyl side trim was made optional, and (for this year only) the fender skirts were gone. It was the final year for the Crown series and this was the first year the LeBaron out sold the Crown. Imperial had only two models and styles of Imperial for 1970. A LeBaron hardtop sedan and coupe and the Crown hardtop coupe and sedan. Production totaled 11,816 for the 1970 Imperial models.

===1971 (Series GY-M)===
For 1971, the Imperial Eagle at the front of the hood was gone, replaced by the word IMPERIAL; the decklid badge said, for the first time, &quot;IMPERIAL by Chrysler&quot; and the only model offered was the LeBaron. The 1971 Imperial is notable for being the first production car in America with a 4-wheel Anti-lock braking system (ABS) from Bendix, a rarely selected option at that time. A total of 11,569 1971 Imperials were produced with a retail price of US$6,276 for the sedan.

Although the vinyl top was standard, for a short time a unique paisley-patterned vinyl top in a burgundy color was available as an option on burgundy-painted cars. It has been rumored that this top had actually been overprinted on waste &quot;Mod Top&quot; patterned vinyl, which had been available on some 1969 and 1970 model year Dodge and Plymouth cars, but according to Jeffrey Godshall, a Chrysler designer and frequent contributor to the magazine &quot;Collectible Automobile&quot;, this was not the case. With exposure to the elements, the burgundy overprint faded, and the pattern began to show through in a purple &quot;paisley&quot; pattern. Chrysler replaced many affected tops with either white or black standard vinyl, but some survive.

=== 1972 (Series HY-M) ===
Evolutionary styling was the basis for completely new sheetmetal for the 1972 model year, giving the cars a bigger and heavier all-around appearance. A somewhat more rounded side profile without a character line down the side and chrome trim on the top seams of the fenders from the rear windows forward appeared. The front fascia was all new and imposing-looking, and the rear featured vertical teardrop taillights for the first time, with side marker lights in the form of shields with eagles on them. Sales increased to 15,796. Two all-black LeBaron sedans were delivered to the US Secret Service, which then turned them over to Hess and Eisenhardt, which converted them into limos for Presidential use. Both cars were used as late as 1981, and carried Ronald Reagan and his staff to Capitol Hill for his presidential swearing-in ceremony in January 1981.

=== 1973 (Series 3Y-M) ===
The 1973 model year saw new federal bumper standards to prevent damage. This meant the Imperials gained large rubber over-riders front and rear, adding to the car&#x27;s length, making it the longest production car in North America for that year and the longest postwar (non-limousine) production car at . The front bumper ends revived a Woodlite headlamp appearance which was a popular, extra cost item during the 1930s. As 1973 was in general a good year for the auto industry, 16,729 of the 1973 Imperials were built and sold.

== Fifth generation (1974–1975) ==

With future sales forecasts likely to remain low, Chrysler had planned on discontinuing the Imperial at the end of the 1973 model year. While image and appearance were an important part of luxury car appeal, without sales Chrysler could not afford to build an Imperial with a unique bodyshell. Yet without one, it would be difficult to compete with rivals Cadillac and Lincoln. For 1974, the Crown Coupe nameplate returned as the most expensive model to compete with the Cadillac Eldorado and the Continental Mark IV with a list price of $7,856.

A front-end design envisioned for the next Imperial penned by Chrysler/Imperial exterior studio senior stylist Chet Limbaugh came to the attention of Elwood Engel. It featured a &quot;waterfall&quot; grille with thin vertical chrome bars separated by a body-colored band running through the center, which started on top of the nose and flowed down.

Engel showed the design to Chrysler president John J. Riccardo and convinced him to use it on an Imperial. To save money the 1974 model would use the same body panels as the Chrysler New Yorker except for the front end clip and trunk lid. This meant that for the first time as a separate marque, the Imperial would share the same wheelbase as a production Chrysler.

An impact absorbing front bumper was also new.

=== 1974 (Series 4Y-M) ===

With the full effects of the 1973 oil crisis being solidly felt, a bad year for both the U.S. economy and its auto industry was in store for 1974 - cruel timing for Chrysler&#x27;s 50th anniversary year. The 1974 Imperial was the first regular American passenger car to offer 4-wheel disc brakes since the 1949–1954 Chrysler Imperials, the 1950–1952 Crosleys and the 1965-on Chevrolet Corvettes. The &quot;by Chrysler&quot; script was removed from the car for 1974. The Imperial&#x27;s electronic ignition system was a U.S. market first, as was the optional car alarm. In addition to the two regular LeBaron models, a 50th Anniversary 2-door LeBaron Crown Coupe was also produced. Finished in Golden Fawn, only 57 were built. While total sales were down from 1973, Chrysler was pleased with the 14,483 Imperials produced, given the poor economy in 1974 and a retail price of $7,230 for the sedan.

=== 1975 (Series 5Y-M) ===

A bolder waterfall grille appeared in 1975, one of the few changes for the model year. The front bumper received slots to aid in engine cooling, and a few other detail improvements were made.

This was to be the last model year of the independent Imperial marque, with only 8,830 1975 models sold. This year they brought back the Crown name. Offered only as a coupe, and the major difference is the Crown Coupe came with an opera window compared to the LeBaron regular coupe window. The last Imperial, a black LeBaron hardtop, rolled out of the factory on 12 June 1975. However, only the name disappeared, as the same basic car was offered rather more cheaply, less some of the Imperial&#x27;s features, as the Chrysler New Yorker Brougham for model years 1976 through 1978.

With divisional cost-savings having forced the Imperial to share basically everything but some trim and badging with the Chrysler New Yorker (and the same platform as all Chryslers and full-sized Dodges and Plymouths), justifying the price differential over a high-end New Yorker had proven increasingly hard for prospective customers, given that the four-door hardtop was listed at $9,046. Compounding this the costs of maintaining and marketing a separate poorly selling marque became too high for the limited return.

== Sixth generation (1981–1983) ==

Hoping to revive not merely the brand, or the division, but all of Chrysler, the company recruited former top Ford executive Lee Iacocca for its helm. He had proven successful in upscaling the 1967 Thunderbird into the 1969 Continental Mark III positioned on the highest end of the personal luxury car market, and sought to repeat a variant of the formula with the Imperial. Only this time the car would be downsized and de-featured instead of the other way around.

Although Chrysler was facing bankruptcy, Iacocca argued &quot;a new flagship would assure the public that Chrysler had a future.&quot; However, when the car finally appeared, a two-door coupé based on the intermediate J platform, it was marketed simply as &quot;Imperial&quot;, and, harking to Imperial&#x27;s days as an independent marque of the manufacturer, the Chrysler name did not appear on the car.

There was no four door or full-sized option, the J-platform being shared the second generation Chrysler Cordoba and Dodge Mirada. The bustle-back appearance and prominent grille was an attempt to revive the 1930s and 1940s luxury car appearances that were briefly popular during the early 1980s, as with the second generation Cadillac Seville. Chrysler designers drew inspiration from the 1937–1939 Chrysler Imperial sedans.

The traditional Imperial eagle logo was not used, as it had been moved to the Chrysler LeBaron model in 1977. Instead, it bore a Chrysler Pentastar hood ornament made of Cartier crystal.

Competing models such as the Cadillac Eldorado and the Continental Mark VI had been downsized by 1981, so the Imperial was of comparable size to its competitors with a listed retail price of $18,311. A marketing effort for the new model included commercials and magazine ads featuring singer Frank Sinatra, a personal friend of Iacocca whom Sinatra jokingly referred to as &quot;the other chairman of the board.&quot; Sinatra even recorded special songs to promote the new Imperial. In addition, Sinatra agreed to work for Chrysler for $1 a year because he believed that more performers should get involved in helping to save jobs in the United States (though his union later forced him to accept scale pay instead).

The Imperial&#x27;s front suspension featured transverse-mounted torsion bars; the rear suspension included asymmetric multiple-leaf, S-shaped springs, anti-sway bar, and telescopic shock absorbers. Extensive use of rubber isolators contributed to the Imperial&#x27;s virtually silent ride on top of Goodyear polyester steel-belted Arriva tires. The Imperials carried a market-leading 24-month/30,000-mile limited warranty covering all labor, maintenance, and parts (except tires).

For the new Imperial, a quality-assurance center was built adjacent to the Windsor plant where the car was assembled. Each car, which had already been subjected to many inspections while it was assembled, was then given additional testing. First was an underbody fluid-leak inspection utilizing a high-pressure water spray, the car was checked for front-end alignment, and finally a road test over a track that included various types of terrain. The cars received a sign-off if everything was in order.

&quot;Imperial is a special car for a special owner,&quot; said Tom Pappert, Chrysler&#x27;s Vice President of U.S. Automotive Sales. &quot;It is designed to appeal to the personal luxury car buyer seeking the highest level of prestige, advanced styling, engineering and special features, extended warranty, and VIP recognition in both the showroom and service areas.&quot;

=== 1981 ===
The 1981 Imperial came with a long list of standard features including air conditioning with thermostatic temperature control, electronic fuel injection, power windows, power door locks, power seats, power outside mirrors, power trunk release, tilt steering column, automatic speed control, garage door opener, and other conveniences. Options included a cost-free choice of wheels (color-coordinated &#x27;snowflake&#x27; cast-aluminum wheels or steel wire wheel covers), upholstery choices including Mark Cross leather (see below) and Yorkshire cloth, sound systems choice, 40-channel CB radio, power moon roof, and the Frank Sinatra Edition package (see below).

Unique for the Imperial was the first fully electronic digital instrumentation ever provided in a production-built American automobile. The Imperial&#x27;s electronic information center was manufactured at Chrysler&#x27;s Huntsville, Alabama Electronics Division, which was also a prime contractor in America&#x27;s Redstone and Saturn Apollo space programs. Located in the center of the instrument panel were nine push-buttons the driver was to touch to operate Imperial&#x27;s information center. The instrument panel displayed an electronic blue-green VFD readout which also featured gear selection.

The Imperial was available in eleven exterior colors (Sterling Silver Crystal Coat; Day Star Blue Crystal Coat; Nightwatch Blue; Light Auburn Crystal Coat; Mahogany StarMist; Light Seaspray Green Crystal Coat; Spice Tan Starmist; Manila Cream; Morocco Red; Pearl White; Formal Black), and six cloth and seven leather interior colors (Dark Blue; Green; Red; Mahogany; Heather; Cashmere; White for leather only). In all, thirty-five interior color and trim combinations were possible.

=== 1982 ===
The Imperial continued to offer an extensive list of standard luxury and convenience items for 1982 although some changes were made. Imperial&#x27;s &quot;floating cushion&quot; velour seats were replaced with ones of Kimberly velvet one-piece construction. New &quot;Quartz-Lock&quot; electronically tuned radios (ETR) were added to the options list while the power moonroof was no longer available.

=== 1983 ===
Following significant price increases during the 1981 and 1982 model years, due in part to high inflation at the time, the Imperial&#x27;s base price was cut back close to its original introductory level. The hood ornament, while similar in appearance, was changed from Cartier crystal to plastic. The Frank Sinatra Edition package was no longer available. A suspension upgrade Touring Edition package was added.

The sixth generation Imperial did not meet Chrysler management&#x27;s sales and reliability expectations. It had innovations such as the fuel injection system and electronic instrument cluster, and Chrysler tried to use it as a showcase for technology and quality. The fuel injection system proved troublesome and many 1981 models were retrofitted under warranty (or later on owner initiative) with carburetors.

The Imperial name would reappear in 1990, but as the flagship sub-brand Chrysler Imperial model.

=== Powertrain ===
The V8, was the only available engine. 1981 models came standard with a Chrysler-built throttle-body EFI system, replaced by a carburetor for 1982 and 1983 models. The automatic transmission was a wide-ratio TorqueFlite equipped with lock-up torque converter, with the final drive ratio 2.2:1 in 1981 and 1983; 2.4:1 in 1982.

=== Special trims ===

==== Frank Sinatra (fs) Edition ====
The Imperial for 1981 and 1982 was offered with an optional edition named after a celebrity. The Imperial fs was one of few regular production cars bearing a celebrity&#x27;s name. It was available only in Glacier Blue Crystal paint - Chrysler advertising claimed it matched the color of Sinatra&#x27;s eyes - and had special &quot;fs&quot; (lowercase) external badging, with a large glovebox placard proclaiming &quot;Frank Sinatra Signature Edition&quot;. Inside, 16 cassette tapes of Sinatra titles were presented in a specially made Mark Cross leather case stored in a special locking console below the dashboard. Production in 1981 was 148 and 279 in 1982 fs edition were made that were an additional $1,078 above the $20,988 price of the car.

==== Limousine ====
Aside from the &quot;fs&quot; edition available for purchase by the public, Chrysler president Lee Iacocca commissioned a 1982 Imperial converted by ASC (American Sunroof Corporation) outside Detroit, Michigan, using the front doors from a 1979-81 Chrysler Fifth Avenue sedan into a limousine with a stretch, and presented it to Frank Sinatra as a gift. A similar Imperial limousine also built by ASC is also used in the 1984 movie &quot;Cannonball Run II&quot; driven by Burt Reynolds and Dom DeLuise, as well as the movies &quot;Sharky&#x27;s Machine&quot; and &quot;Stick&quot; both directed by and starring Reynolds.

==== Cartier Crystals ====
All 1981 through 1983 model year Imperials had Cartier crystals placed on the exterior opera lights and steering wheel, and each crystal displayed &#x27;Cartier.&#x27; In addition, each Imperial came with a Cartier crystal key in the Mark Cross Gift Set.

==== Mark Cross Interior &amp; Gift Set ====
All 1981 through 1983 model year Imperials had the interior designed by Mark Cross, an American luxury leather goods brand. The seating came in either Kimberly cloth or Leather. Upon purchasing a new Imperial, Chrysler shipped the new owner a Mark Cross Gift Set consisting of an umbrella, leather portfolio, leather key fob, uncut Cartier key, and a &#x27;Sounds of Stereo&#x27; music cassette. These were exclusive Mark Cross items not available for sale in a Mark Cross showroom.

=== NASCAR ===
A few race teams built NASCAR spec racecars with Imperial sheetmetal and raced them on the &quot;NASCAR&quot; circuit from 1981 through the 1985 season, though mostly only on the superspeedways. They were driven by Buddy Arrington, Rick Baldwin, Cecil Gordon, Phil Goode, and Maurice Randall. The cars did not distinguish themselves to any great degree, however a &quot;Buddy Arrington&quot; owned and driven Imperial finished in sixth place in the summer 1982 race at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn. The Imperial-based cars were used in competition as it was determined to be far more aerodynamic (and capable of higher speeds) than the Dodge Mirada at the time. The car had a drag coefficient of 0.41, which was better than contemporary Corvette (0.45), and performed well on the big high speed tracks, with Morgan Shepherd (driving Buddy Arrington&#x27;s Imperial) qualifying for the 1985 Daytona 500 at a speed of 197 mph, despite the lack of suitable high-performance race engines. One of Arrington&#x27;s Imperials is in the Talladega, Alabama NASCAR museum.

=== Production figures ===
The first 1981 Imperial rolled off the assembly line on August 11, 1980. Imperial production ended on April 29, 1983. Chrysler had originally planned to cap production at 25,000 units.

*Cars manufactured in 1980 calendar year were sold as 1981 model year.

== Imperial limousines ==
=== Imperial Crown (1955–1965) ===



For 1955 and 1956, an Imperial Crown limousine model was also offered. With an extra and of wheelbase in 1955 and 1956 respectively, and seating eight (three in the front including the driver, three in the rear, and two on rearward-facing fold-down jump seats), these replaced the long-wheelbase offerings in all Chrysler marques. A total of 172 were built for (model year) 1955, with 226 for 1956. They were the last Chrysler-branded limousines built entirely in Detroit. Color choices were limited to dark green, dark blue, maroon or black with wire wheels being the only optional equipment offered.

From 1957 through 1965, long-wheelbase Imperial Crown cars would be finished by Ghia in Italy and was formally introduced January 2, 1957. The earlier models used two-door hardtop bodies mounted on the more rigid convertible chassis; these would be shipped across the Atlantic, cut apart, lengthened by and reworked. Later models were built from four-door models to the same specification. Each took a month to build and carried a high price for the time of US$18,500 in 1963-64. They sold in limited numbers against the less expensive Cadillac Series 75 (US$9724–$9960 in 1963-64), but had an established reputation among limousine buyers, as well as against competing coachbuilders building on the Cadillac commercial chassis. Packard had ended production in 1958 and both the Mercedes-Benz 300d and the Rolls-Royce Silver Cloud had just been introduced. A total of 132 Imperial Crowns were manufactured for Chrysler by Ghia over 1957-65. An oddity is that these cars were often built as soon as the styling changed, and sold over a period of some years. All 1961 Imperial Crown Ghias used the 1960 styling front and rear, for example, and all 10 Ghia built Imperial Crowns sold during the 1965 model year were 1964s with 1965 exterior styling and consequently had a TorqueFlight pushbutton gear selector. At about curb weight the 1957-65 Ghia built Imperial Crowns are the heaviest standard production cars sold by an American firm since the 1930s.

Throughout her husband&#x27;s term as U.S. President, Jacqueline Kennedy&#x27;s personal car was a Ghia-built 1961 Imperial Crown with 1960 styling. The car figured prominently in her various duties as First Lady. In President John F. Kennedy&#x27;s funeral procession on November 25, 1963, near the front of the motorcade, carrying Jackie and her children, was her Imperial Crown.

New York governor and heir to the Standard Oil fortune Nelson Rockefeller, later Vice President of the U.S. during the term of President Gerald Ford, also owned a 1960 Imperial Crown. It is one of 17 limousines made by Ghia in that year, and the only one with blind rear quarter treatment.

In the 1974 movie &quot;The Godfather Part II&quot;, a black Ghia built 1958 Imperial Crown was used by Michael Corleone (played by Al Pacino) while at the family compound near Reno, Nevada.

=== Imperial Crown (1967–1971) and Imperial (through 1983) ===
While Imperial Crown limousines production ended in 1965, Imperial limousines continued to be made by other coachbuilders. After the last ten Ghia-built Imperial Crowns were completed, Ghia sold its tooling to Barreiros Coachbuilders of Spain. Barreiros built ten limousines, much like those built by Ghia and, similar to the last ten built by Ghia, built as 1965s with 1966 exterior styling, but with a wheelbase two inches longer. Build quality was poor by comparison, with the cars famous for having a wiring harness made from wires of the same color. This effort was made with Chrysler&#x27;s cooperation, but Chrysler did not advertise them as official Crown Imperials; that model was not offered by the factory in 1966.

For the model years 1967 through 1971, a total of 27 Imperial limousines were produced by Stageway Coachbuilders (ASC) of Fort Smith, Arkansas, on a wheelbase, and were justifiably advertised as the largest luxury automobiles in the world. These were the official Imperial Crown models. Armbruster-Stageway was a well-established builder of such customized products as airport limousines, and Chrysler had been collaborating with the firm for years. The last of these was built in 1969, though leftover units were updated with 1970 and 1971 grilles and taillights, and sold during those model years. They closed out the Imperial Custom /Imperial Crown tradition in fine style.

Two 1972 models with 1973 model year grilles were built by the Hess and Eisenhardt Company of Fairfield, Ohio, for the United States Secret Service and were used by Presidents Nixon, Ford, Carter, and finally Reagan on his swearing-in day. One 1974 model year Imperial was produced into a limo also by ASC. The final Imperial limousines were 1981–83 bodied cars, two of which were stretched by and five were lengthened by .
Imperial Crown limousines should not be confused with the Imperial Crown and Crown Coupe models. The &quot;Crown Imperial Limousine&quot; was the top of the line, and fitted with LeBaron trim or better, while the Imperial Crown was the middle-tier line through 1968 and bottom of the Imperial line in 1969 and 1970.

==Imperial advertising slogans==
* &quot;America&#x27;s Most Carefully Built Car&quot;
* &quot;The Finest Car America Has Yet Produced&quot;
* &quot;Finest Product of Chrysler Corporation&quot;
* &quot;The Incomparable Imperial&quot;
* &quot;Excellence Without Equal&quot;
* &quot;It&#x27;s Time for Imperial&quot; (1981–1983)

== See also ==
* Chrysler Imperial

== References ==
== External links ==

* Online Imperial Club
* Fuselage bodies at Allpar.com
* J-bodies at Allpar.com
* 1969 - 1973 Imperials at Fuselage.de site
* Imperials listed by model and chassis in movies and TV series
* &quot;Imperial&quot;-Chrysler Corporation&#x27;s Finest Cars</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q668822" start="0" end="8" title="Imperial (automobile)" label="Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="17" end="37" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="52" end="62" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="63" end="68" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088705" start="200" end="217" title="Chrysler Imperial" label="Chrysler Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q216796" start="350" end="357" title="Lincoln Motor Company" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q27436" start="362" end="370" title="Cadillac" label="Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q341174" start="474" end="483" title="V8 engine" label="V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27436" start="866" end="874" title="Cadillac" label="Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433838" start="876" end="887" title="Lincoln Mark series" label="Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q216796" start="889" end="896" title="Lincoln Motor Company" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q27582" start="898" end="908" title="Duesenberg" label="Duesenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q40978" start="910" end="922" title="Pierce Arrow" label="Pierce Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q869084" start="924" end="928" title="Cord Automobile" label="Cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q40971" start="934" end="941" title="Packard" label="Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q318044" start="970" end="988" title="Walter Chrysler" label="Walter P. Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581707" start="1012" end="1022" title="luxury car" label="luxury car"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1037" end="1050" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q107426915" start="1244" end="1256" title="Chrysler Six" label="Chrysler Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q427829" start="1328" end="1342" title="Chrysler Royal" label="Chrysler Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q636970" start="1344" end="1351" title="Chrysler Airflow" label="Airflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088749" start="1353" end="1361" title="Chrysler Saratoga" label="Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088751" start="1367" end="1377" title="Chrysler New Yorker" label="New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q216796" start="1609" end="1616" title="Lincoln Motor Company" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1678" end="1698" title="Lincoln Motor Company#Continental Division (1956–1959)" label="Continental Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q919928" start="2374" end="2386" title="Virgil Exner" label="Virgil Exner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2809" end="2819" title="Cadillac Series 70#1954–1956" label="limousines"/>
<link wikidata="Q743344" start="2942" end="2952" title="Facel Vega" label="Facel Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q967967" start="2972" end="2993" title="Facel Vega Excellence" label="Facel Vega Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611731" start="3019" end="3025" title="Hongqi (marque)" label="Hongqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25018247" start="3085" end="3096" title="Hongqi CA72" label="Hongqi CA72"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088692" start="3177" end="3209" title="Chrysler Imperial Parade Phaeton" label="Chrysler Imperial Parade Phaeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q523777" start="3529" end="3541" title="Chrysler 300 letter series" label="Chrysler 300"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336161" start="4150" end="4157" title="hardtop" label="hardtop"/>
<link wikidata="Q213853" start="4158" end="4163" title="coupe" label="coupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q190578" start="4201" end="4206" title="sedan (car)" label="sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q341174" start="4387" end="4396" title="V8 engine" label="V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q834730" start="4434" end="4438" title="Chrysler Hemi engine" label="Hemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="4638" end="4654" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236194" start="5538" end="5560" title="Chrysler PowerFlite transmission" label="push button PowerFlite"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5722" end="5744" title="Ultramatic#1956: Ultramatic and Touchbutton Ultramatic" label="Touchbutton Ultramatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q751199" start="5784" end="5801" title="Packard Caribbean" label="Packard Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q751248" start="5810" end="5819" title="Packard Patrician" label="Patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189936" start="5906" end="5918" title="Merc-O-Matic" label="Merc-O-Matic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287696" start="6222" end="6227" title="Edsel" label="Edsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696881" start="6228" end="6237" title="Teletouch" label="Teletouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714331" start="6319" end="6325" title="Philco" label="Philco"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="6790" end="6798" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q919928" start="6828" end="6840" title="Forward Look" label="Forward Look"/>
<link wikidata="Q634491" start="6921" end="6938" title="Chrysler Norseman" label="Chrysler Norseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709419" start="7750" end="7757" title="unibody" label="unibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709419" start="7817" end="7832" title="perimeter frame" label="perimeter frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188730" start="7937" end="7948" title="crossmember" label="crossmember"/>
<link wikidata="Q668566" start="8379" end="8390" title="torsion-bar" label="torsion-bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q919928" start="9025" end="9037" title="Forward Look" label="Forward Look"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311520" start="10484" end="10488" title="Trim package" label="trim"/>
<link wikidata="Q598067" start="10596" end="10616" title="LeBaron Incorporated" label="LeBaron, Carrossiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688934" start="10899" end="10915" title="Continental tire" label="Continental tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q507295" start="11333" end="11347" title="cruise control" label="cruise control"/>
<link wikidata="Q190863" start="11487" end="11503" title="Power door locks" label="Power door locks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12002" end="12027" title="Jefferson North Assembly#Jefferson Avenue Assembly" label="Jefferson Avenue Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724185" start="12073" end="12086" title="Mack Avenue Engine Complex" label="Warren Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q40971" start="13262" end="13269" title="Packard" label="Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465524" start="16514" end="16519" title="Stutz Motor Company" label="Stutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q61058048" start="16689" end="16700" title="Lester Lum Colbert" label="Tex Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q938328" start="16914" end="16923" title="space age" label="space age"/>
<link wikidata="Q215803" start="17104" end="17122" title="electroluminescence" label="electroluminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088705" start="18495" end="18510" title="Chrysler Imperial" label="1930s Chryslers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465524" start="18555" end="18560" title="Stutz Motor Company" label="Stutz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19441" end="19457" title="TorqueFlite#A727" label="TorqueFlite A727"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="19458" end="19480" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368331" start="20517" end="20529" title="Elwood Engel" label="Elwood Engel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20860" end="20879" title="Lincoln Continental#Fourth generation (1961–1969)" label="Lincoln Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q283193" start="21011" end="21027" title="Three-box styling" label="three-box design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690444" start="22686" end="22696" title="vinyl roof" label="vinyl roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816760" start="22957" end="22969" title="Tom McCahill" label="Tom McCahill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24504" end="24507" title="Chrysler 300 letter series#1965 300L" label="300"/>
<link wikidata="Q291739" start="24634" end="24646" title="Juglans hindsii" label="Claro Walnut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25657" end="25663" title="Chrysler RB engine#440" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q304999" start="25906" end="25922" title="The Green Hornet (TV series)" label="The Green Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q733531" start="25939" end="25951" title="Van Williams" label="Van Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16397" start="25956" end="25965" title="Bruce Lee" label="Bruce Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5856671" start="26054" end="26094" title="Richard Benjamin Harrison" label="Richard &amp;quot;The Old Man&amp;quot; Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="26117" end="26132" title="History (U.S. TV channel)" label="History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q794145" start="26145" end="26155" title="Pawn Stars" label="Pawn Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114649" start="26351" end="26357" title="Chrysler D platform (RWD)" label="D-body"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114639" start="26382" end="26388" title="Chrysler C platform" label="C-body"/>
<link wikidata="Q304444" start="26422" end="26427" title="Mopar" label="Mopar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114639" start="26759" end="26765" title="Chrysler C platform" label="C-body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045339" start="27076" end="27080" title="Ghia" label="Ghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79535" start="27180" end="27190" title="Fort Smith, Arkansas" label="Fort Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025241" start="27507" end="27525" title="Cadillac Series 75" label="Cadillac Series 75"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30673" end="30683" title="tumblehome#In automobile design" label="tumblehome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="30739" end="30747" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114639" start="30960" end="30966" title="Chrysler C platform" label="C-body"/>
<link wikidata="Q668566" start="31557" end="31568" title="torsion bar" label="torsion bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q964912" start="31907" end="31930" title="sequential turn signals" label="sequential turn signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q79535" start="32350" end="32360" title="Fort Smith, Arkansas" label="Fort Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="32540" end="32558" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q964912" start="32702" end="32716" title="cornering lamp" label="cornering lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="33564" end="33588" title="Anti-lock braking system" label="Anti-lock braking system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690444" start="33755" end="33764" title="vinyl top" label="vinyl top"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="35102" end="35119" title="US Secret Service" label="US Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053625" start="35152" end="35171" title="Hess and Eisenhardt" label="Hess and Eisenhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="35276" end="35289" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305815" start="35307" end="35319" title="Capitol Hill" label="Capitol Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q124316407" start="36917" end="36933" title="John J. Riccardo" label="John J. Riccardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088751" start="37045" end="37064" title="Chrysler New Yorker" label="Chrysler New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="37343" end="37358" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088705" start="37630" end="37647" title="Chrysler Imperial" label="Chrysler Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141056" start="37664" end="37671" title="Crosley" label="Crosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q56166" start="37689" end="37707" title="Chevrolet Corvette" label="Chevrolet Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475102" start="37872" end="37881" title="car alarm" label="car alarm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38951" end="38979" title="Chrysler New Yorker#1974–1978" label="Chrysler New Yorker Brougham"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="39683" end="39687" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q281847" start="39698" end="39709" title="Lee Iacocca" label="Lee Iacocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133834" start="39771" end="39782" title="Ford Thunderbird" label="Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q593296" start="39797" end="39817" title="Lincoln Continental Mark III" label="Continental Mark III"/>
<link wikidata="Q504507" start="39855" end="39874" title="personal luxury car" label="personal luxury car"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="40108" end="40116" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114666" start="40258" end="40268" title="Chrysler J platform" label="J platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q368884" start="40542" end="40558" title="Chrysler Cordoba" label="Chrysler Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234275" start="40563" end="40575" title="Dodge Mirada" label="Dodge Mirada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025247" start="40773" end="40789" title="Cadillac Seville" label="Cadillac Seville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40846" end="40863" title="Chrysler Imperial#1937–1939" label="Chrysler Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088714" start="40951" end="40967" title="Chrysler LeBaron" label="Chrysler LeBaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866404" start="41011" end="41020" title="Pentastar" label="Pentastar"/>
<link wikidata="Q538587" start="41043" end="41050" title="Cartier (jeweler)" label="Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025182" start="41090" end="41107" title="Cadillac Eldorado" label="Cadillac Eldorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q370818" start="41116" end="41135" title="Lincoln Continental Mark VI" label="Continental Mark VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="41353" end="41366" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q770588" start="43740" end="43748" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; band radio" label="CB radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q79860" start="44041" end="44060" title="Huntsville, Alabama" label="Huntsville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q393028" start="44135" end="44143" title="Redstone (rocket family)" label="Redstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="44148" end="44161" title="Apollo program" label="Saturn Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277396" start="44374" end="44377" title="Vacuum fluorescent display" label="VFD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46234" end="46251" title="Chrysler Imperial#1990–1993" label="Chrysler Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="46380" end="46383" title="electronic fuel injection" label="EFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="46447" end="46469" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826788" start="46487" end="46498" title="TorqueFlite" label="TorqueFlite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46513" end="46537" title="Torque converter#Lock-up torque converters" label="lock-up torque converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="47135" end="47148" title="cassette tape" label="cassette tape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47684" end="47705" title="Chrysler Fifth Avenue#Origin and the &amp;quot;R-Body years&amp;quot;" label="Chrysler Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q646806" start="47874" end="47891" title="Cannonball Run II" label="Cannonball Run II"/>
<link wikidata="Q202148" start="47908" end="47921" title="Burt Reynolds" label="Burt Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q348209" start="47926" end="47937" title="Dom DeLuise" label="Dom DeLuise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755064" start="47967" end="47988" title="Sharky&amp;#x27;s Machine" label="Sharky&amp;#x27;s Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q971636" start="48005" end="48010" title="Stick (film)" label="Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q538587" start="48132" end="48139" title="Cartier (jeweler)" label="Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354062" start="48172" end="48184" title="Opera window" label="opera lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q55622209" start="48458" end="48468" title="Mark Cross (brand)" label="Mark Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="48908" end="48914" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984808" start="49100" end="49115" title="Buddy Arrington" label="Buddy Arrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052298" start="49131" end="49143" title="Cecil Gordon" label="Cecil Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108486123" start="49334" end="49385" title="Pure Michigan 400" label="summer 1982 race at Michigan International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930227" start="49389" end="49397" title="Brooklyn, Michigan" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="49576" end="49592" title="drag coefficient" label="drag coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135709" start="49637" end="49645" title="Chevrolet Corvette (C3)" label="Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174694" start="49708" end="49723" title="Morgan Shepherd" label="Morgan Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582272" start="49785" end="49801" title="1985 Daytona 500" label="1985 Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q79975" start="49929" end="49947" title="Talladega, Alabama" label="Talladega, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q188475" start="50350" end="50359" title="limousine" label="limousine"/>
<link wikidata="Q382835" start="50562" end="50571" title="jump seat" label="jump seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045339" start="50996" end="51000" title="Ghia" label="Ghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025241" start="51452" end="51470" title="Cadillac Series 75" label="Cadillac Series 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025164" start="51616" end="51643" title="Cadillac commercial chassis" label="Cadillac commercial chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q751248" start="51645" end="51652" title="Packard Patrician" label="Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410125" start="51695" end="51713" title="Mercedes-Benz W189" label="Mercedes-Benz 300d"/>
<link wikidata="Q942171" start="51722" end="51746" title="Rolls-Royce Silver Cloud" label="Rolls-Royce Silver Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826788" start="52185" end="52222" title="TorqueFlite" label="TorqueFlight pushbutton gear selector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="52407" end="52421" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="52423" end="52441" title="Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis" label="Jacqueline Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="52571" end="52581" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52596" end="52611" title="John F. Kennedy#Funeral" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="52786" end="52798" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="52807" end="52825" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="52833" end="52859" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President of the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="52889" end="52900" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q184768" start="53067" end="53088" title="The Godfather Part II" label="The Godfather Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q835154" start="53147" end="53163" title="Michael Corleone" label="Michael Corleone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="53175" end="53184" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="53220" end="53232" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q367720" start="53508" end="53531" title="Barreiros (manufacturer)" label="Barreiros Coachbuilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053625" start="54766" end="54793" title="Hess and Eisenhardt Company" label="Hess and Eisenhardt Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002506" start="54797" end="54812" title="Fairfield, Ohio" label="Fairfield, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="54822" end="54850" title="United States Secret Service" label="United States Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088705" start="55789" end="55806" title="Chrysler Imperial" label="Chrysler Imperial"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795139" wikidata="Q1265665" url="?curid=795139" title="Fish pond">
<text>A fish pond or fishpond is a controlled pond, small artificial lake or retention basin that is stocked with fish and is used in aquaculture for fish farming, for recreational fishing, or for ornamental purposes.

Fish ponds are a classical garden feature in East Asian residence, such as the Classical Gardens of Suzhou of China, the Imperial Palace of Japan and the Gyeongbokgung Palace of South Korea. In Medieval Europe, it was also typical for monasteries and castles (small, partly self-sufficient communities) to have a fish pond.

==History==
Records of the use of fish ponds can be found from the early Middle Ages. &quot;The idealized eighth-century estate of Charlemagne&#x27;s capitulary &quot;de villis&quot; was to have artificial fishponds but two hundred years later, facilities for raising fish remained very rare, even on monastic estates.&quot;. As the Middle Ages progressed, fish ponds became a more common feature of urbanizing environments. 

Those with access to fish ponds had a controlled source of food, not unlike pastures for cattle and sheep, for use on days when it was not permitted to eat meat. However fish ponds were difficult to maintain. They were a mark of power and authority, since only rich nobles and institutions such as monasteries could afford to maintain them. In winter, supplying fresh food for a castle garrison was a constant struggle. Nobles had access to meat from deer parks, but this did not supply the needs of whole households. Though fish ponds required maintenance to keep them healthy, they were an elegant way of giving monasteries and noble houses access to fresh fish. 

Some of the more popular species of fish farmed in fish ponds were carp and pike. From the 14th century onward these fish proved to be a popular feature of artificial fish ponds.

==Aquaculture==
Fish ponds have been used in aquaculture.

They are or were common in:
* Canada
* Europe, especially in the Czech Republic (Rožmberk Pond, Velké Dářko, Lake Mácha), where common carp may be kept.
* Ireland, where medieval monks kept fish that could be eaten on Fridays, in accordance with Catholic rules of fasting
* Hawaii, United States, where the Native Hawaiians used them extensively.
* The Philippines where milkfish, tilapia, crabs, lobsters, tiger shrimp, snails and others may be kept.
* East Asia, especially in Japan with koi, trout, and white crucian carp.

Fish ponds are also being promoted in developing countries. They provide a source of food and income from the sale of fish for small farmers and can also supply irrigation needs and water for livestock. The ecosystem and production services offered by carp farming in fish ponds have immense societal and economic advantages. For example, per production cycle, common carp aquaculture in the whole Central and Eastern Europe fishponds offer at least 579 million € worth of services, some of which are realized while a larger part is intangible. European carp aquaculture in fishponds has a smaller footprint than other crop and livestock sectors in the European Union.

==Gallery==


==See also==
*Ancient Hawaiian aquaculture
*Garden pond
*Kahaluu Fish Pond
*Koi pond
*Raceway (aquaculture)
*Raceway pond
*Sea cage
*Stew pond
*Water garden
*Jetted pond
==Notes==
==References==
* Aston M (1998) &quot;Medieval fish, fisheries and fishponds in England&quot; Volumes 1–2. B.A.R. .
* Chattopadhyay GN (1998) &quot;Chemical Analysis of Fish Pond Soil and Water&quot; Daya Publishing House. .
* Compton LV (1943) &quot;Techniques of fishpond management&quot; U.S. Dept. of Agriculture.
* Delincé G (1992) &quot;The ecology of the fish pond ecosystem&quot; Kluwer Academic Publishers. .
* Farber JM (1997) &quot;Ancient Hawaiian fishponds: can restoration succeed on Molokaʻi?&quot; Neptune House Publications. .
* Gopalakrishnan V and Coche AG (1994) &quot;Handbook on small-scale freshwater fish farming&quot; Training Series No. 24, FAO, Rome. .
* Hoare J (1870) treatise on fishponds, addressed to the nobility and gentry of Sussex&quot; Wyman &amp; sons, original from Harvard University.
* IUCN (1997) &quot;Fishing for a living: the ecology and economics of fishponds in Central Europe&quot; .
* FAO (1996) Simple methods for aquaculture: &quot;Management for freshwater fish culture: Ponds and water practices&quot; Training Series No. 21/1, Rome.
* FAO (1995) Simple methods for aquaculture: &quot;Pond Construction for Freshwater Fish Culture: Building Earthen Ponds&quot; FAO Training Series No. 20/1, Rome.
* FAO (1992) Simple methods for aquaculture: &quot;Pond Construction for Freshwater Fish Culture: Pond-Farm Structures and Layouts&quot; FAO Training Series No. 20/2, Rome.
* FAO (1989) Simple methods for aquaculture: &quot;Topography: Making topographical surveys for freshwater fish culture&quot; Training Series No. 16/2, Rome.
* FAO (1981) Simple methods for aquaculture. &quot;Water for freshwater fish culture&quot; Training Series No.4, Rome.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1265665" start="2" end="11" title="Fish pond" label="fish pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265665" start="15" end="23" title="Fish pond" label="fishpond"/>
<link wikidata="Q12719646" start="40" end="44" title="pond" label="pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="52" end="67" title="artificial lake" label="artificial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413117" start="71" end="86" title="retention basin" label="retention basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454710" start="95" end="102" title="fish stocking" label="stocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="108" end="112" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="128" end="139" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="144" end="156" title="fish farming" label="fish farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q283534" start="162" end="182" title="recreational fishing" label="recreational fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q335261" start="191" end="201" title="ornament (art)" label="ornamental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107656" start="240" end="246" title="garden" label="garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="258" end="267" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144337" start="292" end="319" title="Classical Gardens of Suzhou" label="Classical Gardens of Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="323" end="328" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q500681" start="334" end="349" title="Tokyo Imperial Palace" label="Imperial Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="353" end="358" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q482485" start="367" end="387" title="Gyeongbokgung Palace" label="Gyeongbokgung Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="391" end="402" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="407" end="422" title="Medieval Europe" label="Medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="448" end="459" title="monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="464" end="470" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8086" start="644" end="658" title="8th century" label="eighth-century"/>
<link wikidata="Q699907" start="688" end="698" title="capitulary" label="capitulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662247" start="1416" end="1426" title="Deer park (England)" label="deer parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="1699" end="1703" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="1708" end="1712" title="Northern pike" label="pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034" start="1723" end="1735" title="14th century" label="14th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="1857" end="1868" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1901" end="1907" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1910" end="1916" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="1936" end="1950" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623196" start="1952" end="1965" title="Rožmberk Pond" label="Rožmberk Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512478" start="1967" end="1978" title="Velké Dářko" label="Velké Dářko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720734" start="1980" end="1990" title="Lake Mácha" label="Lake Mácha"/>
<link wikidata="Q81110" start="1999" end="2010" title="common carp" label="common carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="2026" end="2033" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130" start="2089" end="2095" title="Friday" label="Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267230" start="2117" end="2142" title="Fasting and abstinence in the Catholic Church" label="Catholic rules of fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="2145" end="2151" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2153" end="2166" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="2178" end="2194" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2224" end="2235" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q465261" start="2242" end="2250" title="milkfish" label="milkfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q47793" start="2252" end="2259" title="tilapia" label="tilapia"/>
<link wikidata="Q578204" start="2278" end="2290" title="tiger shrimp" label="tiger shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="2325" end="2334" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2350" end="2355" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q378846" start="2361" end="2364" title="koi" label="koi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="2366" end="2371" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090973" start="2377" end="2395" title="Carassius cuvieri" label="white crucian carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="2436" end="2456" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="2473" end="2487" title="Fish as food" label="source of food"/>
<link wikidata="Q81110" start="2759" end="2770" title="common carp" label="common carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q900636" start="2796" end="2822" title="Central and Eastern Europe" label="Central and Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3051" end="3065" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752854" start="3096" end="3124" title="Ancient Hawaiian aquaculture" label="Ancient Hawaiian aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887441" start="3126" end="3137" title="Garden pond" label="Garden pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346794" start="3139" end="3156" title="Kahaluu Fish Pond" label="Kahaluu Fish Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426198" start="3158" end="3166" title="Koi pond" label="Koi pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279041" start="3168" end="3189" title="Raceway (aquaculture)" label="Raceway (aquaculture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279046" start="3191" end="3203" title="Raceway pond" label="Raceway pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q626242" start="3205" end="3213" title="Sea cage" label="Sea cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615657" start="3215" end="3224" title="Stew pond" label="Stew pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q113574" start="3226" end="3238" title="Water garden" label="Water garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17281214" start="3240" end="3251" title="Jetted pond" label="Jetted pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="3929" end="3932" title="FAO" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="4089" end="4093" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795140" wikidata="Q258671" url="?curid=795140" title="Awake (Dream Theater album)">
<text>Awake is the third studio album by American progressive metal band Dream Theater, released on October 4, 1994, through East West Records. It is the final Dream Theater album to feature original keyboardist Kevin Moore, who announced his decision to leave the band during the mixing process of the album.

Much of the material for &quot;Awake&quot; was written in writing sessions between February and April 1994, during which Dream Theater were under pressure from their record label to produce an album as successful as &quot;Images and Words&quot; (1992) with a single similar to &quot;Pull Me Under&quot;. The label wanted the band to produce a more metal-oriented album, hoping it would be easier to market. John Purdell and Duane Baron produced, engineered and mixed the album. The album&#x27;s cover, again designed by Larry Freemantle, features numerous references to the album&#x27;s lyrics.

Released at the height of the popularity of grunge music, &quot;Awake&quot; initially received mixed reviews, though the album was later referred to as one of the band&#x27;s finest releases. The album peaked at 32 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, the highest position a Dream Theater album would reach on that chart until 2007&#x27;s &quot;Systematic Chaos&quot;, which peaked at 19. &quot;Lie&quot; and &quot;The Silent Man&quot; were released as singles but failed to be as successful as &quot;Pull Me Under&quot; had been. The band&#x27;s record label considered the album a commercial failure, which would lead to the band being pressured to write more radio-friendly songs on their subsequent studio album.

==Background==
After a month-long break, Dream Theater started working on their third studio album in February 1994. The band&#x27;s two-month writing sessions were located at Prince Studios, New York City. The lack of a leader within the band increased tensions in what were already tense sessions. Keyboardist Kevin Moore noted at the time that &quot;there are arguments that last forever because there&#x27;s nobody to come in and draw the line&quot;. &quot;When it came to the music, you had [guitarist] John Petrucci and I playing the roles we still kind of play, and Kevin was also a forceful element,&quot; drummer Mike Portnoy said. &quot;In those days, [bassist] John Myung was a little bit more out of his shell, so the bass was a bit more predominant in the band. The fighting never came to blows, but there was a lot of bickering over every single element, like the fine details of what the third note on the sixty-fourth bar should be.&quot;

The success of Dream Theater&#x27;s previous album, &quot;Images and Words&quot;, particularly the single &quot;Pull Me Under&quot;, put pressure on the band to produce a similarly successful follow-up album. &quot;Somebody once said that you have your whole life to prepare for your first album and have about two months to prepare the follow-up, and that was very much the situation we faced in early 1994,&quot; Portnoy noted. The popularity of alternative metal and groove metal meant that the band&#x27;s record label, East West, were keen for the band to create a heavier, darker album. &quot;Awake&quot; featured Petrucci&#x27;s use of a seven-string guitar for the first time, establishing a more riff-based writing style. &quot;This style would further cement the fusion of metal and progressive music, which is what Dream Theater are known for,&quot; Petrucci said. &quot;I think it paved the way for many of our strongest and heaviest later songs like &#x27;A Change of Seasons&#x27;, &#x27;The Glass Prison&#x27; and &#x27;The Dark Eternal Night&#x27;.&quot; Vocalist James LaBrie described his vocals on &quot;Awake&quot; as &quot;more varied and a lot more aggressive&quot; than on &quot;Images and Words&quot; to the extent that people may think the band had a new singer for the album.

==Recording==
The recording sessions for the album began in May 1994 at One On One Studios in North Hollywood, Los Angeles, with overdub work done at Devonshire Studios in Los Angeles. John Purdell and Duane Baron, whose credits included Ozzy Osbourne&#x27;s &quot;No More Tears&quot; (1991), were hired to produce the album. The band, which had a difficult relationship with David Prater, who produced &quot;Images and Words&quot;, enjoyed working with Purdell and Baron. &quot;I think everyone felt we were able to express ourselves a lot more genuinely,&quot; Petrucci said. &quot;The experience from the road, learning more about our sound and what we like and don&#x27;t like enabled us to be more prepared. The producers were totally into capturing that and being patient with us. So everybody walked away being completely satisfied with their performances and their sounds.&quot; Awake is the band&#x27;s only studio album to date that was not recorded on the east coast of the United States.

===Departure of Moore===
Towards the end of the recording sessions, Kevin Moore announced to his bandmates that he was leaving the band. Petrucci, who was childhood friends with the keyboardist, found the news particularly hard to take. Myung noted that the announcement &quot;didn&#x27;t come out of the blue&quot;. LaBrie noticed changes in Moore at the end of the &quot;Images and Words&quot; tour. &quot;He seemed to be more distant and wrapped up in himself... It wasn&#x27;t that he was rude or unpleasant with anyone,&quot; he said. &quot;But when Mike, John Petrucci and John Myung were in the rehearsal studio putting together the music for &quot;Awake&quot;, he wasn&#x27;t there as he had been in the past. And when he &quot;was&quot; there, the guys told me he&#x27;d be sitting reading a magazine when they were trying to work out riffs.&quot; &quot;After the record was recorded in Los Angeles, he returned to New York, sold his belongings, packed everything into his station wagon and said &#x27;I&#x27;m moving away from Long Island,&#x27;&quot; Dream Theater&#x27;s co-manager Jim Pitulski recalled. &quot;So I asked him where he was moving to, and he said, &#x27;I&#x27;ll let you know when I get there.&#x27; He really had no idea what he was doing and he just started driving across the country. I kind of admired that.&quot;

Moore stated that he decided to leave because his approach to writing music had changed. He had become more interested in writing and recording his own material. Myung said that Moore left the band out of &quot;peace of mind and what he wanted to do musically that he couldn&#x27;t do in the band&quot;. The band&#x27;s business manager, Rob Shore, suggested that the idea of prolonged touring was a contributing factor in Moore&#x27;s decision. Describing Moore as &quot;a very private person&quot;, Portnoy thought that he might have left because &quot;the whole machine of the music business just wasn&#x27;t his cup of tea&quot;. When Moore announced his decision to leave, he was single, while LaBrie was married, Portnoy and Petrucci had girlfriends and Myung, according to Portnoy, &quot;was kind of in his own world&quot;. Portnoy speculated that any resentment or jealousy Moore felt because of this may have influenced his decision. After leaving Dream Theater, Moore continued to release music, musically far-removed from his work with the band.

===Mixing===
&quot;Awake&quot; was mixed at Unique Studios, New York City. When mixing, Purdell and Baron were initially joined by the remaining members of the band. &quot;We were all in the studio when it first started and it was just unfair to the producers,&quot; vocalist James LaBrie said. &quot;Obviously each guy was focusing on his instrument, so it was like &#x27;Wait, I want me up more!&#x27; So they were trying to please everyone and you just can&#x27;t do that.&quot; The band had to be banned from the mixing sessions to allow Purdell and Baron to mix the album to a high enough standard. &quot;The one great thing, though – even though we were out of the studio – was that they were aware of what we wanted and didn&#x27;t want,&quot; LaBrie said. &quot;When David Prater mixed &quot;Images and Words&quot; it was really unfortunate because he forgot to bring some sections out and he really didn&#x27;t understand what we wanted from the final music. When Duane and John went in, they knew everything that needed to be there and how we wanted it to be represented.&quot;

==Songs==
===&quot;6:00&quot; and &quot;Innocence Faded&quot;===
The album&#x27;s opening track, &quot;6:00&quot;, features lyrics written by Moore, hinting at the growing distance between him and the rest of the band. Petrucci wrote the lyrics of &quot;Innocence Faded&quot;, inspired by his deteriorating friendship with Moore. &quot;The way I wrote lyrics a lot of the time is that I&#x27;ll take an initial spark of an idea... But then I&#x27;ll kind of generalize and add in other situations,&quot; Petrucci said. &quot;So I couldn&#x27;t say it was solely about that, but it was definitely inspired by that. There was a feeling of it not being the same way it had been, and the realization that things were not always going to remain the same.&quot;

===&quot;Caught in a Web&quot;===
According to James LaBrie, &quot;Caught in a Web&quot; is about a protagonist that has finally determined to live the way they want, after being told by society they have to live their life a certain way. He says it deals with &quot;... a person that&#x27;s... it&#x27;s not male or female, it could be either. And it&#x27;s... a person who has suppressed their feelings for so long and has finally had enough of it and feels that the only way that they can really live life to its fullest is to live from the inside out. And that&#x27;s basically what this person has come to terms with. And they&#x27;re sick of society inducements and they feel the only way that they can go on with life is to live it the way they feel is the truth...&quot;

===&quot;A Mind Beside Itself&quot; trilogy: &quot;Erotomania&quot;, &quot;Voices&quot;, and &quot;The Silent Man&quot;===

&quot;Erotomania&quot;, &quot;Voices&quot; and &quot;The Silent Man&quot; form a three-part suite titled &quot;A Mind Beside Itself&quot;. Portnoy stated that the instrumental &quot;Erotomania&quot; was written &quot;off the cuff&quot; as &quot;a bit of a joke and parody&quot;. Petrucci penned the lyrics to &quot;Voices&quot;, dealing with the subject of mental illness. He researched schizophrenia and similar disorders and used religious terms &quot;to make things more vivid&quot;. &quot;When I was writing it, I saw these terms and medical things that were just brilliant,&quot; he said. &quot;Like there was a guy who felt that his skin was inside out. I read that and was like &#x27;Oh my God! That&#x27;s unbelievable; I&#x27;ve got to write about that.&#x27;&quot; Petrucci wrote the music and lyrics to the acoustic &quot;The Silent Man&quot;. LaBrie described the lyrics as dealing with &quot;communication breakdown, for instance between a father and a son. We feel that we have to play certain roles when around one of our parents, and we never really get to know the real person. I&#x27;m lucky that I behave with my own father like I would a friend. We can joke around and go for a beer.&quot;

===&quot;The Mirror&quot;===
Portnoy wrote the lyrics to &quot;The Mirror&quot;, describing his battle with alcoholism. He would return to the subject on later Dream Theater albums with the group&#x27;s so-called &quot;Twelve-step Suite.&quot;

Notably, although this is the first song released on a studio album with lyrics fully written by Portnoy, he had previously written part of the lyrics for Take the Time on &quot;Images and Words&quot;.

===&quot;Lie&quot;===

&quot;Lie&quot;, the lead single from &quot;Awake&quot;, demonstrates the heavier, darker style of the album. The song is a live staple of the band. &quot;Lie&quot; was originally part of &quot;The Mirror&quot;, but LaBrie thought it was strong enough to be a song in itself. &quot;I remember one of the first tapes [the band] sent me to start jamming with up in Canada was &#x27;The Mirror&#x27;,&quot; LaBrie said. &quot;We used to jam instrumentally to it on the last tour and then we built it into a song, with the lyrics and melodies but also within the song was &#x27;Lie&#x27;. I heard this groove and I was going &#x27;Oh my God, that&#x27;s a song in itself!&#x27; So I called up the guys and said &#x27;Man, I really feel strong about this song. Can&#x27;t we take that groove and build a song?&#x27;&quot;

===&quot;Lifting Shadows Off a Dream&quot;===
&quot;Lifting Shadows Off a Dream&quot; began as a poem and two chords brought to the band by Myung. &quot;We worked on it, racked our brains, recorded the jam and by the end of the night we were like &#x27;Ahh fuck it. This sucks,&#x27;&quot; Petrucci recalled. &quot;We came by the next day, listened to the recording and thought it could be really cool. All of a sudden it evolved into this song.&quot;

===&quot;Scarred&quot;===
The lyrics to &quot;Scarred&quot; were initially inspired by a mishearing of the lyrics to The Clash&#x27;s &quot;Rock the Casbah&quot;. The song eventually took on a darker tone as the tempo changed and guitarist John Petrucci began writing lyrics about depression. The lines inspired by &quot;Rock the Casbah&quot;, while present on the working demo, were removed entirely for the final release.

===&quot;Space-Dye Vest&quot;===

&quot;Space-Dye Vest&quot; was written by Moore, who brought the piece into the studio as a completed song.

==Artwork==
Larry Freemantle, who had designed the cover of &quot;Images and Words&quot;, provided the artwork for &quot;Awake&quot;. As with &quot;Images and Words&quot;, the band instructed Freemantle to include several lyrical references in the cover, such as a clock showing the time 6:00, a mirror and a spider in the middle of a web. &quot;The band were very definite about what they wanted, and where they wanted it,&quot; Freemantle said. &quot;The mirror was to be buried in the sand with a factory in the background, so it was just a case of putting it together.&quot; Access Images, the company Freemantle had used for &quot;Images and Words&quot;, had broken up, meaning that he had to put the cover together using stock images himself. &quot;It was done really quickly and I always felt frustrated with that sleeve as I lost too much time on it,&quot; Freemantle said. &quot;I was always up against deadlines on certain things and it got away from me.&quot;

==Release and promotion==
&quot;Awake&quot; was released on October 4, 1994, through East West Records. LaBrie considered the album&#x27;s title to be &quot;the perfect word to describe the album&#x27;s lyrics. What we&#x27;re basically talking about is the awareness of your existence - becoming closer and more in touch with yourself and ultimately discovering what works best for you as an individual as you try to get through life.&quot; Portnoy dedicated the album to his biggest inspiration, Frank Zappa, who died in 1993.

The album sold 36,160 copies the first week it was released. &quot;Lie&quot;, the album&#x27;s lead single, was released in late September. The accompanying music video featured the band, then a four-piece, playing the track at various locations in New York City, including the Brooklyn Bridge, Tribeca and a tunnel in Manhattan (which had to be temporarily closed in order to complete the shoot). It was hoped that &quot;Lie&quot; would be as successful as &quot;Pull Me Under&quot; had been, but the single failed to make an impact on the charts. &quot;Caught in a Web&quot; and &quot;The Silent Man&quot; were the album&#x27;s second and third singles respectively. Portnoy was keen to direct the music video for &quot;The Silent Man&quot;, but East West only offered him a co-directing credit with Pamela Birkhead. On the day of the shoot, Portnoy became violently ill, and when not needed to perform rested in his tour bus bunk.

==Touring==

With Moore no longer a member of Dream Theater, the band needed to find a replacement keyboardist for the forthcoming world tour in support of &quot;Awake&quot;. Before the tour started, the band had a headlining concert on September 9, 1994, at the Foundations Forum in Burbank, California. The album was to be unveiled in a live setting for the first time. Jordan Rudess&#x27;s audition impressed the band, with Portnoy claiming that it had &quot;blown his mind&quot; and that Rudess was the &quot;best keyboard player we&#x27;d ever seen&quot;. Rudess accepted the band&#x27;s offer to perform with them at the Burbank show, but decided against joining the band for the entire tour. At the same time, he had received an offer to perform with the Dixie Dregs for shorter runs of shows and had a job with Kurzweil. Rudess also had a young family and was unsure if Dream Theater &quot;was just going to be a flash in the pan&quot;. &quot;I decided I would be better off going with the Dregs, continuing with Kurzweil, and being around for my family as much as possible,&quot; Rudess said. The show was not a success; the band were nervous of playing without Moore and were out of practice from not having played live for some time. Rudess eventually joined Dream Theater as a full band member in 1999.

The band held another round of auditions and were impressed with Derek Sherinian. Sherinian, who studied at Berklee College of Music the year before Petrucci, Portnoy, and Myung did, had previously played with Alice Cooper and Kiss and enjoyed similar music to the other members of Dream Theater. He was offered the position on a trial basis at the beginning of October 1994, giving him just two weeks to learn two hours of highly complex music. &quot;It&#x27;s one thing going in to play for an artist with hit songs that you&#x27;ve heard since you were a kid, and the songs are ingrained in your mind,&quot; Sherinian said. &quot;It was another thing altogether going in with music you&#x27;ve never heard before that is totally off the charts as far as technical prowess... But it is amazing what one will do to ascend... when I was in New York at the rehearsals, I would play the songs at night over and over on a loop so that I would be subliminally programmed and it would ingrain it in my head.&quot; Sherinian was officially asked to join the band as a full member in February 1995.

The US leg of the Waking Up The World tour began on October 20, 1994, and finished on December 9. Over Christmas, LaBrie went on holiday to Cuba with his wife, where he had violent food poisoning. Upon his return home he consulted an ears, nose, and throat specialist, who told LaBrie that he had ruptured his vocal cords, advising him not to sing for six months to a year. &quot;I was in total shock and devastated,&quot; LaBrie said. &quot;On the US leg I had been so psyched and couldn&#x27;t wait to blow everyone away around the rest of the world. We weren&#x27;t in a position for me to take a six-month break so I had to keep touring.&quot; LaBrie was able to continue performing, but his voice became unpredictable. &quot;It was absolutely miserable, and it was an extremely dark and depressing period for me,&quot; he recalled. &quot;Literally every fucking night on the European leg, I wouldn&#x27;t know if my voice would be there or if it would cooperate... I didn&#x27;t feel that my voice really started to come back until maybe the &quot;Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence&quot; tour in 2002. That&#x27;s when I &quot;started&quot; to feel my range and strength coming back.&quot;

The Great Hanshin earthquake struck Japan while Dream Theater were touring there. Although none of the band was injured, they seriously considered calling off the tour, but only ended up canceling one show. The band held a minute&#x27;s silence at every show in Japan in memory of those who had died. During the soundchecks for the Japanese shows, the band rehearsed a series of cover songs. These were performed at a special covers-only show in Ronnie Scott&#x27;s Jazz Club, London. The show, performed to an invitation-only audience of three hundred, featured guest musicians such as Barney Greenway, Steve Hogarth, Steve Rothery and Steve Howe. A selection of covers and medleys performed by Dream Theater at this show were released on &quot;A Change of Seasons&quot;.

==Reception==
&quot;Awake&quot; peaked at 32 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, remaining in the charts for six weeks. This would remain the band&#x27;s highest-charting release in the US until &quot;Systematic Chaos&quot; in 2007, which was eventually topped by 2009&#x27;s &quot;Black Clouds &amp; Silver Linings&quot;, which peaked at No. 6. The album peaked in the top 20 in four countries. Derek Oliver, Dream Theater&#x27;s label representative considered the album to be a commercial failure. This led to the band once again working with David Prater on &quot;A Change of Seasons&quot; and to the record label putting increasing pressure on the band to make songs on their next studio album, &quot;Falling into Infinity&quot;, more commercial and radio-friendly.
&quot;Awake&quot; received acclaim from music critics. &quot;Q&quot; wrote that &quot;fans of Marillion may well love this, and even the sceptical listener can enjoy the crunching, radio-friendly choruses of &quot;Scarred&quot; and &quot;Caught in a Web&quot;.&quot; &quot;Guitar World&quot; ranked the album as one of the top ten releases of the year, stating that &quot;this shred party left me punch drunk and, for once in my life, fully &quot;Awake&quot;.&quot; &quot;Metal Hammer&quot; dismissed &quot;Awake&quot; as &quot;musical masturbation&quot;: &quot;Progressive rock is basically a very adolescent notion of what &#x27;grown up&#x27; music might sound like - more notes, longer solos and, best/worst of all, convoluted concepts... Their propensity for pomposity extends to the ballad &quot;Silent Man&quot;, which would probably like to be Queensrÿche&#x27;s &quot;Silent Lucidity&quot; but in fact sounds like Stryper on a particularly pious day&quot;. The album has since sold nearly 400,000 copies.

Later reviews were more favorable. Reviewers praised the album&#x27;s production, noting the album is darker and heavier than previous Dream Theater releases. The musicianship of the band has been praised. Phil Carter of AllMusic highlighted Petrucci and Portnoy&#x27;s performances; Metal Storm praised LaBrie and Portnoy; Murat Batmaz of Sea of Tranquility praised all the performances, but singled out Moore&#x27;s contribution as &quot;immense&quot; and complimented him on &quot;a lucid layer of atmosphere around [the album] built by none other than Kevin Moore.&quot; Carter ranked &quot;Lie&quot;, &quot;Scarred&quot;, &quot;Caught in a Web&quot; and &quot;Space-Dye Vest&quot; as the best tracks. Metal Storm praised &quot;6:00&quot; and the &quot;A Mind Beside Itself&quot; suite.

In a 1995 Guitar World interview, Chuck Schuldiner praised &quot;Awake&quot; and the band Dream Theater in general, claiming that &quot;their music is very complex, but they definitely have hooks, which is crucial to making music listenable&quot;, citing them as an influence on the more progressive nature of his band Death&#x27;s later material as opposed to the stagnant death metal scene at the time. In 2005, &quot;Awake&quot; was ranked number 390 in &quot;Rock Hard&quot; magazine&#x27;s book of &quot;The 500 Greatest Rock &amp; Metal Albums of All Time&quot;. In July 2014, the album was ranked number 1 in &quot;Guitar World&quot; magazine&#x27;s list of &quot;Superunknown: 50 Iconic Albums That Defined 1994&quot;.

==Track listing==

==Personnel==
;Dream Theater
*James LaBrie – lead vocals
*John Petrucci – guitars
*John Myung – bass
*Kevin Moore – keyboards
*Mike Portnoy – drums

;Production
*John Purdell, Duane Baron – engineering, mixing, producers
*Mike Stock, Greg Cathcart – engineering assistance
*Ed Miller – mixing assistance
*Ted Jensen – mastering
*Rich Kern – programming (&quot;Space-Dye Vest&quot;)
*Prix-mo – dialogue (&quot;Voices&quot;)
*Larry Freemantle, Donald May – art direction
*Dennis Keeley – photography
*Dream Theater, Dan Muro – cover concept
==Chart positions==


==Certifications==


==References==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q484344" start="44" end="61" title="progressive metal" label="progressive metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q162586" start="67" end="80" title="Dream Theater" label="Dream Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576206" start="119" end="136" title="East West Records" label="East West Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q347159" start="206" end="217" title="Kevin Moore" label="Kevin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q643906" start="527" end="543" title="Images and Words" label="Images and Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q67864730" start="588" end="601" title="Pull Me Under" label="Pull Me Under"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="653" end="658" title="heavy metal music" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253559" start="712" end="724" title="John Purdell" label="John Purdell"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="741" end="749" title="record producer" label="produced"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="751" end="761" title="audio engineering" label="engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="766" end="771" title="audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="945" end="951" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1126" end="1151" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q826828" start="1246" end="1262" title="Systematic Chaos" label="Systematic Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q834957" start="1593" end="1616" title="Falling into Infinity" label="subsequent studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1811" end="1824" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q347159" start="1931" end="1942" title="Kevin Moore" label="Kevin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q211976" start="2127" end="2140" title="John Petrucci" label="John Petrucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q221468" start="2241" end="2253" title="Mike Portnoy" label="Mike Portnoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q280734" start="2291" end="2301" title="John Myung" label="John Myung"/>
<link wikidata="Q20378" start="3023" end="3040" title="alternative metal" label="alternative metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q241662" start="3045" end="3057" title="groove metal" label="groove metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096201" start="3220" end="3239" title="seven-string guitar" label="seven-string guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="3280" end="3284" title="riff" label="riff"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="3368" end="3379" title="progressive rock" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q300352" start="3544" end="3563" title="A Change of Seasons" label="A Change of Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3577" end="3593" title="Twelve-step Suite#The Glass Prison" label="The Glass Prison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3610" end="3632" title="Systematic Chaos#The Dark Eternal Night" label="The Dark Eternal Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q296039" start="3655" end="3667" title="James LaBrie" label="James LaBrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319697" start="3972" end="4000" title="North Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="North Hollywood, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760913" start="4007" end="4014" title="overdub" label="overdub"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="4050" end="4061" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253559" start="4063" end="4075" title="John Purdell" label="John Purdell"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="4116" end="4129" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q845206" start="4143" end="4156" title="No More Tears" label="No More Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="4185" end="4192" title="record producer" label="produce"/>
<link wikidata="Q188886" start="5861" end="5874" title="station wagon" label="station wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q296039" start="7560" end="7572" title="James LaBrie" label="James LaBrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q203005" start="10126" end="10131" title="suite (music)" label="suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12626468" start="10145" end="10165" title="A Mind Beside Itself" label="A Mind Beside Itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="10421" end="10434" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="11353" end="11363" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083366" start="11464" end="11481" title="Twelve-step Suite" label="Twelve-step Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q305520" start="13127" end="13142" title="Rock the Casbah" label="Rock the Casbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634416" start="14282" end="14294" title="stock photography" label="stock images"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="15025" end="15036" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q258671" start="15124" end="15127" title="Lie (Dream Theater single)" label="Lie"/>
<link wikidata="Q125006" start="15335" end="15350" title="Brooklyn Bridge" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q766014" start="15352" end="15359" title="Tribeca" label="Tribeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="15376" end="15385" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474535" start="16255" end="16272" title="Foundations Forum" label="Foundations Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="16276" end="16295" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q175102" start="16364" end="16377" title="Jordan Rudess" label="Jordan Rudess"/>
<link wikidata="Q906619" start="16754" end="16765" title="Dixie Dregs" label="Dixie Dregs"/>
<link wikidata="Q495548" start="16811" end="16819" title="Kurzweil Music Systems" label="Kurzweil"/>
<link wikidata="Q335598" start="17373" end="17388" title="Derek Sherinian" label="Derek Sherinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q248970" start="17416" end="17440" title="Berklee College of Music" label="Berklee College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="17518" end="17530" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="17535" end="17539" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="18541" end="18545" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q831548" start="19454" end="19485" title="Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence" label="Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q214866" start="19599" end="19623" title="Great Hanshin earthquake" label="Great Hanshin earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q862842" start="19907" end="19917" title="soundcheck" label="soundcheck"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="19974" end="19985" title="cover version" label="cover songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296978" start="20041" end="20070" title="Ronnie Scott&amp;#x27;s Jazz Club" label="Ronnie Scott&amp;#x27;s Jazz Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="20072" end="20078" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q732653" start="20182" end="20197" title="Barney Greenway" label="Barney Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q935245" start="20199" end="20212" title="Steve Hogarth" label="Steve Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q463454" start="20214" end="20227" title="Steve Rothery" label="Steve Rothery"/>
<link wikidata="Q312691" start="20232" end="20242" title="Steve Howe (guitarist)" label="Steve Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q300352" start="20341" end="20360" title="A Change of Seasons" label="A Change of Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="20421" end="20446" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q300352" start="20935" end="20954" title="A Change of Seasons" label="A Change of Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q834957" start="21073" end="21094" title="Falling into Infinity" label="Falling into Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="21199" end="21200" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q678410" start="21232" end="21241" title="Marillion" label="Marillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="21411" end="21423" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q646424" start="21515" end="21520" title="shred guitar" label="shred"/>
<link wikidata="Q248283" start="21610" end="21622" title="Metal Hammer" label="Metal Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q462380" start="21990" end="22001" title="Queensrÿche" label="Queensrÿche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388633" start="22015" end="22030" title="Silent Lucidity" label="Silent Lucidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052564" start="22061" end="22068" title="Stryper" label="Stryper"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="22374" end="22382" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q258671" start="22748" end="22751" title="Lie (Dream Theater single)" label="Lie"/>
<link wikidata="Q266544" start="22979" end="22995" title="Chuck Schuldiner" label="Chuck Schuldiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192843" start="23264" end="23269" title="Death (metal band)" label="Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="23319" end="23330" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q455803" start="23408" end="23417" title="Rock Hard (magazine)" label="Rock Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="23567" end="23579" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q296039" start="23722" end="23734" title="James LaBrie" label="James LaBrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q211976" start="23750" end="23763" title="John Petrucci" label="John Petrucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q280734" start="23775" end="23785" title="John Myung" label="John Myung"/>
<link wikidata="Q347159" start="23794" end="23805" title="Kevin Moore" label="Kevin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q221468" start="23819" end="23831" title="Mike Portnoy" label="Mike Portnoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253559" start="23854" end="23866" title="John Purdell" label="John Purdell"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="23882" end="23893" title="audio engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884071" start="23895" end="23901" title="mixing engineer" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267061" start="23997" end="24007" title="Ted Jensen" label="Ted Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="24010" end="24019" title="mastering engineer" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289786" start="24033" end="24044" title="music programming" label="programming"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795141" wikidata="Q1032103" url="?curid=795141" title="HMS Suffolk">
<text>Six ships of the Royal Navy have borne the name HMS &quot;Suffolk&quot;, after the county of Suffolk:

* was a 70-gun third rate launched in 1680, rebuilt in 1699, 1718 and 1739, and broken up in 1765.
* was a 30-gun storeship purchased in 1694 and sold in 1713.
* was a 74-gun third rate launched in 1765 and sold in 1803.
* HMS &quot;Suffolk&quot; was a prison ship launched in 1775 as the 74-gun third rate . She became a prison ship in 1797, was renamed HMS &quot;Suffolk&quot; in 1805, and was sold in 1816.
* was a armoured cruiser launched in 1903 and sold in 1920.
* was a heavy cruiser launched in 1926 and sold for breaking up in 1948.

==See also==
*A fictional HMS &quot;Suffolk&quot;, played by the Type 23 frigate , appeared in the ITV drama &quot;Making Waves&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="17" end="27" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032103" start="48" end="65" title="HMS Suffolk" label="HMS &amp;quot;Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="93" end="100" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q892492" start="118" end="128" title="third rate" label="third rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150726" start="217" end="226" title="storeship" label="storeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040250" start="326" end="349" title="HMS Sultan (1775)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Suffolk&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498196" start="356" end="367" title="prison ship" label="prison ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q847478" start="521" end="537" title="armoured cruiser" label="armoured cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q898771" start="581" end="594" title="heavy cruiser" label="heavy cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264384" start="712" end="727" title="Type 23 frigate" label="Type 23 frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="746" end="749" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739653" start="756" end="780" title="Making Waves (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Making Waves&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795143" wikidata="Q742145" url="?curid=795143" title="Stone Arch Bridge (Minneapolis)">
<text>The Stone Arch Bridge is a former railroad bridge crossing the Mississippi River at Saint Anthony Falls in downtown Minneapolis, Minnesota. It is the only arched bridge made of stone on the entire Mississippi River. It is the second oldest bridge on the river next to Eads Bridge. The bridge was built to connect the railway system to the new Union Depot, which at that time was planned to be built between Hennepin Avenue and Nicollet Avenue. The bridge was completed in 1883, costing $650,000 at the time ($ today). 117 Portland Avenue is the general address of the historic complex.

Located between the 3rd Avenue Bridge and the I-35W Saint Anthony Falls Bridge, the Stone Arch Bridge was built in 1883 by railroad tycoon James J. Hill for his Great Northern Railway, and accessed the former passenger station located about a mile to the west, on the west bank of the river. 
For a time, the bridge was dubbed &quot;Hill&#x27;s Folly&quot; until the value of Hill&#x27;s new bridge as a passenger rail link became evident.

The structure is now used as a pedestrian and bicycle bridge. It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1971 as a part of the Saint Anthony Falls Historic District, (District #71000438). The bridge was designated as a National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark in 1974.

==History==
In 1880, Minneapolis was a bustling city with major commerce mostly located on the west bank of the Mississippi River, while smaller, up-and-coming businesses were on the east. With the merging of the Village of St. Anthony on the east side, Minneapolis continuously grew in population, and the Hennepin Avenue suspension bridge served as the sole thoroughfare for commuters and pedestrians. At that time, the Hennepin Avenue bridge was overused and in desperate need of upkeep. The city&#x27;s network of railroads, which was crucial for urbanization, was also located on the east side of the river. With the rapid increase in commercialization, Minneapolis businessmen sought a plan to accommodate the heavy flow of traffic, and immediately considered the railroad mogul James J. Hill for the task. The idea was to build a railroad depot, similar to the St. Paul Union Depot, along the intersections of Hennepin Avenue and Nicollet Avenue in downtown Minneapolis, which would also connect to the Manitoba Road tracks, eventually developing into the Great Northern Railway.

The initial planning was conducted during a meeting held near the end of 1881. The project would include building a terminal in downtown Minneapolis and connecting the rails to the Manitoba Railway, the execution for which was accomplished by the Minneapolis Union Railway company, a team that was built for the sole purpose of overseeing the project. The stockholders met for the first time immediately the following year and Col. Charles C. Smith was selected as the head engineer.

The bridge has been altered somewhat from its original appearance. When the Upper Lock and Dam were built at Saint Anthony Falls, two of the arches were replaced with a moveable truss so barges could pass through the lock. Later, in 1965, flood waters undermined three of the piers and caused the bridge to sag fourteen inches. The bridge was repaired by strengthening the piers and reinforcing underneath two of the arches.

When it was in rail service, the bridge carried trains of many railroads to and from the Minneapolis Great Northern Depot, including the Great Northern Railway&#x27;s &quot;Empire Builder&quot;. The bridge ceased to be used as a railroad bridge in 1978, and after a period of disuse, was repaired and adapted in the early 1990s to its present use. The bike and walking trails across the bridge are integrated into the city&#x27;s park and trail system, and form part of the St Anthony Falls Heritage Trail, which includes interpretive plaques describing the history of the area. The most recent renovations—including indirect lighting—were completed in late 2005. The lighting was paid for by private donations.

During the summer months, the Stone Arch Bridge is a focus of numerous festivals in the area of St. Anthony Main and Historic Main Street. The Stone Arch Festival of the Arts occurs Father&#x27;s Day weekend and features many local artists. Fireworks displays on the Fourth of July and during the Minneapolis Aquatennial in late July also bring crowds; fireworks are launched from nearby Hennepin Island. The bridge offers views of the Minneapolis skyline, Pillsbury &quot;A&quot; Mill, the Mill City Museum, and many other places in the district, and is near both the restaurants of Main St SE and the Guthrie Theater.

===Timeline===
The Minnesota Historical Society and the Great Northern Railway provided the following important historical timeline:
1881 - James J. Hill commissioned the Stone Arch Bridge project 

1882 - The initial stockholders meeting was held and Col. Charles C. Smith was assigned as the construction&#x27;s head engineer

1883 - After 22 months of intensive work, the Stone Arch Bridge was completed 

1885 - The Union Depot at the heart of Minneapolis was completed and substantially increased the passenger volume
1907-1911 - Renovations were done to improve the bridge&#x27;s drainage system and strengthen its structural support in order to transport heavier loads

1913 - The new Great Northern Depot, north of Hennepin Avenue, replaced the Union Depot

1925 - Another renovation conducted to increase the width to allow bigger trains that would house more passengers

1961- 1963 - The lock and dam was built at St. Anthony falls which required arch number 13 and 14 to be replaced with a 200-foot Warren truss and allow barges to pass 

1965 - The bridge underwent renovation when the Mississippi River flooded, causing the seventh pier to sink about 14 inches

1971 - The bridge became part of the National Register of Historic Places 

1978 - The last passenger train crossed the Stone Arch Bridge 

1978 - The Great Northern Depot was razed

1989 - The bridge was bought by the Hennepin County Regional Railroad Authority 

1992 - The ownership was transferred to Minnesota Department of Transportation 

1994 - The bridge was converted into a biking/walking path by the Minneapolis Park Board 

==Design and construction==

The Stone Arch Bridge, commissioned by James J Hill and designed by Charles C Smith, was built between 1882 and 1883. Hill originally intended to build an iron bridge spanning the Mississippi at Nicollet Island, but Smith discovered that pursuing that design would be detrimental to St Anthony Falls’ eroding sandstone. Smith&#x27;s design was pioneering and the signature arches were designed to account for the falls and the surrounding topography. The stone used to make the bridge was locally sourced, including granite from Sauk Rapids for the piers and magnesium limestone from Mankato and Iowa for the upper portion.

In the 130 years of its existence the bridge has undergone a number of upgrades and repairs. In 1925 the width of the bridge was increased to allow for larger railcars. Then in 1994 the bridge was converted to a pedestrian walkway.

==Heritage trail plaque==
A plaque near the bridge explains that the bridge was built for the &quot;Manitoba Line&quot; (St. Paul, Minneapolis and Manitoba Railway), which would be used to bring wheat from the Red River valley and Canada to the Minneapolis mills. It remains as a monument to James J. Hill, his vision, and is a National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark.

==See also==
*List of crossings of the Upper Mississippi River
*List of shared-use paths in Minneapolis

==References==
* Olsen, Byron D. (1998). &quot;Great Northern Railway 1945-1970 Photo Archive Volume 2&quot;. 

==Image gallery: the Stone Arch Bridge==

==External links==
*Stone Arch Bridge, National Park Service
*Photograph
*Stone Arch Festival of the Arts
*Minneapolis-riverfront.com The city&#x27;s official promotional site for the riverfront district.
*Interactive 360 Degree Virtual Tour featuring the Stone Arch Bridge
*VIDEO: Hill&#x27;s Folly: James J Hill and the Stone Arch Bridge</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q742145" start="4" end="21" title="Stone Arch Bridge (Minneapolis)" label="Stone Arch Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="63" end="80" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752963" start="84" end="103" title="Saint Anthony Falls" label="Saint Anthony Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="116" end="138" title="Minneapolis, Minnesota" label="Minneapolis, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239907" start="268" end="279" title="Eads Bridge" label="Eads Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292302" start="633" end="665" title="I-35W Saint Anthony Falls Bridge" label="I-35W Saint Anthony Falls Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q771991" start="726" end="739" title="James J. Hill" label="James J. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272318" start="748" end="770" title="Great Northern Railway (U.S.)" label="Great Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="1110" end="1146" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752963" start="1172" end="1191" title="Saint Anthony Falls" label="Saint Anthony Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573251" start="1264" end="1308" title="National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark" label="National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2968" end="2986" title="Saint Anthony Falls#Locks and dams" label="Upper Lock and Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867988" start="3407" end="3439" title="Minneapolis Great Northern Depot" label="Minneapolis Great Northern Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q197764" start="3491" end="3505" title="Empire Builder" label="Empire Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q134847" start="4213" end="4230" title="Father&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Father&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="4298" end="4312" title="Fourth of July" label="Fourth of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867957" start="4328" end="4351" title="Minneapolis Aquatennial" label="Minneapolis Aquatennial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4419" end="4434" title="Hennepin Island" label="Hennepin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095095" start="4488" end="4516" title="Pillsbury &amp;quot;A&amp;quot; Mill" label="Pillsbury &amp;quot;A&amp;quot; Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550380" start="4522" end="4538" title="Mill City Museum" label="Mill City Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027239" start="4634" end="4649" title="Guthrie Theater" label="Guthrie Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q15458970" start="7272" end="7314" title="St. Paul, Minneapolis and Manitoba Railway" label="St. Paul, Minneapolis and Manitoba Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q156006" start="7361" end="7370" title="Red River of the North" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="7382" end="7388" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573251" start="7479" end="7523" title="National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark" label="National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614816" start="7540" end="7588" title="List of crossings of the Upper Mississippi River" label="List of crossings of the Upper Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851285" start="7590" end="7629" title="List of shared-use paths in Minneapolis" label="List of shared-use paths in Minneapolis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795149" wikidata="Q300352" url="?curid=795149" title="A Change of Seasons">
<text>A Change of Seasons is the first EP by American progressive metal band Dream Theater, first released on September 19, 1995, through East West Records. It comprises the 23-minute title track and a collection of live cover songs performed at a fan club concert on January 31, 1995, at Ronnie Scott&#x27;s Jazz Club in London.

The title track was recorded at BearTracks Studios in New York and was originally slated to be released on the 1992 album &quot;Images and Words&quot;, but was instead re-recorded and released as an EP. Although the song includes audio samples from the 1989 film &quot;Dead Poets Society&quot; (as well as quotes from the 1648 Robert Herrick poem, &quot;To the Virgins, to Make Much of Time&quot;), the lyrics, written by drummer Mike Portnoy, were not inspired by the film. Instead, &quot;it&#x27;s about the cycle of life. Basically, I took a lot of personal incidents, like losing my mother and a couple of things that happened in my life, and I wrote them into the lyrics.&quot; The back cover has a calendar displaying the date November 16, the date Portnoy&#x27;s mother died. &quot;A Change of Seasons&quot; was also the first Dream Theater release featuring Derek Sherinian on keyboards.

Excerpts from the title track were used by NBC in a segment on downhill skiing during the 2002 Winter Olympics.

Although the record is labeled as an EP, its running time of 57:30 makes it significantly longer than a standard EP, and even many LPs, including Dream Theater&#x27;s first two albums. According to Portnoy, &quot;It was important for us and the label for it not to be perceived as the latest studio record. That&#x27;s why we tagged it an EP.&quot;

== Track listing ==
== Credits ==

=== Dream Theater ===
*James LaBrie – lead vocals
*John Myung – bass
*John Petrucci – guitar
*Mike Portnoy – drums
*Derek Sherinian – keyboards

=== Production ===
*David Prater – producer, mixing
*Doug Oberkircher – engineer (track 1), mixing
*Andy Scarth – engineer (tracks 2-5)
*Robert Siciliano – assistant engineer
*Ted Jensen – mastering at Sterling Sound, NYC
*Mike Portnoy – cover concept
*Larry Freemantle – art direction
*Joseph Cultice – photography

== Chart performance ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="33" end="35" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q484344" start="48" end="65" title="progressive metal" label="progressive metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q162586" start="71" end="84" title="Dream Theater" label="Dream Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576206" start="132" end="149" title="East West Records" label="East West Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="215" end="226" title="cover version" label="cover songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296978" start="283" end="312" title="Ronnie Scott&amp;#x27;s Jazz Club" label="Ronnie Scott&amp;#x27;s Jazz Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="316" end="322" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876347" start="357" end="375" title="BearTracks Studios" label="BearTracks Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q643906" start="453" end="469" title="Images and Words" label="Images and Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q106316" start="594" end="612" title="Dead Poets Society" label="Dead Poets Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q553554" start="652" end="666" title="Robert Herrick (poet)" label="Robert Herrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196945" start="679" end="715" title="To the Virgins, to Make Much of Time" label="To the Virgins, to Make Much of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q221468" start="755" end="767" title="Mike Portnoy" label="Mike Portnoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q335598" start="1191" end="1206" title="Derek Sherinian" label="Derek Sherinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1265" end="1268" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9668" start="1312" end="1332" title="2002 Winter Olympics" label="2002 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q296039" start="1743" end="1755" title="James LaBrie" label="James LaBrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="1758" end="1769" title="singing" label="lead vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q280734" start="1771" end="1781" title="John Myung" label="John Myung"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="1784" end="1788" title="Bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q211976" start="1790" end="1803" title="John Petrucci" label="John Petrucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="1806" end="1812" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q221468" start="1814" end="1826" title="Mike Portnoy" label="Mike Portnoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="1829" end="1834" title="drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q335598" start="1836" end="1851" title="Derek Sherinian" label="Derek Sherinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="1854" end="1863" title="keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="1900" end="1908" title="Record producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884071" start="1910" end="1916" title="Mixing engineer" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="1937" end="1945" title="Audio engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267061" start="2041" end="2051" title="Ted Jensen" label="Ted Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="2054" end="2063" title="Mastering engineer" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q16649858" start="2067" end="2081" title="Sterling Sound" label="Sterling Sound"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795154" wikidata="Q4837640" url="?curid=795154" title="Babe Adams">
<text>Charles Benjamin &quot;Babe&quot; Adams (May 18, 1882 – July 27, 1968) was an American right-handed pitcher in Major League Baseball (MLB) from 1906 to 1926 who spent nearly his entire career with the Pittsburgh Pirates. Noted for his outstanding control, his career average of 1.29 walks per 9 innings pitched was the second lowest of the 20th century; his mark of 1 walk per 14.6 innings was a modern record until . He shares the Pirates&#x27; franchise record for career victories by a right-hander (194), and holds the team mark for career shutouts (47); from 1926 to 1962, he held the team record for career games pitched (481).

==Early life==
Adams was born in Tipton, Indiana. As a child, he moved to Mount Moriah, Missouri, where baseball was popular. After he was discovered by a Missouri-based scout in 1904, he was signed to play minor league baseball with the Parsons Preachers of the Missouri Valley League in 1905.

==Major league career==
He made his MLB debut on April 18, 1906, with the St. Louis Cardinals, taking the loss in a 4-inning start, but did not pitch again for them. In September 1907, his contract was sold to the Pirates. After going 12–3 with a 1.11 earned run average (ERA) in the regular season, his first full year, Adams became the star of the 1909 World Series after being named the surprise starter of Game 1 following a tip by National League president John Heydler that Adams&#x27; style was similar to that of an AL pitcher whom the Detroit Tigers had difficulty playing against. He won three complete game victories – each of them a six-hitter. With a shutout in Game 7, Adams became the first rookie in World Series history to start and win Game 7, which has only been repeated by John Lackey in 2002. He was also the only member of that team who would be on the Pirates&#x27; World Series champions in 1925. He later won 20 games in both and . An off-year in that saw his ERA rise to 5.72 got him farmed out to the Western Association, but late in he found his stride again and rejoined the Pirates, where he stayed until .

On May 4, 1913, Adams&#x27; third inning triple drove in Billy Kelly for the Pirates only hit and run, Adams held the Cincinnati Reds to only 2 hits and a walk for a 1–0 victory at Redland Field.

Adams was known as an excellent control pitcher. On July 17, 1914, he pitched a 21-inning game against the New York Giants without allowing a single walk, surrendering only 12 hits, but losing 3–1 on Larry Doyle&#x27;s home run in the top of the 21st; it is the longest game without a walk in major league history. Rube Marquard also went the distance for New York to gain the victory, allowing two walks. In , Adams allowed only 18 walks in 263 innings.

In his career, Adams had a 194–140 win–loss record and a 2.76 ERA. His last game was on August 11, 1926; he was released days later after joining a group of players who requested that former manager and team vice president Fred Clarke, who had been openly criticizing manager Bill McKechnie, not be permitted to sit on the bench. He never played another major league game.

Adams was a better than average hitting pitcher in his major league career, compiling a .212 batting average (216-for-1,019) with 79 runs, 3 home runs, 75 RBI and drawing 53 bases on balls. Defensively, he was a better-than-average fielding pitcher, recording a .976 fielding percentage which was 24 points higher than the league average at that position.

==Later life and death==
Adams later managed in the minor leagues, farmed in Mount Moriah, Missouri, and worked as a reporter and foreign correspondent during World War II and the Korean War.

Adams died of throat cancer in Silver Spring, Maryland, at age 86. He was cremated at Fort Lincoln Cemetery in Brentwood, Maryland. He has a memorial stone at Mount Moriah Cemetery, MO.

==References==
==External links==

*Babe Adams at SABR (Baseball BioProject)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4837640" start="0" end="39" title="Babe Adams" label="Charles Benjamin &amp;quot;Babe&amp;quot; Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="100" end="107" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="111" end="132" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="201" end="219" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150471" start="247" end="254" title="strike zone" label="control"/>
<link wikidata="Q587180" start="283" end="288" title="base on balls" label="walks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192188" start="295" end="310" title="innings pitched" label="innings pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="474" end="483" title="win (baseball)" label="victories"/>
<link wikidata="Q262031" start="544" end="551" title="shutout" label="shutout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520118" start="613" end="626" title="games pitched" label="games pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q994988" start="668" end="683" title="Tipton, Indiana" label="Tipton, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q958935" start="709" end="731" title="Mount Moriah, Missouri" label="Mount Moriah, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140053" start="873" end="890" title="Parsons Preachers" label="Parsons Preachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859293" start="898" end="920" title="Missouri Valley League" label="Missouri Valley League"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="1005" end="1024" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="1183" end="1201" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q846847" start="1281" end="1298" title="1909 World Series" label="1909 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="1367" end="1382" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239162" start="1393" end="1405" title="John Heydler" label="John Heydler"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="1475" end="1489" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178824" start="1725" end="1736" title="John Lackey" label="John Lackey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187726" start="1740" end="1744" title="2002 World Series" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561782" start="1847" end="1851" title="1925 World Series" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019154" start="1960" end="1979" title="Western Association" label="Western Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912827" start="2127" end="2138" title="Billy Kelly (baseball)" label="Billy Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="2188" end="2203" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003747" start="2251" end="2264" title="Redland Field" label="Redland Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165879" start="2299" end="2314" title="control pitcher" label="control pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="2374" end="2389" title="New York Giants (NL)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490221" start="2467" end="2478" title="Larry Doyle (baseball)" label="Larry Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375896" start="2582" end="2595" title="Rube Marquard" label="Rube Marquard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494850" start="2946" end="2957" title="Fred Clarke" label="Fred Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q862306" start="2999" end="3013" title="Bill McKechnie" label="Bill McKechnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="3190" end="3205" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="3230" end="3234" title="run (baseball)" label="runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="3238" end="3247" title="home runs" label="home runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="3252" end="3255" title="Run batted in" label="RBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q587180" start="3271" end="3285" title="bases on balls" label="bases on balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q859741" start="3364" end="3383" title="fielding percentage" label="fielding percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q958935" start="3531" end="3553" title="Mount Moriah, Missouri" label="Mount Moriah, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="3634" end="3644" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q755741" start="3678" end="3701" title="Silver Spring, Maryland" label="Silver Spring, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q753912" start="3758" end="3777" title="Brentwood, Maryland" label="Brentwood, Maryland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795155" wikidata="Q7643578" url="?curid=795155" title="Superior Unit Award">
<text>The Superior Unit Award is a decoration of the United States Army which is awarded in peacetime to any unit of the Army which displays outstanding meritorious performance of a difficult and challenging mission carried out under extraordinary circumstances.

The Army Superior Unit Award (ASUA) was created in 1985. The award is composed of a green and red ribbon, enclosed within a gold frame.

==Background==

As part of the Army Cohesion and Stability Study (ARCOST) of 1980, a proposal to adopt the Army Superior Unit Award was forwarded to Major Army Commands (MACOMs) for comment on 18 March 1981. This recommendation was based on the fact that present Army unit awards were for combat service only. While all MACOM and most of the Army Staff supported the proposal, the leadership elected not to approve the new award. In 1984, the Vice Chief of Staff, Army, directed that a Peacetime Unit Award be developed and submitted for approval. In April 1985, the Secretary of the Army (SECARMY) approved the Army Superior Unit Award for meritorious unit performance of a uniquely difficult and challenging mission under extraordinary circumstances that involved the national interest. As a result of the strict criteria and lack of approving awards, the criteria were changed by SECARMY in July 1986. This change deleted the words &quot;unique&quot; and &quot;national interest&quot;. Only two units were awarded the ASUA prior to the revision. The first ASUA was awarded to the 164th Military Police Company, 59th Ordnance Brigade, Miesau, West Germany, in May 1985 for its anti-terrorism work during NATO nuclear operations. The second went to the 3d Battalion, 502d Infantry, 101st Airborne Division. Nearly 200 of the 248 soldiers who were killed in the crash of Arrow Air Flight 1285 in Gander, Newfoundland, were from the battalion and were on their way home in December 1985 from duty with the Multinational Force and Observers in the Sinai Desert.

On 17 September 1991, in a memorandum to the Secretary of the Army, The Adjutant General (TAG) requested approval to create a lapel pin to be worn by all members of units awarded the Army Superior Unit Award. This recommendation was based on the fact that the award was being presented to units with a significant number of civilians assigned and there was no visible means of recognizing them. This change permitted issue of an emblem to both military and civilian personnel. The Secretary of the Army approved the recommendation on 12 December 1991. &quot;Source: United States Army (2009)&quot;

The emblem is worn by all members of a cited organization and is considered an individual decoration for persons in connection with the cited acts and may be worn whether or not they continue as members of the organization. Other personnel may wear this decoration while serving with an organization to indicate the unit has been awarded the Army Superior Unit Award. &quot;Source: United States Army (2009)&quot;

==See also==
*Awards and decorations of the United States military
*Awards and decorations of the United States Army

==References==
==External links==
*Army Regulation 600-8-22 page 86, paragraph 7–16.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7643578" start="4" end="23" title="Superior Unit Award" label="Superior Unit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="47" end="65" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643578" start="262" end="293" title="Superior Unit Award" label="Army Superior Unit Award (ASUA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578927" start="382" end="392" title="gold frame" label="gold frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008856" start="544" end="572" title="Major Command" label="Major Army Commands (MACOMs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180238" start="1766" end="1787" title="Arrow Air Flight 1285" label="Arrow Air Flight 1285"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069653" start="1900" end="1933" title="Multinational Force and Observers" label="Multinational Force and Observers"/>
<link wikidata="Q784242" start="2984" end="3036" title="Awards and decorations of the United States military" label="Awards and decorations of the United States military"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042873" start="3038" end="3086" title="Awards and decorations of the United States Army" label="Awards and decorations of the United States Army"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795156" wikidata="Q834957" url="?curid=795156" title="Falling into Infinity">
<text>Falling into Infinity is the fourth studio album by American progressive metal band Dream Theater, released on September 23, 1997, through EastWest Records. It is the band&#x27;s only studio album to feature keyboardist Derek Sherinian, following the departure of Kevin Moore in 1994.

&quot;Falling into Infinity&quot; was produced by Kevin Shirley. The album&#x27;s writing and pre-production phases were stressful periods for the band, as they were feeling constant pressure from the record label to deliver a more radio-friendly album. It was recorded in June 1997 at Avatar Studios (previously known as Power Station Studios) in Manhattan.

==Background==
Following a brief tour in support of the &quot;A Change of Seasons&quot; EP, Dream Theater entered Dream Factory Studios in East Rutherford, New Jersey, in early 1996 to begin writing material for a new album. It was their first time writing with keyboardist Derek Sherinian, who replaced Kevin Moore in 1994. Around this time, Elektra Records was exerting pressure on the band to write concise, radio-friendly songs. Consequently, creative conflicts arose, with guitarist John Petrucci accepting the label&#x27;s plea for change and drummer Mike Portnoy fighting against it.

For over a year, Dream Theater wrote songs without being given permission to record them; according to Portnoy, at one point they became so frustrated that they considered retirement. In March 1997, the band was finally given the go-ahead to record the new album with Kevin Shirley producing. By May, the band had enough material for a double album but was told to keep it to one disc for budget reasons. As a result, certain songs were not included on the final cut of the album, including &quot;Raise the Knife&quot;, &quot;Where Are You Now&quot;, &quot;Cover My Eyes&quot;, &quot;Speak to Me&quot;, &quot;The Way It Used to Be&quot;, and &quot;Metropolis Pt. 2&quot;, the latter of which was later expanded into its own album, with the rest being included on the 1999 fan club CD &quot;Cleaning Out the Closet&quot;. Shirley made significant alterations to some of what was left on the album; most notably, he took the middle section out of &quot;Burning My Soul&quot; and turned it into what would become &quot;Hell&#x27;s Kitchen&quot;. Shirley also recommended that the band work with Desmond Child to re-write &quot;You or Me&quot;, resulting in Petrucci being flown down to Florida to work on the song with Child. Following the sessions, the song became &quot;You Not Me&quot;.

Actual recording for the album began on June 2 at The Power Station, known then as Avatar Studios from 1996 to 2017 (and reopening in 2020 as Power Station at BerkleeNYC), located at 441 West 53rd Street between Ninth and Tenth Avenues in the Hell&#x27;s Kitchen neighborhood in Manhattan, New York City. In contrast to the difficult writing and pre-production stages, the band considered the recording sessions trouble free and enjoyable. The album, titled &quot;Falling into Infinity&quot;, was completed on July 30. Originally, Petrucci and Portnoy wanted to call it &quot;Stream of Consciousness&quot;, but the rest of the band rejected the name because they felt it was too pompous (although the phrase &quot;Stream of Consciousness&quot; is found in the song &quot;Lines in the Sand&quot; and would later become the title of the instrumental piece on &quot;Train of Thought&quot;). Its eventual title was proposed by Petrucci, and its cover art was designed by Storm Thorgerson.

==Composition==

&quot;Falling into Infinity&quot; is the first Dream Theater album to feature multiple songs with lyrics by Mike Portnoy. Portnoy and the rest of the band were forced to write more lyrics following the departure of Kevin Moore. All of Portnoy&#x27;s lyrics were inspired by his frustration with Elektra Records: &quot;New Millennium&quot; and &quot;Just Let Me Breathe&quot; are aimed at the music industry and label, and &quot;Burning My Soul&quot; targets A&amp;R man Derek Oliver. John Petrucci wrote six lyrics for the album, including those for &quot;Peruvian Skies&quot;; lead singer James LaBrie and bassist John Myung each contributed lyrics to one song each, &quot;Anna Lee&quot; and &quot;Trial of Tears&quot; respectively; while &quot;Hell&#x27;s Kitchen&quot; is an instrumental. Both &quot;Peruvian Skies&quot; and &quot;Anna Lee&quot; deal with the subject of child abuse. As is the case with most Dream Theater albums, the songs were given working titles during production; for example, &quot;Lines in the Sand&quot; and &quot;Burning My Soul&quot; were originally called &quot;Cat&#x27;s Tail&quot; and &quot;Carnival of Clams&quot;, respectively.

In the official Dream Theater biography &quot;Lifting Shadows&quot;, author Rich Wilson described &quot;Falling into Infinity&quot;&#x27;s musical style as having an &quot;accessible nature&quot;. In his review of the album for AllMusic, Jeremy Ulrey noted of the album: &quot;Like many other progressive bands playing difficult music, Dream Theater inevitably chose to trim down both their bombastic production and intricate songwriting for a more laid-back approach, both live and in the studio.&quot; Its writing was inspired by a multitude of artists including Elton John.

==Release==

&quot;Falling into Infinity&quot; was released on September 23, 1997. In America, the album debuted at number 52 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. &quot;Falling into Infinity&quot; received mixed reviews from critics and fans. In a three out of five star review for AllMusic, Jeremy Ulrey called it &quot;the band&#x27;s weakest effort since their debut.&quot; Rich Wilson has described it as &quot;one of the patchier albums in the band&#x27;s catalogue.&quot;

According to &quot;Lifting Shadows&quot;, &quot;Falling into Infinity&quot; was considered a commercial failure, failing to break any new ground for Dream Theater or increase their sales despite its more commercial direction. As a result of the creative and personal tensions experienced during the album&#x27;s production phase, it has been described as the band&#x27;s &quot;most difficult album&quot;, and eventually led to their demanding to be free from record label interference for all future albums. Mike Portnoy has mentioned that if Elektra Records, Kevin Shirley, and Desmond Child were not involved in the making of the album, he would have made a &quot;completely different record&quot;. In 2007, the band released a demo version of the album reflecting Portnoy&#x27;s original song arrangements and track listing, including a live rehearsal of the original &quot;Metropolis Pt. 2&quot;.

In contrast to Portnoy&#x27;s comments, John Petrucci has spoken fondly of the album, and in a 2014 interview stated, &quot;Maybe I could set the records straight: I think that’s a really big misunderstanding. The label didn’t have an influence on the album. We wrote the kind of album we wanted to write.&quot;

==Track listing==

==Personnel==
Dream Theater:
*James LaBrie – lead vocals, backing vocals
*John Petrucci – guitars, backing vocals
*John Myung – bass, Chapman Stick
*Derek Sherinian – keyboards, backing vocals
*Mike Portnoy – drums, backing vocals, harmony vocals (track 1)

Additional credits:
*Dream Theater – arrangements
*Doug Pinnick – additional vocals (track 7)
*Kevin Shirley – engineering, mixing, producer
*Rich Alvy – engineering assistance
*Barbara Lipke – engineering assistance
*Dave Swope – mixing assistance
*Leon Zervos – mastering
*Storm Thorgerson – cover art

==Chart performance==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q484344" start="61" end="78" title="progressive metal" label="progressive metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q162586" start="84" end="97" title="Dream Theater" label="Dream Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="139" end="155" title="Elektra Records" label="EastWest Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q335598" start="220" end="235" title="Derek Sherinian" label="Derek Sherinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q347159" start="264" end="275" title="Kevin Moore" label="Kevin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q968489" start="336" end="349" title="Kevin Shirley" label="Kevin Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661000" start="572" end="586" title="Power Station (recording studio)" label="Avatar Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="634" end="643" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q300352" start="708" end="727" title="A Change of Seasons" label="A Change of Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="734" end="736" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q335598" start="920" end="935" title="Derek Sherinian" label="Derek Sherinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q347159" start="950" end="961" title="Kevin Moore" label="Kevin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="989" end="1004" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q211976" start="1134" end="1147" title="John Petrucci" label="John Petrucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q221468" start="1203" end="1215" title="Mike Portnoy" label="Mike Portnoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q968489" start="1506" end="1519" title="Kevin Shirley" label="Kevin Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242743" start="1574" end="1586" title="double album" label="double album"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1958" end="1967" title="Metropolis Pt. 2: Scenes from a Memory" label="own album"/>
<link wikidata="Q453987" start="2330" end="2343" title="Desmond Child" label="Desmond Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661000" start="2576" end="2593" title="Power Station (recording studio)" label="The Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640404" start="2718" end="2729" title="53rd Street (Manhattan)" label="53rd Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q130378" start="2738" end="2743" title="Ninth Avenue (Manhattan)" label="Ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q130388" start="2748" end="2753" title="Tenth Avenue (Manhattan)" label="Tenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q840133" start="2769" end="2788" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen, Manhattan" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="2805" end="2814" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q750321" start="3389" end="3405" title="Train of Thought (Dream Theater album)" label="Train of Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q624903" start="3467" end="3476" title="cover art" label="cover art"/>
<link wikidata="Q724003" start="3493" end="3509" title="Storm Thorgerson" label="Storm Thorgerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="3987" end="3994" title="A&amp;amp;R" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q296039" start="4119" end="4131" title="James LaBrie" label="James LaBrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q280734" start="4144" end="4154" title="John Myung" label="John Myung"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="4307" end="4319" title="instrumental" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323476" start="4740" end="4755" title="Lifting Shadows" label="Lifting Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="4922" end="4930" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="5259" end="5269" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="5405" end="5430" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="5551" end="5559" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q296039" start="7012" end="7024" title="James LaBrie" label="James LaBrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q211976" start="7056" end="7069" title="John Petrucci" label="John Petrucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q280734" start="7097" end="7107" title="John Myung" label="John Myung"/>
<link wikidata="Q754518" start="7116" end="7129" title="Chapman Stick" label="Chapman Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q335598" start="7131" end="7146" title="Derek Sherinian" label="Derek Sherinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q221468" start="7176" end="7188" title="Mike Portnoy" label="Mike Portnoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121042" start="7291" end="7303" title="Doug Pinnick" label="Doug Pinnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q968489" start="7335" end="7348" title="Kevin Shirley" label="Kevin Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="7351" end="7362" title="audio engineer" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884071" start="7364" end="7370" title="mixing engineer" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q20687660" start="7490" end="7501" title="Leon Zervos" label="Leon Zervos"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="7504" end="7513" title="mastering engineer" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q724003" start="7515" end="7531" title="Storm Thorgerson" label="Storm Thorgerson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795161" wikidata="Q1214375" url="?curid=795161" title="Live at the Marquee">
<text>Live at the Marquee may refer to:

*Live at the Marquee (festival), an annual music festival in Cork, Ireland
*&quot;Live at the Marquee&quot; (Dream Theater album), 1993
*&quot;Live at the Marquee&quot; (Gary Moore album), 1980
*&quot;Live at the Marquee&quot; (King Crimson album), 1998
*&quot;Live at the Marquee&quot; (Girl album), 2001
*&quot;Live at the Marquee 1980&quot;, a live album by British rock band Atomic Rooster
*&quot;Live at the Marquee Theatre&quot;, an album by The Format
*&quot;Live at the Marquee&quot; (DVD), a 2003 video album by Jesus Jones
*&quot;Live at the Marquee&quot; (Jesus Jones album), 2005
*&quot;Live at the Marquee&quot; (Osibisa album), 1984
*&quot;Live at the Marquee&quot; (Nathan Carter album)
*&quot;Live at the Marquee&quot;, a song by The Vapors on their album &quot;Magnets&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15242526" start="36" end="66" title="Live at the Marquee (festival)" label="Live at the Marquee (festival)"/>
<link wikidata="Q843203" start="111" end="164" title="Live at the Marquee (Dream Theater album)" label="&amp;quot;Live at the Marquee&amp;quot; (Dream Theater album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023956" start="172" end="222" title="Live at the Marquee (Gary Moore album)" label="&amp;quot;Live at the Marquee&amp;quot; (Gary Moore album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107355" start="230" end="282" title="Live at the Marquee (King Crimson album)" label="&amp;quot;Live at the Marquee&amp;quot; (King Crimson album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656864" start="290" end="334" title="Live at the Marquee (Girl album)" label="&amp;quot;Live at the Marquee&amp;quot; (Girl album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656873" start="348" end="372" title="Live at the Marquee 1980" label="Live at the Marquee 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734862" start="483" end="493" title="The Format" label="The Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656866" start="495" end="532" title="Live at the Marquee (DVD)" label="&amp;quot;Live at the Marquee&amp;quot; (DVD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656866" start="569" end="620" title="Live at the Marquee (Jesus Jones album)" label="&amp;quot;Live at the Marquee&amp;quot; (Jesus Jones album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656869" start="628" end="675" title="Live at the Marquee (Osibisa album)" label="&amp;quot;Live at the Marquee&amp;quot; (Osibisa album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075146" start="683" end="736" title="Live at the Marquee (Nathan Carter album)" label="&amp;quot;Live at the Marquee&amp;quot; (Nathan Carter album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997196" start="813" end="820" title="Magnets (album)" label="Magnets"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795165" wikidata="Q201012" url="?curid=795165" title="New Siberian Islands">
<text>The New Siberian Islands (; ) are an archipelago in the Extreme North of Russia, to the north of the East Siberian coast between the Laptev Sea and the East Siberian Sea north of the Sakha (Yakutia) Republic, of whose Bulunsky District they are administratively a part.

==History==
The first news about the existence of the New Siberian Islands was brought by a Cossack, Yakov Permyakov, in the beginning of the 18th century. In 1712, a Cossack unit led by M. Vagin reached the Great Lyakhovsky Island.

In 1809–10 Yakov Sannikov and Matvei Gedenschtrom went to the New Siberian Islands on a cartographic expedition. Sannikov reported the sighting of a &quot;new land&quot; north of Kotelny in 1811. This became the myth of &quot;Zemlya Sannikova&quot; or &quot;Sannikov Land&quot;. In 1886, Russian polar explorer and scientist Eduard Toll, during his first visit to the New Siberian Islands, thought that he had seen an unknown land north of Kotelny Island. He guessed that this was the so-called &quot;Zemlya Sannikova&quot;.

Toll paid a further visit to the island group in the spring of 1892, accompanied by one Cossack and three natives. He traveled over the ice in sleds drawn by dogs and reached the south coast of Great Lyakhovsky Island. Along the southern coast of this island he found well-preserved bones, ivory, peat, wood, and even a tree within high sea cliffs that expose Late Pleistocene sediments. These sediments are cemented by permafrost and have accumulated periodically over the last 200,000 years.

In September 2014, the Russian Navy re-established a Soviet era naval base on Kotelny Island which had lain abandoned since 1993.

==Geography==

The New Siberian Islands proper, or Anzhu Islands (острова Анжу, Sakha: Анжу арыылара), covering a land area of about 29,000 km, consist of:
* Kotelny Island (о. Коте́льный) 11,700 km and
** Faddeyevsky Island (о. Фадде́евский) 5,300 km. Bunge Land (земля́ Бу́нге) 6,200 km (occasionally submerged by sea) links Kotelny Island and Faddeyevsky Island. Very close to Bunge Land&#x27;s northwestern coast lie two smaller islands: 
*** Zheleznyakov Island (Ostrov Zheleznyakova), right off the NW cape and east of it, Matar Island (Ostrov Matar). Both islands have a length of about 5 km.
* Nanosnyy Island is a small island located due north off the northern bay formed by Kotelny and Bunge. It is C-shaped and only 4 km in length, &lt;br&gt;but its geographical importance lies in the fact that it is the northernmost island of the New Siberian group.
* Novaya Sibir (о. Но́вая Сиби́рь) 6,200 km
* Belkovsky Island (о. Бельковский) 500 km

To the south and nearer to the Siberian mainland lie the Lyakhovskiye Islands (6,095 km):

* Great Lyakhovsky Island (о. Большо́й Ля́ховский) 4,600 km
* Little Lyakhovsky Island (о. Ма́лый Ля́ховский) 1,325 km
* Stolbovoy Island (о. Столбово́й) 170 km
* Semyonovsky Island (о. Семёновский) 0 km (now submerged)

The small De Long Islands (228 km) lie to the north-east of Novaya Sibir.
* Jeannette Island (о. Жанне́тты)
* Henrietta Island (о. Генрие́тты)
* Bennett Island (о. Бе́ннетта)
* Vilkitsky Island (о. Вильки́цкого)
* Zhokhov Island (о. Жо́хова)

The New Siberian Islands are low-lying. Their highest point is located on Bennett island, with an elevation of 426 m. They are part of the East Siberian Lowland, forming a geographical continuum with the continental plains further south.

The New Siberian Islands once formed major hills within the Great Arctic Plain that covered the northern part of Late Pleistocene &quot;Beringia&quot; between Siberia and Alaska during the Last Glacial Maximum (Late Weichselian Epoch). These islands represent the remains of about 1.6 million square kilometers of the formerly subaerial Great Arctic Plain that now lies submerged below parts of the Arctic Ocean, East Siberian Sea, and Laptev Sea. At this plain&#x27;s greatest extent, sea level was 100–120 m below modern sea-level and the coastline lay 700 to 1000 kilometers north of its current position. This plain did not undergo extensive glaciation during the Late Pleistocene or the Last Glacial Maximum because it lay in the rain shadow of the Northern European ice sheet. During the frigid polar climate of the Last Glacial Maximum, 17,000 to 24,000 BC, small passive ice caps formed on the adjacent De Long Islands. Fragments of these ice caps remain on Jeannette, Henrietta, and Bennett Islands. Traces of former small slope and cirque glaciers in the form of buried ground ice deposits are preserved on Zhokhov Island. The sea submerged the Great Arctic Plain (except for the New Siberian and other isolated islands) within a relatively short time span of 7,000 years during the Early–Middle Holocene.

==Geology==
As noted by Digby and numerous later publications, this archipelago consists of a mixture of folded and faulted sedimentary and igneous rocks ranging in age from Precambrian to Pliocene. The Lyakhovsky Islands consist of a folded and faulted assemblage of Precambrian metamorphic rocks; upper Paleozoic to Triassic sandstones and shales; Jurassic to lower Cretaceous turbidites; Cretaceous granites; and ophiolites. The Anzhu Islands consist of a highly faulted and folded assemblage of Ordovician to Devonian limestones, dolomites, sandstones, shales, volcanoclastic strata, and igneous rocks; upper Paleozoic to Triassic sandstones and shales; Jurassic to lower Cretaceous turbidites; and upper Cretaceous to Pliocene sandstones and shales. The De Long Islands consist of early Paleozoic, middle Paleozoic, Cretaceous, and Neogene sedimentary and igneous (mostly basalt) rocks. These sedimentary, metamorphic, and igneous rocks are mantled by loose Pleistocene and Holocene sediments that range in thickness from a fraction of a meter to about .

Digby also noted that some early papers published about the New Siberian Islands incorrectly describe them, often along with other Arctic islands (e.g. Wrangel Island), as being made either up almost entirely of mammoth bones and tusks or of ice, sand, and the bones of mammoths and other extinct megafauna. Some of these papers were written by persons (e.g. D. Gath Whitley) who had never visited the New Siberian Islands and relied upon anecdotes of traders and travelers and local folklore for their descriptions of them, and other articles were written by explorers and ivory hunters untrained in either geology or other sciences. Such statements have been shown to be fictional in nature by detailed studies of the geology of the New Siberian Islands by professional geologists, paleontologists, and other scientists.

===Ivory deposits===
As noted by Baron Eduard V. Toll in his account of the New Siberian Islands, sizeable and economically significant accumulations of fossil ivory occur within them. The ivory, along with mammoth and other bones, are found in recent beaches, drainage areas, river terraces and river beds. The New Siberian Islands are unique in the burial and preservation of fossil ivory &quot;in such a wonderful state of preservation that the tusks so found cannot be distinguished from the very best and purest ivory&quot;.

The abundant bones, even skeletons, of mammoth, rhinoceros, musk-ox, and other megafauna along with the mammoth ivory found in these islands are preserved by permafrost, in which they are encased. The permafrost periodically developed in Late Pleistocene loess, solifluction, pond, and stream sediments as they accumulated. The radiocarbon dating of bones, ivory, and plants, optically stimulated luminescence dating of enclosing sediments, and uranium-thorium dating of associated peats demonstrate that they accumulated over a period of some 200,000 years. Radiocarbon dates obtained from the collagen of 87 mammoth tusks and bones collected from Faddeevsky, Kotelniy, and New Siberia islands ranged from 9470±40 BP to greater than 50,000 BP (14C).

==Important Bird Area==
The entire archipelago has been designated an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it supports breeding populations of many species of birds. 

==Climate==
The climate is polar (Köppen &quot;ET&quot;) and severe. Snow cover is present for 9 months of the year.
* Average temperature in January: 
* Temperature in July: At the coasts icy Arctic water keeps the temperatures relatively low. Average maximum temperatures here are from and average minimum temperatures from . In the interior of the islands the average maximum temperatures in July are and average minimum temperatures .
* Precipitation: up to a year

Continuous permafrost rich in underground ice covers the archipelago. The surface of the islands is covered with Arctic tundra vegetation and numerous lakes.

The ocean surrounding the islands is covered with ice most of the year. During warm years, the ocean briefly opens for navigation July through October. During cold years, islands may remain ice-locked through the summer.

Polar night conditions are present November through February, and, conversely, the sun remains above the horizon continuously during summer months.

==Photo gallery==
==See also==

* Arctic Alaska-Chukotka terrane
* Lomonosov Ridge
* List of islands
* Kigilyakh
* Genesis 2.0

==References==

* Locations

==Further reading==
* Alfred Wegner institute (AWI) Publications, Berichte zur Polar- und Meeresforschung (Reports on polar and marine research) - free, downloadable research reports on the biology, geology, oceanography, hydrology, paleontology, paleoclimatology, fauna, flora, soils, cryology, and so forth of the New Siberian Islands, Laptev Sea, and other parts of the Arctic Circle.
* Andreev, A.A., and D.M. Peteet, 1999, &quot;Climate and Diet of Mammoths in the East Siberian Arctic .&quot; Science Briefs (August 1999). Goddard Institute for Space Studies, New York, New York. Last visited July 12, 2008.
* Babinski, E.T., nd, &quot;A Frozen Ninety Foot Tall Plum Tree.&quot; examination of reports of a 90-foot fossil plum tree being found in Great Lyakhovsky Island of the New Siberian Islands.
* Basilyan, A., and P.A. Nikolskiy, 2002, &quot;Quaternary Deposits of New Siberia Island (Russian Arctic).&quot; 32nd Annual Arctic Workshop Abstracts, March 14–16, 2002, INSTAAR, University of Colorado at Boulder.
* Espinoza, E.O., and M.-J. Mann, 1993, &quot;The history and significance of the Schreger Pattern in Proboscidean ivory characterization.&quot; Journal for the American Institute for Conservation. vol. 32, no. 3, Article 3, pp. 241–248.
* Kuznetsova, T.V., L.D. Sulerzhitsky, Ch. Siegert, 2001, , 144 KB PDF file, The World of Elephants - International Congress, Rome 2001. Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Centro di Studio per il Quaternario e l&#x27;Evoluzione Ambientale, Università di Roma, Roma, Italy.

==External links==
* - aerial photographs of these islands.
* Location of Nanosnyy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201012" start="4" end="24" title="New Siberian Islands" label="New Siberian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="37" end="48" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q965661" start="56" end="69" title="Extreme North" label="Extreme North"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="73" end="79" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="101" end="114" title="Siberia" label="East Siberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988" start="133" end="143" title="Laptev Sea" label="Laptev Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q163434" start="152" end="169" title="East Siberian Sea" label="East Siberian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605" start="183" end="207" title="Sakha Republic" label="Sakha (Yakutia) Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q572266" start="218" end="235" title="Bulunsky District" label="Bulunsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="363" end="370" title="Cossack" label="Cossack"/>
<link wikidata="Q346937" start="372" end="387" title="Yakov Permyakov" label="Yakov Permyakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q971556" start="479" end="502" title="Great Lyakhovsky Island" label="Great Lyakhovsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q568513" start="516" end="530" title="Yakov Sannikov" label="Yakov Sannikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q724418" start="535" end="554" title="Matvei Gedenschtrom" label="Matvei Gedenschtrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352248" start="763" end="776" title="Sannikov Land" label="Sannikov Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q559426" start="830" end="841" title="Eduard Toll" label="Eduard Toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q498831" start="1391" end="1407" title="Late Pleistocene" label="Late Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="1451" end="1461" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="1549" end="1561" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q462252" start="1579" end="1589" title="Soviet era" label="Soviet era"/>
<link wikidata="Q648391" start="1604" end="1618" title="Kotelny Island" label="Kotelny Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q569425" start="1708" end="1721" title="Anzhu Islands" label="Anzhu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34299" start="1737" end="1742" title="Sakha language" label="Sakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q648391" start="1815" end="1829" title="Kotelny Island" label="Kotelny Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q648391" start="1863" end="1881" title="Faddeyevsky Island" label="Faddeyevsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009491" start="1910" end="1920" title="Bunge Land" label="Bunge Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q860726" start="2524" end="2536" title="Novaya Sibir" label="Novaya Sibir"/>
<link wikidata="Q815670" start="2568" end="2584" title="Belkovsky Island" label="Belkovsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="2641" end="2648" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q912074" start="2667" end="2687" title="Lyakhovskiye Islands" label="Lyakhovskiye Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q971556" start="2703" end="2726" title="Bolshoy Lyakhovsky Island" label="Great Lyakhovsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325669" start="2763" end="2787" title="Maly Lyakhovsky Island" label="Little Lyakhovsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074886" start="2822" end="2838" title="Stolbovoy Island" label="Stolbovoy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337715" start="2864" end="2882" title="Semyonovsky Island" label="Semyonovsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q577808" start="2932" end="2947" title="De Long Islands" label="De Long Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049592" start="2998" end="3014" title="Jeannette Island" label="Jeannette Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q665174" start="3032" end="3048" title="Henrietta Island" label="Henrietta Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q817858" start="3067" end="3081" title="Bennett Island" label="Bennett Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q762450" start="3099" end="3115" title="Vilkitsky Island (East Siberian Sea)" label="Vilkitsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060418" start="3136" end="3150" title="Zhokhov Island" label="Zhokhov Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414144" start="3304" end="3325" title="East Siberian Lowland" label="East Siberian Lowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="3540" end="3548" title="Beringia" label="Beringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="3593" end="3613" title="Last Glacial Maximum" label="Last Glacial Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="3803" end="3815" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q163434" start="3817" end="3834" title="East Siberian Sea" label="East Siberian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988" start="3840" end="3850" title="Laptev Sea" label="Laptev Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="4139" end="4150" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q577808" start="4315" end="4330" title="De Long Islands" label="De Long Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049592" start="4370" end="4379" title="Jeannette Island" label="Jeannette"/>
<link wikidata="Q665174" start="4381" end="4390" title="Henrietta Island" label="Henrietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q817858" start="4396" end="4410" title="Bennett Island" label="Bennett Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579772" start="4446" end="4460" title="cirque glacier" label="cirque glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060418" start="4521" end="4535" title="Zhokhov Island" label="Zhokhov Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="4710" end="4718" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q81659" start="4826" end="4832" title="Fold (geology)" label="folded"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="4837" end="4844" title="Fault (geology)" label="faulted"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="4845" end="4856" title="Sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="4861" end="4873" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="4895" end="4906" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="4910" end="4918" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="5001" end="5017" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="5026" end="5035" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="5039" end="5047" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="5048" end="5057" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="5063" end="5068" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="5071" end="5079" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="5089" end="5099" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501943" start="5100" end="5109" title="turbidite" label="turbidite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="5123" end="5130" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q605396" start="5137" end="5146" title="ophiolite" label="ophiolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="5220" end="5230" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="5234" end="5242" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="5243" end="5252" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134814" start="5255" end="5263" title="Dolomite (rock)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="5598" end="5604" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="5684" end="5695" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="5700" end="5708" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="5709" end="5717" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106594" start="5934" end="5948" title="Wrangel Island" label="Wrangel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="5994" end="6001" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q559426" start="6639" end="6659" title="Eduard Toll" label="Baron Eduard V. Toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="6759" end="6765" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="6766" end="6771" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="6813" end="6820" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069618" start="6883" end="6896" title="river terrace" label="river terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="7216" end="7225" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="7295" end="7305" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q22723" start="7392" end="7397" title="loess" label="loess"/>
<link wikidata="Q648379" start="7399" end="7411" title="solifluction" label="solifluction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12719646" start="7413" end="7417" title="pond" label="pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="7423" end="7429" title="stream" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="7430" end="7438" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="7465" end="7483" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335524" start="7534" end="7553" title="luminescence dating" label="luminescence dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q668593" start="7582" end="7604" title="uranium-thorium dating" label="uranium-thorium dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="7619" end="7623" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="7732" end="7740" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q648391" start="7786" end="7796" title="Kotelny Island" label="Faddeevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q648391" start="7798" end="7806" title="Kotelniy Island" label="Kotelniy"/>
<link wikidata="Q860726" start="7812" end="7823" title="New Siberia" label="New Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="7852" end="7854" title="Before Present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="7959" end="7978" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="7988" end="8010" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q193372" start="8107" end="8112" title="polar climate" label="polar"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="8114" end="8120" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="8521" end="8534" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="Precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="8550" end="8571" title="Continuous permafrost" label="Continuous permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="8670" end="8676" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q187997" start="8677" end="8687" title="vegetation" label="vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063701" start="9114" end="9144" title="Arctic Alaska-Chukotka terrane" label="Arctic Alaska-Chukotka terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166029" start="9147" end="9162" title="Lomonosov Ridge" label="Lomonosov Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q120647565" start="9165" end="9180" title="List of islands" label="List of islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220040" start="9183" end="9192" title="Kigilyakh" label="Kigilyakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508232" start="9195" end="9206" title="Genesis 2.0" label="Genesis 2.0"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795167" wikidata="Q7888180" url="?curid=795167" title="United Kingdom national and local elections">
<text>==Scotland==
*Scottish Parliament elections
**1999 Scottish Parliament election
**2003 Scottish Parliament election
**2007 Scottish Parliament election
**2011 Scottish Parliament election
**2016 Scottish Parliament election
**2021 Scottish Parliament election

==Wales==
*Senedd elections
**1999 National Assembly for Wales election
**2003 National Assembly for Wales election
**2007 National Assembly for Wales election
**2011 National Assembly for Wales election
**2016 National Assembly for Wales election
**2021 Senedd election

==Northern Ireland==
*Northern Ireland Assembly elections
**1998 Northern Ireland Assembly election
**2003 Northern Ireland Assembly election
**2007 Northern Ireland Assembly election
**2011 Northern Ireland Assembly election
**2016 Northern Ireland Assembly election
**2017 Northern Ireland Assembly election
**2022 Northern Ireland Assembly election

==Greater London==
* Greater London Authority elections
** Mayor of London
*** 2000 London mayoral election
*** 2004 London mayoral election
*** 2008 London mayoral election
*** 2012 London mayoral election
*** 2016 London mayoral election
*** 2021 London mayoral election
** London Assembly
*** 2000 London Assembly election
*** 2004 London Assembly election
*** 2008 London Assembly election
*** 2012 London Assembly election
*** 2016 London Assembly election
*** 2021 London Assembly election
* Greater London Council elections
** 1964, 1967, 1970, 1973, 1977, 1981

==Local elections==

===Elections by year===
* 1973
* 1975
* 1976
* 1977
* 1978
* 1979
* 1977
* 1980
* 1981
* 1982
* 1983
* 1984
* 1985
* 1986
* 1987
* 1988
* 1989
* 1990
* 1991
* 1993
* 1993
* 1994
* 1995
* 1996
* 1997
* 1998
* 1999
* 2000
* 2001
* 2002
* 2003
* 2004
* 2005
* 2006
* 2007
* 2008
* 2009
* 2010
* 2011
* 2013
* 2014
* 2015
* 2016
* 2017
* 2018
* 2019
* 2021
* 2022
* 2023

===English elections by council===
* Adur local elections
* Allerdale local elections
* Alnwick local elections
* Amber Valley local elections
* Arun local elections
* Ashfield local elections
* Ashford local elections
* Aylesbury Vale local elections
* Babergh local elections
* Barking and Dagenham local elections
* Barnet local elections
* Barnsley local elections
* Barrow-in-Furness local elections
* Basildon local elections
* Basingstoke and Deane local elections
* Bassetlaw local elections
* Bath and North East Somerset local elections
* Bedford local elections
* Bedfordshire local elections
* Berwick upon Tweed local elections
* Bexley local elections
* Birmingham local elections
* Blaby local elections
* Blackburn with Darwen local elections
* Blackpool local elections
* Blyth Valley local elections
* Bolsover local elections
* Bolton local elections
* Boston local elections
* Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole Council elections
* Bournemouth local elections
* Bracknell Forest local elections
* Bradford local elections
* Braintree local elections
* Breckland local elections
* Brentwood local elections
* Brent local elections
* Bridgnorth local elections
* Brighton and Hove local elections
* Bristol local elections
* Broadland local elections
* Bromley local elections
* Bromsgrove local elections
* Broxbourne local elections
* Broxtowe local elections
* Buckinghamshire local elections
* Burnley local elections
* Bury local elections
* Calderdale local elections
* Cambridge local elections
* Cambridgeshire local elections
* Camden local elections
* Cannock Chase local elections
* Canterbury local elections
* Caradon local elections
* Carlisle local elections
* Carrick local elections
* Castle Morpeth local elections
* Castle Point local elections
* Central Bedfordshire local elections
* Charnwood local elections
* Chelmsford local elections
* Cheltenham local elections
* Cherwell local elections
* Cheshire local elections
* Cheshire East local elections
* Cheshire West and Chester local elections
* Chester local elections
* Chester-le-Street local elections
* Chesterfield local elections
* Chichester local elections
* Chiltern local elections
* Chorley local elections
* Christchurch local elections
* City of Durham local elections
* Colchester local elections
* Congleton local elections
* Copeland local elections
* Corby local elections
* Cornwall local elections
* Cotswold local elections
* County Durham local elections
* Coventry local elections
* Craven local elections
* Crawley local elections
* Crewe and Nantwich local elections
* Croydon local elections
* Cumbria local elections
* Dacorum local elections
* Darlington local elections
* Dartford local elections
* Daventry local elections
* Derby local elections
* Derbyshire local elections
* Derbyshire Dales local elections
* Derwentside local elections
* Devon local elections
* Doncaster local elections
* Dorset County Council elections
* Dorset Council elections
* Dover local elections
* Dudley local elections
* Ealing local elections
* Easington local elections
* East Cambridgeshire local elections
* East Devon local elections
* East Dorset local elections
* East Hampshire local elections
* East Hertfordshire local elections
* East Lindsey local elections
* East Northamptonshire local elections
* East Riding of Yorkshire local elections
* East Staffordshire local elections
* East Sussex local elections
* Eastbourne local elections
* Eastleigh local elections
* Eden local elections
* Ellesmere Port and Neston local elections
* Elmbridge local elections
* Enfield local elections
* Epping Forest local elections
* Epsom and Ewell local elections
* Erewash local elections
* Essex local elections
* Exeter local elections
* Fareham local elections
* Fenland local elections
* Forest Heath local elections
* Forest of Dean local elections
* Fylde local elections
* Gateshead local elections
* Gedling local elections
* Gloucester local elections
* Gloucestershire local elections
* Gosport local elections
* Gravesham local elections
* Great Yarmouth local elections
* Greenwich local elections
* Guildford local elections
* Hackney local elections
* Halton local elections
* Hambleton local elections
* Hammersmith and Fulham local elections
* Hampshire local elections
* Harborough local elections
* Haringey local elections
* Harlow local elections
* Harrogate local elections
* Harrow local elections
* Hart local elections
* Hartlepool local elections
* Hastings local elections
* Havant local elections
* Havering local elections
* Herefordshire local elections
* Hertfordshire local elections
* Hertsmere local elections
* High Peak local elections
* Hillingdon local elections
* Hinckley and Bosworth local elections
* Horsham local elections
* Hounslow local elections
* Huntingdonshire local elections
* Hyndburn local elections
* Ipswich local elections
* Isle of Wight local elections
* Islington local elections
* Kennet local elections
* Kensington and Chelsea local elections
* Kent local elections
* Kerrier local elections
* Kettering local elections
* King&#x27;s Lynn and West Norfolk local elections
* Kingston upon Hull local elections
* Kingston upon Thames local elections
* Kirklees local elections
* Knowsley local elections
* Lambeth local elections
* Lancashire local elections
* Lancaster local elections
* Leeds local elections
* Leicester local elections
* Leicestershire local elections
* Lewes local elections
* Lewisham local elections
* Lichfield local elections
* Lincoln local elections
* Lincolnshire local elections
* Liverpool local elections
* Luton local elections
* Macclesfield local elections
* Maidstone local elections
* Maldon local elections
* Malvern Hills local elections
* Manchester local elections
* Mansfield local elections
* Medway local elections
* Melton local elections
* Mendip local elections
* Merton local elections
* Mid Bedfordshire local elections
* Mid Devon local elections
* Mid Suffolk local elections
* Mid Sussex local elections
* Middlesbrough local elections
* Milton Keynes local elections
* Mole Valley local elections
* New Forest local elections
* Newark and Sherwood local elections
* Newcastle upon Tyne local elections
* Newcastle-under-Lyme local elections
* Newham local elections
* Norfolk local elections
* North Cornwall local elections
* North Devon local elections
* North Dorset local elections
* North East Derbyshire local elections
* North East Lincolnshire local elections
* North Hertfordshire local elections
* North Kesteven local elections
* North Lincolnshire local elections
* North Norfolk local elections
* North Shropshire local elections
* North Somerset local elections
* North Tyneside local elections
* North Warwickshire local elections
* North West Leicestershire local elections
* North Wiltshire local elections
* North Yorkshire local elections
* Northampton local elections
* Northamptonshire local elections
* Northumberland local elections
* Norwich local elections
* Nottingham local elections
* Nottinghamshire local elections
* Nuneaton and Bedworth local elections
* Oadby and Wigston local elections
* Oldham local elections
* Oswestry local elections
* Oxford local elections
* Oxfordshire local elections
* Pendle local elections
* Penwith local elections
* Peterborough local elections
* Plymouth local elections
* Poole local elections
* Portsmouth local elections
* Preston local elections
* Purbeck local elections
* Reading local elections
* Redbridge local elections
* Redcar and Cleveland local elections
* Redditch local elections
* Reigate and Banstead local elections
* Restormel local elections
* Ribble Valley local elections
* Richmond upon Thames local elections
* Richmondshire local elections
* Rochdale local elections
* Rochford local elections
* Rossendale local elections
* Rother local elections
* Rotherham local elections
* Rugby local elections
* Runnymede local elections
* Rushcliffe local elections
* Rushmoor local elections
* Rutland local elections
* Ryedale local elections
* St Albans local elections
* St Edmundsbury local elections
* St Helens local elections
* Salisbury local elections
* Salford local elections
* Sandwell local elections
* Scarborough local elections
* Sedgefield local elections
* Sedgemoor local elections
* Sefton local elections
* Selby local elections
* Sevenoaks local elections
* Sheffield local elections
* Shepway local elections
* Shrewsbury and Atcham local elections
* Shropshire local elections
* Slough local elections
* Solihull local elections
* Somerset local elections
* South Bedfordshire local elections
* South Buckinghamshire local elections
* South Cambridgeshire local elections
* South Gloucestershire local elections
* South Derbyshire local elections
* South Hams local elections
* South Holland local elections
* South Kesteven local elections
* South Lakeland local elections
* South Norfolk local elections
* South Northamptonshire local elections
* South Oxfordshire local elections
* South Ribble local elections
* South Shropshire local elections
* South Somerset local elections
* South Staffordshire local elections
* South Tyneside local elections
* Southampton local elections
* Southend-on-Sea local elections
* Southwark local elections
* Spelthorne local elections
* Stafford local elections
* Staffordshire local elections
* Staffordshire Moorlands local elections
* Stevenage local elections
* Stockport local elections
* Stockton-on-Tees local elections
* Stoke-on-Trent local elections
* Stratford-on-Avon local elections
* Stroud local elections
* Suffolk local elections
* Suffolk Coastal local elections
* Sunderland local elections
* Surrey local elections
* Surrey Heath local elections
* Sutton local elections
* Swale local elections
* Swindon local elections
* Tameside local elections
* Tamworth local elections
* Tandridge local elections
* Taunton Deane local elections
* Teesdale local elections
* Teignbridge local elections
* Telford and Wrekin local elections
* Tendring local elections
* Test Valley local elections
* Tewkesbury local elections
* Thanet local elections
* Three Rivers local elections
* Thurrock local elections
* Tonbridge and Malling local elections
* Torbay local elections
* Torridge local elections
* Tower Hamlets local elections
* Trafford local elections
* Tunbridge Wells local elections
* Tynedale local elections
* Uttlesford local elections
* Vale of White Horse local elections
* Vale Royal local elections
* Wakefield local elections
* Walsall local elections
* Waltham Forest local elections
* Wandsworth local elections
* Wansbeck local elections
* Warrington local elections
* Warwick District Council elections
* Warwickshire local elections
* Watford local elections
* Waveney local elections
* Waverley local elections
* Wealden local elections
* Wear Valley local elections
* Wellingborough local elections
* Welwyn Hatfield local elections
* West Berkshire local elections
* West Devon local elections
* West Dorset local elections
* West Lancashire local elections
* West Lindsey local elections
* West Oxfordshire local elections
* West Somerset local elections
* West Sussex local elections
* West Wiltshire local elections
* Westminster local elections
* Weymouth and Portland local elections
* Wigan local elections
* Wiltshire local elections
* Winchester local elections
* Windsor and Maidenhead local elections
* Wirral local elections
* Woking local elections
* Wokingham local elections
* Wolverhampton local elections
* Worcester local elections
* Worcestershire local elections
* Worthing local elections
* Wychavon local elections
* Wycombe local elections
* Wyre local elections
* Wyre Forest local elections
* York local elections

===Welsh elections by council===
* Blaenau Gwent local elections
* Bridgend local elections
* Caerphilly local elections
* Cardiff local elections
* Carmarthenshire local elections
* Ceredigion local elections
* Conwy local elections
* Denbighshire local elections
* Flintshire local elections
* Gwynedd local elections
* Isle of Anglesey local elections
* Merthyr Tydfil local elections
* Monmouthshire local elections
* Neath Port Talbot local elections
* Newport local elections
* Pembrokeshire local elections
* Powys local elections
* Rhondda Cynon Taf local elections
* Swansea local elections
* Torfaen local elections
* Vale of Glamorgan local elections
* Wrexham local elections

==See also==
* Elections in the United Kingdom</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="14" end="33" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269950" start="46" end="79" title="1999 Scottish Parliament election" label="1999 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q683800" start="82" end="115" title="2003 Scottish Parliament election" label="2003 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="118" end="151" title="2007 Scottish Parliament election" label="2007 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862416" start="154" end="187" title="2011 Scottish Parliament election" label="2011 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437890" start="190" end="223" title="2016 Scottish Parliament election" label="2016 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q24969168" start="226" end="259" title="2021 Scottish Parliament election" label="2021 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="272" end="278" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q842113" start="291" end="332" title="1999 National Assembly for Wales election" label="1999 National Assembly for Wales election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655536" start="335" end="376" title="2003 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2003 National Assembly for Wales election"/>
<link wikidata="Q111715" start="379" end="420" title="2007 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2007 National Assembly for Wales election"/>
<link wikidata="Q111713" start="423" end="464" title="2011 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2011 National Assembly for Wales election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258007" start="467" end="508" title="2016 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2016 National Assembly for Wales election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403875" start="511" end="531" title="2021 Senedd election" label="2021 Senedd election"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="555" end="580" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076208" start="593" end="632" title="1998 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="1998 Northern Ireland Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076187" start="635" end="674" title="2003 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2003 Northern Ireland Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562399" start="677" end="716" title="2007 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2007 Northern Ireland Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058474" start="719" end="758" title="2011 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2011 Northern Ireland Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973450" start="761" end="800" title="2016 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2016 Northern Ireland Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231972" start="803" end="842" title="2017 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2017 Northern Ireland Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q48771420" start="845" end="884" title="2022 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2022 Northern Ireland Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135166" start="907" end="931" title="Greater London Authority" label="Greater London Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="945" end="960" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671126" start="965" end="993" title="2000 London mayoral election" label="2000 London mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671136" start="998" end="1026" title="2004 London mayoral election" label="2004 London mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011607" start="1031" end="1059" title="2008 London mayoral election" label="2008 London mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671131" start="1064" end="1092" title="2012 London mayoral election" label="2012 London mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671130" start="1097" end="1125" title="2016 London mayoral election" label="2016 London mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039528" start="1130" end="1158" title="2021 London mayoral election" label="2021 London mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="1162" end="1177" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669839" start="1182" end="1211" title="2000 London Assembly election" label="2000 London Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669841" start="1216" end="1245" title="2004 London Assembly election" label="2004 London Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669844" start="1250" end="1279" title="2008 London Assembly election" label="2008 London Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669846" start="1284" end="1313" title="2012 London Assembly election" label="2012 London Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160717" start="1318" end="1347" title="2016 London Assembly election" label="2016 London Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q24298997" start="1352" end="1381" title="2021 London Assembly election" label="2021 London Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476542" start="1384" end="1406" title="Greater London Council" label="Greater London Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600609" start="1420" end="1424" title="1964 Greater London Council election" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600608" start="1426" end="1430" title="1967 Greater London Council election" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600610" start="1432" end="1436" title="1970 Greater London Council election" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600611" start="1438" end="1442" title="1973 Greater London Council election" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600612" start="1444" end="1448" title="1977 Greater London Council election" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993294" start="1450" end="1454" title="1981 Greater London Council election" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888119" start="1503" end="1507" title="1973 United Kingdom local elections" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888122" start="1510" end="1514" title="1975 United Kingdom local elections" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888123" start="1517" end="1521" title="1976 United Kingdom local elections" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888125" start="1524" end="1528" title="1977 United Kingdom local elections" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888126" start="1531" end="1535" title="1978 United Kingdom local elections" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q17047803" start="1538" end="1542" title="1979 United Kingdom local elections" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888125" start="1545" end="1549" title="1977 United Kingdom local elections" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888129" start="1552" end="1556" title="1980 United Kingdom local elections" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888130" start="1559" end="1563" title="1981 United Kingdom local elections" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977259" start="1566" end="1570" title="1982 United Kingdom local elections" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888132" start="1573" end="1577" title="1983 United Kingdom local elections" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888133" start="1580" end="1584" title="1984 United Kingdom local elections" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888135" start="1587" end="1591" title="1985 United Kingdom local elections" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888136" start="1594" end="1598" title="1986 United Kingdom local elections" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888137" start="1601" end="1605" title="1987 United Kingdom local elections" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888139" start="1608" end="1612" title="1988 United Kingdom local elections" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948755" start="1615" end="1619" title="1989 United Kingdom local elections" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888141" start="1622" end="1626" title="1990 United Kingdom local elections" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888142" start="1629" end="1633" title="1991 United Kingdom local elections" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888144" start="1636" end="1640" title="1992 United Kingdom local elections" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888145" start="1643" end="1647" title="1993 United Kingdom local elections" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948241" start="1650" end="1654" title="1994 United Kingdom local elections" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888147" start="1657" end="1661" title="1995 United Kingdom local elections" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888148" start="1664" end="1668" title="1996 United Kingdom local elections" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888150" start="1671" end="1675" title="1997 United Kingdom local elections" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888151" start="1678" end="1682" title="1998 United Kingdom local elections" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888154" start="1685" end="1689" title="1999 United Kingdom local elections" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888155" start="1692" end="1696" title="2000 United Kingdom local elections" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888156" start="1699" end="1703" title="2001 United Kingdom local elections" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888157" start="1706" end="1710" title="2002 United Kingdom local elections" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888158" start="1713" end="1717" title="2003 United Kingdom local elections" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888160" start="1720" end="1724" title="2004 United Kingdom local elections" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888161" start="1727" end="1731" title="2005 United Kingdom local elections" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888162" start="1734" end="1738" title="2006 United Kingdom local elections" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888163" start="1741" end="1745" title="2007 United Kingdom local elections" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888168" start="1748" end="1752" title="2008 United Kingdom local elections" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888169" start="1755" end="1759" title="2009 United Kingdom local elections" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888171" start="1762" end="1766" title="2010 United Kingdom local elections" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888172" start="1769" end="1773" title="2011 United Kingdom local elections" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888174" start="1776" end="1780" title="2013 United Kingdom local elections" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888176" start="1783" end="1787" title="2014 United Kingdom local elections" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099804" start="1790" end="1794" title="2015 United Kingdom local elections" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187822" start="1797" end="1801" title="2016 United Kingdom local elections" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q25067559" start="1804" end="1808" title="2017 United Kingdom local elections" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467273" start="1811" end="1815" title="2018 United Kingdom local elections" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388144" start="1818" end="1822" title="2019 United Kingdom local elections" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636556" start="1825" end="1829" title="2021 United Kingdom local elections" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q106616146" start="1832" end="1836" title="2022 United Kingdom local elections" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q112136750" start="1839" end="1843" title="2023 United Kingdom local elections" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685991" start="1882" end="1902" title="Adur local elections" label="Adur local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732111" start="1905" end="1930" title="Allerdale local elections" label="Allerdale local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734074" start="1933" end="1956" title="Alnwick local elections" label="Alnwick local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741330" start="1959" end="1987" title="Amber Valley local elections" label="Amber Valley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802152" start="1990" end="2010" title="Arun local elections" label="Arun local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804976" start="2013" end="2037" title="Ashfield local elections" label="Ashfield local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805016" start="2040" end="2063" title="Ashford local elections" label="Ashford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831377" start="2066" end="2096" title="Aylesbury Vale local elections" label="Aylesbury Vale local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837784" start="2099" end="2122" title="Babergh local elections" label="Babergh local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861057" start="2125" end="2161" title="Barking and Dagenham local elections" label="Barking and Dagenham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861618" start="2164" end="2186" title="Barnet local elections" label="Barnet local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861943" start="2189" end="2213" title="Barnsley local elections" label="Barnsley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863857" start="2216" end="2249" title="Barrow-in-Furness local elections" label="Barrow-in-Furness local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867320" start="2252" end="2276" title="Basildon local elections" label="Basildon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867535" start="2279" end="2316" title="Basingstoke and Deane local elections" label="Basingstoke and Deane local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868097" start="2319" end="2344" title="Bassetlaw local elections" label="Bassetlaw local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868967" start="2347" end="2391" title="Bath and North East Somerset local elections" label="Bath and North East Somerset local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879219" start="2394" end="2417" title="Bedford local elections" label="Bedford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879238" start="2420" end="2448" title="Bedfordshire local elections" label="Bedfordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896023" start="2451" end="2485" title="Berwick upon Tweed local elections" label="Berwick upon Tweed local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899805" start="2488" end="2510" title="Bexley local elections" label="Bexley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916653" start="2513" end="2539" title="Birmingham local elections" label="Birmingham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920022" start="2542" end="2563" title="Blaby local elections" label="Blaby local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922741" start="2566" end="2603" title="Blackburn with Darwen local elections" label="Blackburn with Darwen local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923288" start="2606" end="2631" title="Blackpool local elections" label="Blackpool local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930867" start="2634" end="2662" title="Blyth Valley local elections" label="Blyth Valley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940076" start="2665" end="2689" title="Bolsover local elections" label="Bolsover local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940252" start="2692" end="2714" title="Bolton local elections" label="Bolton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948241" start="2717" end="2739" title="Boston local elections" label="Boston local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q106616301" start="2742" end="2795" title="Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole Council elections" label="Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole Council elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950303" start="2798" end="2825" title="Bournemouth local elections" label="Bournemouth local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953732" start="2828" end="2860" title="Bracknell Forest local elections" label="Bracknell Forest local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954788" start="2863" end="2887" title="Bradford local elections" label="Bradford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955950" start="2890" end="2915" title="Braintree local elections" label="Braintree local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960051" start="2918" end="2943" title="Breckland local elections" label="Breckland local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961802" start="2946" end="2971" title="Brentwood local elections" label="Brentwood local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961598" start="2974" end="2995" title="Brent local elections" label="Brent local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q684835" start="2998" end="3024" title="Bridgnorth local elections" label="Bridgnorth local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967755" start="3027" end="3060" title="Brighton and Hove local elections" label="Brighton and Hove local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968847" start="3063" end="3086" title="Bristol local elections" label="Bristol local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972212" start="3089" end="3114" title="Broadland local elections" label="Broadland local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973708" start="3117" end="3140" title="Bromley local elections" label="Bromley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973773" start="3143" end="3169" title="Bromsgrove local elections" label="Bromsgrove local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985514" start="3172" end="3198" title="Broxbourne local elections" label="Broxbourne local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976945" start="3201" end="3225" title="Broxtowe local elections" label="Broxtowe local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983259" start="3228" end="3259" title="Buckinghamshire local elections" label="Buckinghamshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150755" start="3262" end="3285" title="Burnley local elections" label="Burnley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001131" start="3288" end="3308" title="Bury local elections" label="Bury local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019056" start="3311" end="3337" title="Calderdale local elections" label="Calderdale local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025632" start="3340" end="3365" title="Cambridge local elections" label="Cambridge local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025652" start="3368" end="3398" title="Cambridgeshire local elections" label="Cambridgeshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025826" start="3401" end="3423" title="Camden local elections" label="Camden local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032731" start="3426" end="3455" title="Cannock Chase local elections" label="Cannock Chase local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033715" start="3458" end="3484" title="Canterbury local elections" label="Canterbury local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037606" start="3487" end="3510" title="Caradon local elections" label="Caradon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041413" start="3513" end="3537" title="Carlisle local elections" label="Carlisle local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046152" start="3540" end="3563" title="Carrick local elections" label="Carrick local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050186" start="3566" end="3596" title="Castle Morpeth local elections" label="Castle Morpeth local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050233" start="3599" end="3627" title="Castle Point local elections" label="Castle Point local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3630" end="3666" title="Central Bedfordshire local elections" label="Central Bedfordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086586" start="3669" end="3694" title="Charnwood local elections" label="Charnwood local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089977" start="3697" end="3723" title="Chelmsford local elections" label="Chelmsford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090248" start="3726" end="3752" title="Cheltenham local elections" label="Cheltenham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092666" start="3755" end="3779" title="Cherwell local elections" label="Cherwell local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092945" start="3782" end="3806" title="Cheshire local elections" label="Cheshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092952" start="3809" end="3838" title="Cheshire East local elections" label="Cheshire East local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092982" start="3841" end="3882" title="Cheshire West and Chester local elections" label="Cheshire West and Chester local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094087" start="3885" end="3908" title="Chester local elections" label="Chester local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093425" start="3911" end="3944" title="Chester-le-Street local elections" label="Chester-le-Street local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093842" start="3947" end="3975" title="Chesterfield local elections" label="Chesterfield local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096023" start="3978" end="4004" title="Chichester local elections" label="Chichester local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099214" start="4007" end="4031" title="Chiltern local elections" label="Chiltern local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105173" start="4034" end="4057" title="Chorley local elections" label="Chorley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109107" start="4060" end="4088" title="Christchurch local elections" label="Christchurch local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123664" start="4091" end="4121" title="City of Durham local elections" label="City of Durham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142121" start="4124" end="4150" title="Colchester local elections" label="Colchester local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q612333" start="4153" end="4178" title="Congleton local elections" label="Congleton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168382" start="4181" end="4205" title="Copeland local elections" label="Copeland local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169827" start="4208" end="4229" title="Corby local elections" label="Corby local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172025" start="4232" end="4256" title="Cornwall local elections" label="Cornwall local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175497" start="4259" end="4283" title="Cotswold local elections" label="Cotswold local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177666" start="4286" end="4315" title="County Durham local elections" label="County Durham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179131" start="4318" end="4342" title="Coventry local elections" label="Coventry local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182757" start="4345" end="4367" title="Craven local elections" label="Craven local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182988" start="4370" end="4393" title="Crawley local elections" label="Crawley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139851" start="4396" end="4430" title="Crewe and Nantwich local elections" label="Crewe and Nantwich local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189716" start="4433" end="4456" title="Croydon local elections" label="Croydon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194031" start="4459" end="4482" title="Cumbria local elections" label="Cumbria local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207728" start="4485" end="4508" title="Dacorum local elections" label="Dacorum local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224019" start="4511" end="4537" title="Darlington local elections" label="Darlington local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225620" start="4540" end="4564" title="Dartford local elections" label="Dartford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230306" start="4567" end="4591" title="Daventry local elections" label="Daventry local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261535" start="4594" end="4615" title="Derby local elections" label="Derby local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261563" start="4618" end="4644" title="Derbyshire local elections" label="Derbyshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261698" start="4647" end="4679" title="Derbyshire Dales local elections" label="Derbyshire Dales local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263366" start="4682" end="4709" title="Derwentside local elections" label="Derwentside local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267710" start="4712" end="4733" title="Devon local elections" label="Devon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295526" start="4736" end="4761" title="Doncaster local elections" label="Doncaster local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298842" start="4764" end="4795" title="Dorset County Council elections" label="Dorset County Council elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q113101142" start="4798" end="4822" title="Dorset Council elections" label="Dorset Council elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302538" start="4825" end="4846" title="Dover local elections" label="Dover local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312035" start="4849" end="4871" title="Dudley local elections" label="Dudley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325494" start="4874" end="4896" title="Ealing local elections" label="Ealing local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327527" start="4899" end="4924" title="Easington local elections" label="Easington local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327986" start="4927" end="4962" title="East Cambridgeshire local elections" label="East Cambridgeshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328228" start="4965" end="4991" title="East Devon local elections" label="East Devon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328244" start="4994" end="5021" title="East Dorset local elections" label="East Dorset local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328537" start="5024" end="5054" title="East Hampshire local elections" label="East Hampshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328578" start="5057" end="5091" title="East Hertfordshire local elections" label="East Hertfordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328841" start="5094" end="5122" title="East Lindsey local elections" label="East Lindsey local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329053" start="5125" end="5162" title="East Northamptonshire local elections" label="East Northamptonshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329264" start="5165" end="5205" title="East Riding of Yorkshire local elections" label="East Riding of Yorkshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329427" start="5208" end="5242" title="East Staffordshire local elections" label="East Staffordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329461" start="5245" end="5272" title="East Sussex local elections" label="East Sussex local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329832" start="5275" end="5301" title="Eastbourne local elections" label="Eastbourne local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330764" start="5304" end="5329" title="Eastleigh local elections" label="Eastleigh local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336965" start="5332" end="5352" title="Eden local elections" label="Eden local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332093" start="5355" end="5396" title="Ellesmere Port and Neston local elections" label="Ellesmere Port and Neston local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366435" start="5399" end="5424" title="Elmbridge local elections" label="Elmbridge local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377332" start="5427" end="5450" title="Enfield local elections" label="Enfield local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383887" start="5453" end="5482" title="Epping Forest local elections" label="Epping Forest local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384012" start="5485" end="5516" title="Epsom and Ewell local elections" label="Epsom and Ewell local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385735" start="5519" end="5542" title="Erewash local elections" label="Erewash local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399682" start="5545" end="5566" title="Essex local elections" label="Essex local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420150" start="5569" end="5591" title="Exeter local elections" label="Exeter local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434971" start="5594" end="5617" title="Fareham local elections" label="Fareham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443506" start="5620" end="5643" title="Fenland local elections" label="Fenland local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468895" start="5646" end="5674" title="Forest Heath local elections" label="Forest Heath local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469167" start="5677" end="5707" title="Forest of Dean local elections" label="Forest of Dean local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511221" start="5710" end="5731" title="Fylde local elections" label="Fylde local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527173" start="5734" end="5759" title="Gateshead local elections" label="Gateshead local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529711" start="5762" end="5785" title="Gedling local elections" label="Gedling local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5788" end="5814" title="Gloucester local elections" label="Gloucester local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572098" start="5817" end="5848" title="Gloucestershire local elections" label="Gloucestershire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587449" start="5851" end="5874" title="Gosport local elections" label="Gosport local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597930" start="5877" end="5902" title="Gravesham local elections" label="Gravesham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600313" start="5905" end="5935" title="Great Yarmouth local elections" label="Great Yarmouth local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993367" start="5938" end="5963" title="Greenwich local elections" label="Greenwich local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615855" start="5966" end="5991" title="Guildford local elections" label="Guildford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637384" start="5994" end="6017" title="Hackney local elections" label="Hackney local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643673" start="6020" end="6042" title="Halton local elections" label="Halton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644235" start="6045" end="6070" title="Hambleton local elections" label="Hambleton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645760" start="6073" end="6111" title="Hammersmith and Fulham local elections" label="Hammersmith and Fulham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646047" start="6114" end="6139" title="Hampshire local elections" label="Hampshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654743" start="6142" end="6168" title="Harborough local elections" label="Harborough local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5657629" start="6171" end="6195" title="Haringey local elections" label="Haringey local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658992" start="6198" end="6220" title="Harlow local elections" label="Harlow local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666435" start="6223" end="6248" title="Harrogate local elections" label="Harrogate local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666613" start="6251" end="6273" title="Harrow local elections" label="Harrow local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674285" start="6276" end="6296" title="Hart local elections" label="Hart local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674834" start="6299" end="6325" title="Hartlepool local elections" label="Hartlepool local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680473" start="6328" end="6352" title="Hastings local elections" label="Hastings local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160497" start="6355" end="6377" title="Havant local elections" label="Havant local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683838" start="6380" end="6404" title="Havering local elections" label="Havering local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738104" start="6407" end="6436" title="Herefordshire local elections" label="Herefordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993970" start="6439" end="6468" title="Hertfordshire local elections" label="Hertfordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744884" start="6471" end="6496" title="Hertsmere local elections" label="Hertsmere local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756073" start="6499" end="6524" title="High Peak local elections" label="High Peak local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763312" start="6527" end="6553" title="Hillingdon local elections" label="Hillingdon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765799" start="6556" end="6593" title="Hinckley and Bosworth local elections" label="Hinckley and Bosworth local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906330" start="6596" end="6619" title="Horsham local elections" label="Horsham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913321" start="6622" end="6646" title="Hounslow local elections" label="Hounslow local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994465" start="6649" end="6680" title="Huntingdonshire local elections" label="Huntingdonshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956948" start="6683" end="6707" title="Hyndburn local elections" label="Hyndburn local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065673" start="6710" end="6733" title="Ipswich local elections" label="Ipswich local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6736" end="6765" title="Isle of Wight local elections" label="Isle of Wight local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084407" start="6768" end="6793" title="Islington local elections" label="Islington local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389767" start="6796" end="6818" title="Kennet local elections" label="Kennet local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391510" start="6821" end="6859" title="Kensington and Chelsea local elections" label="Kensington and Chelsea local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391665" start="6862" end="6882" title="Kent local elections" label="Kent local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394406" start="6885" end="6908" title="Kerrier local elections" label="Kerrier local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395482" start="6911" end="6936" title="Kettering local elections" label="Kettering local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411002" start="6939" end="6988" title="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn and West Norfolk local elections" label="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn and West Norfolk local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5936038" start="6991" end="7025" title="Kingston upon Hull local elections" label="Kingston upon Hull local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995693" start="7028" end="7064" title="Kingston upon Thames local elections" label="Kingston upon Thames local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415764" start="7067" end="7091" title="Kirklees local elections" label="Kirklees local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423494" start="7094" end="7118" title="Knowsley local elections" label="Knowsley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481463" start="7121" end="7144" title="Lambeth local elections" label="Lambeth local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482999" start="7147" end="7173" title="Lancashire local elections" label="Lancashire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483290" start="7176" end="7201" title="Lancaster local elections" label="Lancaster local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516179" start="7204" end="7225" title="Leeds local elections" label="Leeds local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519254" start="7228" end="7253" title="Leicester local elections" label="Leicester local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519263" start="7256" end="7286" title="Leicestershire local elections" label="Leicestershire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536143" start="7289" end="7310" title="Lewes local elections" label="Lewes local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537337" start="7313" end="7337" title="Lewisham local elections" label="Lewisham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543284" start="7340" end="7365" title="Lichfield local elections" label="Lichfield local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551208" start="7368" end="7391" title="Lincoln local elections" label="Lincoln local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551240" start="7394" end="7422" title="Lincolnshire local elections" label="Lincolnshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658347" start="7425" end="7450" title="Liverpool local elections" label="Liverpool local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997113" start="7453" end="7474" title="Luton local elections" label="Luton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459692" start="7477" end="7505" title="Macclesfield local elections" label="Macclesfield local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735513" start="7508" end="7533" title="Maidstone local elections" label="Maidstone local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742885" start="7536" end="7558" title="Maldon local elections" label="Maldon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997251" start="7561" end="7590" title="Malvern Hills local elections" label="Malvern Hills local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152241" start="7593" end="7619" title="Manchester local elections" label="Manchester local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751712" start="7622" end="7647" title="Mansfield local elections" label="Mansfield local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807436" start="7650" end="7672" title="Medway local elections" label="Medway local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7675" end="7697" title="Melton local elections" label="Melton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816652" start="7700" end="7722" title="Mendip local elections" label="Mendip local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820741" start="7725" end="7747" title="Merton local elections" label="Merton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840929" start="7750" end="7782" title="Mid Bedfordshire local elections" label="Mid Bedfordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840950" start="7785" end="7810" title="Mid Devon local elections" label="Mid Devon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841015" start="7813" end="7840" title="Mid Suffolk local elections" label="Mid Suffolk local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841023" start="7843" end="7869" title="Mid Sussex local elections" label="Mid Sussex local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841880" start="7872" end="7901" title="Middlesbrough local elections" label="Middlesbrough local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861270" start="7904" end="7933" title="Milton Keynes local elections" label="Milton Keynes local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895916" start="7936" end="7963" title="Mole Valley local elections" label="Mole Valley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998731" start="7966" end="7992" title="New Forest local elections" label="New Forest local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016808" start="7995" end="8030" title="Newark and Sherwood local elections" label="Newark and Sherwood local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017567" start="8033" end="8068" title="Newcastle upon Tyne local elections" label="Newcastle upon Tyne local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998845" start="8071" end="8107" title="Newcastle-under-Lyme local elections" label="Newcastle-under-Lyme local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998864" start="8110" end="8132" title="Newham local elections" label="Newham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016618" start="8135" end="8158" title="Norfolk local elections" label="Norfolk local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054918" start="8161" end="8191" title="North Cornwall local elections" label="North Cornwall local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055129" start="8194" end="8221" title="North Devon local elections" label="North Devon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055145" start="8224" end="8252" title="North Dorset local elections" label="North Dorset local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055190" start="8255" end="8292" title="North East Derbyshire local elections" label="North East Derbyshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8295" end="8334" title="North East Lincolnshire local elections" label="North East Lincolnshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055593" start="8337" end="8372" title="North Hertfordshire local elections" label="North Hertfordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055784" start="8375" end="8405" title="North Kesteven local elections" label="North Kesteven local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055958" start="8408" end="8442" title="North Lincolnshire local elections" label="North Lincolnshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056197" start="8445" end="8474" title="North Norfolk local elections" label="North Norfolk local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727388" start="8477" end="8509" title="North Shropshire local elections" label="North Shropshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056789" start="8512" end="8542" title="North Somerset local elections" label="North Somerset local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057066" start="8545" end="8575" title="North Tyneside local elections" label="North Tyneside local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8578" end="8612" title="North Warwickshire local elections" label="North Warwickshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057275" start="8615" end="8656" title="North West Leicestershire local elections" label="North West Leicestershire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057402" start="8659" end="8690" title="North Wiltshire local elections" label="North Wiltshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259441" start="8693" end="8724" title="North Yorkshire local elections" label="North Yorkshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057657" start="8727" end="8754" title="Northampton local elections" label="Northampton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057667" start="8757" end="8789" title="Northamptonshire local elections" label="Northamptonshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059834" start="8792" end="8822" title="Northumberland local elections" label="Northumberland local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061564" start="8825" end="8848" title="Norwich local elections" label="Norwich local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8851" end="8877" title="Nottingham local elections" label="Nottingham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063732" start="8880" end="8911" title="Nottinghamshire local elections" label="Nottinghamshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069814" start="8914" end="8951" title="Nuneaton and Bedworth local elections" label="Nuneaton and Bedworth local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073397" start="8954" end="8987" title="Oadby and Wigston local elections" label="Oadby and Wigston local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085670" start="8990" end="9012" title="Oldham local elections" label="Oldham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q574484" start="9015" end="9039" title="Oswestry local elections" label="Oswestry local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115568" start="9042" end="9064" title="Oxford local elections" label="Oxford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115588" start="9067" end="9094" title="Oxfordshire local elections" label="Oxfordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162449" start="9097" end="9119" title="Pendle local elections" label="Pendle local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165382" start="9122" end="9145" title="Penwith local elections" label="Penwith local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664413" start="9148" end="9176" title="Peterborough local elections" label="Peterborough local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205780" start="9179" end="9203" title="Plymouth local elections" label="Plymouth local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228631" start="9206" end="9227" title="Poole local elections" label="Poole local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232516" start="9230" end="9256" title="Portsmouth local elections" label="Portsmouth local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242032" start="9259" end="9282" title="Preston local elections" label="Preston local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260890" start="9285" end="9308" title="Purbeck local elections" label="Purbeck local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9311" end="9334" title="Reading local elections" label="Reading local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305510" start="9337" end="9362" title="Redbridge local elections" label="Redbridge local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305543" start="9365" end="9401" title="Redcar and Cleveland local elections" label="Redcar and Cleveland local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305658" start="9404" end="9428" title="Redditch local elections" label="Redditch local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310088" start="9431" end="9467" title="Reigate and Banstead local elections" label="Reigate and Banstead local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316257" start="9470" end="9495" title="Restormel local elections" label="Restormel local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322247" start="9498" end="9527" title="Ribble Valley local elections" label="Ribble Valley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331066" start="9530" end="9566" title="Richmond upon Thames local elections" label="Richmond upon Thames local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331070" start="9569" end="9598" title="Richmondshire local elections" label="Richmondshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353823" start="9601" end="9625" title="Rochdale local elections" label="Rochdale local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354086" start="9628" end="9652" title="Rochford local elections" label="Rochford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369795" start="9655" end="9681" title="Rossendale local elections" label="Rossendale local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370415" start="9684" end="9706" title="Rother local elections" label="Rother local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370451" start="9709" end="9734" title="Rotherham local elections" label="Rotherham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378326" start="9737" end="9758" title="Rugby local elections" label="Rugby local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380093" start="9761" end="9786" title="Runnymede local elections" label="Runnymede local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380780" start="9789" end="9815" title="Rushcliffe local elections" label="Rushcliffe local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380856" start="9818" end="9842" title="Rushmoor local elections" label="Rushmoor local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383515" start="9845" end="9868" title="Rutland local elections" label="Rutland local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7385007" start="9871" end="9894" title="Ryedale local elections" label="Ryedale local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592288" start="9897" end="9922" title="St Albans local elections" label="St Albans local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593008" start="9925" end="9955" title="St Edmundsbury local elections" label="St Edmundsbury local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593363" start="9958" end="9983" title="St Helens local elections" label="St Helens local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9986" end="10011" title="Salisbury local elections" label="Salisbury local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404395" start="10014" end="10037" title="Salford local elections" label="Salford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417064" start="10040" end="10064" title="Sandwell local elections" label="Sandwell local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430326" start="10067" end="10094" title="Scarborough local elections" label="Scarborough local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445235" start="10097" end="10123" title="Sedgefield local elections" label="Sedgefield local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445246" start="10126" end="10151" title="Sedgemoor local elections" label="Sedgemoor local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446128" start="10154" end="10176" title="Sefton local elections" label="Sefton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447568" start="10179" end="10200" title="Selby local elections" label="Selby local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10203" end="10228" title="Sevenoaks local elections" label="Sevenoaks local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492800" start="10231" end="10256" title="Sheffield local elections" label="Sheffield local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494580" start="10259" end="10282" title="Shepway local elections" label="Shepway local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761365" start="10285" end="10322" title="Shrewsbury and Atcham local elections" label="Shrewsbury and Atcham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504290" start="10325" end="10351" title="Shropshire local elections" label="Shropshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541495" start="10354" end="10376" title="Slough local elections" label="Slough local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558104" start="10379" end="10403" title="Solihull local elections" label="Solihull local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q120727301" start="10406" end="10430" title="Somerset local elections" label="Somerset local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10433" end="10467" title="South Bedfordshire local elections" label="South Bedfordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10470" end="10507" title="South Buckinghamshire local elections" label="South Buckinghamshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566487" start="10510" end="10546" title="South Cambridgeshire local elections" label="South Cambridgeshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567368" start="10549" end="10586" title="South Gloucestershire local elections" label="South Gloucestershire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567032" start="10589" end="10621" title="South Derbyshire local elections" label="South Derbyshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567424" start="10624" end="10650" title="South Hams local elections" label="South Hams local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10653" end="10682" title="South Holland local elections" label="South Holland local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567618" start="10685" end="10715" title="South Kesteven local elections" label="South Kesteven local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567780" start="10718" end="10748" title="South Lakeland local elections" label="South Lakeland local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568034" start="10751" end="10780" title="South Norfolk local elections" label="South Norfolk local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568036" start="10783" end="10821" title="South Northamptonshire local elections" label="South Northamptonshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568096" start="10824" end="10857" title="South Oxfordshire local elections" label="South Oxfordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568303" start="10860" end="10888" title="South Ribble local elections" label="South Ribble local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283063" start="10891" end="10923" title="South Shropshire local elections" label="South Shropshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568522" start="10926" end="10956" title="South Somerset local elections" label="South Somerset local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568542" start="10959" end="10994" title="South Staffordshire local elections" label="South Staffordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568703" start="10997" end="11027" title="South Tyneside local elections" label="South Tyneside local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569184" start="11030" end="11057" title="Southampton local elections" label="Southampton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569532" start="11060" end="11091" title="Southend-on-Sea local elections" label="Southend-on-Sea local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571176" start="11094" end="11119" title="Southwark local elections" label="Southwark local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575923" start="11122" end="11148" title="Spelthorne local elections" label="Spelthorne local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596675" start="11151" end="11175" title="Stafford local elections" label="Stafford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596720" start="11178" end="11207" title="Staffordshire local elections" label="Staffordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596702" start="11210" end="11249" title="Staffordshire Moorlands local elections" label="Staffordshire Moorlands local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615445" start="11252" end="11277" title="Stevenage local elections" label="Stevenage local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618182" start="11280" end="11305" title="Stockport local elections" label="Stockport local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618216" start="11308" end="11340" title="Stockton-on-Tees local elections" label="Stockton-on-Tees local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618434" start="11343" end="11373" title="Stoke-on-Trent local elections" label="Stoke-on-Trent local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621927" start="11376" end="11409" title="Stratford-on-Avon local elections" label="Stratford-on-Avon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624890" start="11412" end="11434" title="Stroud local elections" label="Stroud local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634552" start="11437" end="11460" title="Suffolk local elections" label="Suffolk local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634541" start="11463" end="11494" title="Suffolk Coastal local elections" label="Suffolk Coastal local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639752" start="11497" end="11523" title="Sunderland local elections" label="Sunderland local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646787" start="11526" end="11548" title="Surrey local elections" label="Surrey local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646811" start="11551" end="11579" title="Surrey Heath local elections" label="Surrey Heath local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650353" start="11582" end="11604" title="Sutton local elections" label="Sutton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055575" start="11607" end="11628" title="Swale local elections" label="Swale local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658459" start="11631" end="11654" title="Swindon local elections" label="Swindon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681174" start="11657" end="11681" title="Tameside local elections" label="Tameside local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061461" start="11684" end="11708" title="Tamworth local elections" label="Tamworth local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682506" start="11711" end="11736" title="Tandridge local elections" label="Tandridge local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688785" start="11739" end="11768" title="Taunton Deane local elections" label="Taunton Deane local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059228" start="11771" end="11795" title="Teesdale local elections" label="Teesdale local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694995" start="11798" end="11825" title="Teignbridge local elections" label="Teignbridge local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258377" start="11828" end="11862" title="Telford and Wrekin local elections" label="Telford and Wrekin local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699664" start="11865" end="11889" title="Tendring local elections" label="Tendring local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705742" start="11892" end="11919" title="Test Valley local elections" label="Test Valley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11922" end="11948" title="Tewkesbury local elections" label="Tewkesbury local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710268" start="11951" end="11973" title="Thanet local elections" label="Thanet local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797773" start="11976" end="12004" title="Three Rivers local elections" label="Three Rivers local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799385" start="12007" end="12031" title="Thurrock local elections" label="Thurrock local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820779" start="12034" end="12071" title="Tonbridge and Malling local elections" label="Tonbridge and Malling local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825451" start="12074" end="12096" title="Torbay local elections" label="Torbay local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827123" start="12099" end="12123" title="Torridge local elections" label="Torridge local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829682" start="12126" end="12155" title="Tower Hamlets local elections" label="Tower Hamlets local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832574" start="12158" end="12182" title="Trafford local elections" label="Trafford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063120" start="12185" end="12216" title="Tunbridge Wells local elections" label="Tunbridge Wells local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254485" start="12219" end="12243" title="Tynedale local elections" label="Tynedale local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903446" start="12246" end="12272" title="Uttlesford local elections" label="Uttlesford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909562" start="12275" end="12310" title="Vale of White Horse local elections" label="Vale of White Horse local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767189" start="12313" end="12339" title="Vale Royal local elections" label="Vale Royal local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961082" start="12342" end="12367" title="Wakefield local elections" label="Wakefield local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963798" start="12370" end="12393" title="Walsall local elections" label="Walsall local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966607" start="12396" end="12426" title="Waltham Forest local elections" label="Waltham Forest local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967318" start="12429" end="12455" title="Wandsworth local elections" label="Wandsworth local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968074" start="12458" end="12482" title="Wansbeck local elections" label="Wansbeck local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970744" start="12485" end="12511" title="Warrington local elections" label="Warrington local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971126" start="12514" end="12548" title="Warwick District Council elections" label="Warwick District Council elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971228" start="12551" end="12579" title="Warwickshire local elections" label="Warwickshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974635" start="12582" end="12605" title="Watford local elections" label="Watford local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975390" start="12608" end="12631" title="Waveney local elections" label="Waveney local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975447" start="12634" end="12658" title="Waverley local elections" label="Waverley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978014" start="12661" end="12684" title="Wealden local elections" label="Wealden local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978128" start="12687" end="12714" title="Wear Valley local elections" label="Wear Valley local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981288" start="12717" end="12747" title="Wellingborough local elections" label="Wellingborough local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035426" start="12750" end="12781" title="Welwyn Hatfield local elections" label="Welwyn Hatfield local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984469" start="12784" end="12814" title="West Berkshire local elections" label="West Berkshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035706" start="12817" end="12843" title="West Devon local elections" label="West Devon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12846" end="12873" title="West Dorset local elections" label="West Dorset local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985706" start="12876" end="12907" title="West Lancashire local elections" label="West Lancashire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985764" start="12910" end="12938" title="West Lindsey local elections" label="West Lindsey local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986134" start="12941" end="12973" title="West Oxfordshire local elections" label="West Oxfordshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986556" start="12976" end="13005" title="West Somerset local elections" label="West Somerset local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986613" start="13008" end="13035" title="West Sussex local elections" label="West Sussex local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987001" start="13038" end="13068" title="West Wiltshire local elections" label="West Wiltshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989235" start="13071" end="13098" title="Westminster local elections" label="Westminster local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990392" start="13101" end="13138" title="Weymouth and Portland local elections" label="Weymouth and Portland local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999562" start="13141" end="13162" title="Wigan local elections" label="Wigan local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066503" start="13165" end="13190" title="Wiltshire local elections" label="Wiltshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023873" start="13193" end="13219" title="Winchester local elections" label="Winchester local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024744" start="13222" end="13260" title="Windsor and Maidenhead local elections" label="Windsor and Maidenhead local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027003" start="13263" end="13285" title="Wirral local elections" label="Wirral local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029339" start="13288" end="13310" title="Woking local elections" label="Woking local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029358" start="13313" end="13338" title="Wokingham local elections" label="Wokingham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030526" start="13341" end="13370" title="Wolverhampton local elections" label="Wolverhampton local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034237" start="13373" end="13398" title="Worcester local elections" label="Worcester local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13401" end="13431" title="Worcestershire local elections" label="Worcestershire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037234" start="13434" end="13458" title="Worthing local elections" label="Worthing local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039547" start="13461" end="13485" title="Wychavon local elections" label="Wychavon local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039654" start="13488" end="13511" title="Wycombe local elections" label="Wycombe local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040466" start="13514" end="13534" title="Wyre local elections" label="Wyre local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040465" start="13537" end="13564" title="Wyre Forest local elections" label="Wyre Forest local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055615" start="13567" end="13587" title="York local elections" label="York local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13624" end="13653" title="Blaenau Gwent local elections" label="Blaenau Gwent local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13656" end="13680" title="Bridgend local elections" label="Bridgend local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13683" end="13709" title="Caerphilly local elections" label="Caerphilly local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038494" start="13712" end="13735" title="Cardiff local elections" label="Cardiff local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13738" end="13769" title="Carmarthenshire local elections" label="Carmarthenshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064127" start="13772" end="13798" title="Ceredigion local elections" label="Ceredigion local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13801" end="13822" title="Conwy local elections" label="Conwy local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13825" end="13853" title="Denbighshire local elections" label="Denbighshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13856" end="13882" title="Flintshire local elections" label="Flintshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13885" end="13908" title="Gwynedd local elections" label="Gwynedd local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13911" end="13943" title="Isle of Anglesey local elections" label="Isle of Anglesey local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13946" end="13976" title="Merthyr Tydfil local elections" label="Merthyr Tydfil local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13979" end="14008" title="Monmouthshire local elections" label="Monmouthshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14011" end="14044" title="Neath Port Talbot local elections" label="Neath Port Talbot local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14047" end="14070" title="Newport local elections" label="Newport local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14073" end="14102" title="Pembrokeshire local elections" label="Pembrokeshire local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14105" end="14126" title="Powys local elections" label="Powys local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14129" end="14162" title="Rhondda Cynon Taf local elections" label="Rhondda Cynon Taf local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14165" end="14188" title="Swansea local elections" label="Swansea local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14191" end="14214" title="Torfaen local elections" label="Torfaen local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14217" end="14250" title="Vale of Glamorgan local elections" label="Vale of Glamorgan local elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14253" end="14276" title="Wrexham local elections" label="Wrexham local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q918346" start="14293" end="14324" title="Elections in the United Kingdom" label="Elections in the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795170" wikidata="Q17083130" url="?curid=795170" title="Noise floor">
<text>In signal theory, the noise floor is the measure of the signal created from the sum of all the noise sources and unwanted signals within a measurement system, where noise is defined as any signal other than the one being monitored.

In radio communication and electronics, this may include thermal noise, black body, cosmic noise as well as atmospheric noise from distant thunderstorms and similar and any other unwanted man-made signals, sometimes referred to as incidental noise. If the dominant noise is generated within the measuring equipment (for example by a receiver with a poor noise figure) then this is an example of an instrumentation noise floor, as opposed to a physical noise floor. These terms are not always clearly defined, and are sometimes confused.

Avoiding interference between electrical systems is the distinct subject of electromagnetic compatibility (EMC). 

In a measurement system such as a seismograph, the physical noise floor may be set by the incidental noise, and may include nearby foot traffic or a nearby road. The noise floor limits the smallest measurement that can be taken with certainty since any measured amplitude can on average be no less than the noise floor.

A common way to lower the noise floor in electronics systems is to cool the system to reduce thermal noise, when this is the major noise source. In special circumstances, the noise floor can also be artificially lowered with digital signal processing techniques.

Signals that are below the noise floor can be detected by using different techniques of spread spectrum communications, where signal of a particular information bandwidth is deliberately spread in the frequency domain resulting in a signal with a wider occupied bandwidth.

Every additional 6.02 dB of noise floor corresponds to a 1-bit reduction of the effective number of bits of an analog-to-digital converter or digital-to-analog converter.

== See also ==
* Atmospheric noise
* Blackbody
* Cosmic noise
* Noise
* Noise (electronic)
* Signal-to-noise ratio
* Thermal noise

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208163" start="3" end="16" title="signal theory" label="signal theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083130" start="22" end="33" title="Noise floor" label="noise floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q179448" start="95" end="100" title="noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="290" end="303" title="Johnson–Nyquist noise" label="thermal noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="305" end="315" title="black body" label="black body"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361408" start="317" end="329" title="cosmic noise" label="cosmic noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817114" start="341" end="358" title="atmospheric noise" label="atmospheric noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q746825" start="587" end="599" title="noise figure" label="noise figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q747288" start="847" end="876" title="electromagnetic compatibility" label="electromagnetic compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="920" end="931" title="seismometer" label="seismograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="1432" end="1457" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q958957" start="1559" end="1574" title="spread spectrum" label="spread spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="1767" end="1769" title="Decibels" label="dB"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="1804" end="1807" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q505579" start="1825" end="1849" title="effective number of bits" label="effective number of bits"/>
<link wikidata="Q190169" start="1856" end="1883" title="analog-to-digital converter" label="analog-to-digital converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210863" start="1887" end="1914" title="digital-to-analog converter" label="digital-to-analog converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817114" start="1934" end="1951" title="Atmospheric noise" label="Atmospheric noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="1954" end="1963" title="Blackbody" label="Blackbody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361408" start="1966" end="1978" title="Cosmic noise" label="Cosmic noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q179448" start="1981" end="1986" title="Noise" label="Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306265" start="1989" end="2007" title="Noise (electronic)" label="Noise (electronic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q738628" start="2010" end="2031" title="Signal-to-noise ratio" label="Signal-to-noise ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="2034" end="2047" title="Thermal noise" label="Thermal noise"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795171" wikidata="Q1075538" url="?curid=795171" title="Choate">
<text>Choate may refer to:

==Places==
===Canada===
* Choate, British Columbia, a locality in the Fraser Canyon of British Columbia, Canada

===United States===
* Choate Mental Health and Development Center, a psychiatric hospital in Anna, Illinois
* Choate Rosemary Hall, a prep school in Wallingford, Connecticut
* Choate House (Massachusetts), a historic house on Choate Island in the Crane Wildlife Refuge, Essex, Massachusetts
* Choate Creek, a creek in Michigan
* Choate House (Pleasantville, New York), 1867 house converted into a private sanitarium
* Choate, Texas, a town
* Choate, Wisconsin, an unincorporated community
* Choateville, Kentucky, an unincorporated community

==Other uses==
* Choate (law), a legal term
* Choate (surname)

==See also==
* Choate, Hall &amp; Stewart, Boston law firm
* Choate House (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1075538" start="0" end="6" title="Choate" label="Choate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987171" start="48" end="72" title="Choate, British Columbia" label="Choate, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30638999" start="157" end="200" title="Choate Mental Health and Development Center" label="Choate Mental Health and Development Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q559296" start="228" end="242" title="Anna, Illinois" label="Anna, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103452" start="245" end="265" title="Choate Rosemary Hall" label="Choate Rosemary Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103445" start="311" end="339" title="Choate House (Massachusetts)" label="Choate House (Massachusetts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600717" start="428" end="440" title="Choate Creek" label="Choate Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103446" start="464" end="502" title="Choate House (Pleasantville, New York)" label="Choate House (Pleasantville, New York)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103439" start="553" end="566" title="Choate, Texas" label="Choate, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659734" start="577" end="594" title="Choate, Wisconsin" label="Choate, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q122332985" start="626" end="647" title="Choateville, Kentucky" label="Choateville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103441" start="695" end="707" title="Choate (law)" label="Choate (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16865562" start="724" end="740" title="Choate (surname)" label="Choate (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103437" start="757" end="783" title="Choate, Hall &amp;amp; Stewart" label="Choate, Hall &amp;amp; Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103444" start="803" end="832" title="Choate House (disambiguation)" label="Choate House (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795173" wikidata="Q6973371" url="?curid=795173" title="National Historic Engineering Landmark">
<text>National Historic Engineering Landmark may refer to:

* Historic Civil Engineering Landmark (designated by the American Society of Civil Engineers) - see List of Historic Civil Engineering Landmarks
* Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmark (designated by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers) - see List of Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmarks</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6573251" start="154" end="198" title="List of Historic Civil Engineering Landmarks" label="List of Historic Civil Engineering Landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573252" start="309" end="358" title="List of Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmarks" label="List of Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmarks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795174" wikidata="Q766067" url="?curid=795174" title="Hour record">
<text>The hour record is the record for the longest distance cycled in one hour on a bicycle from a stationary start. Cyclists attempt this record alone on the track without other competitors present. It is considered one of the most prestigious records in cycling. Since it was first set, cyclists ranging from relatively unknown amateurs to well-known professionals have held the record. There is now one unified record for upright bicycles meeting the requirements of the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI). Hour-record attempts for UCI bikes are made in a velodrome.

== Early hour records (until 1972) ==
The first universally accepted record was in 1876 when the American Frank Dodds rode on a penny-farthing. The first recorded distance was set in 1873 by James Moore in Wolverhampton, riding an Ariel 49&quot; high wheel () bicycle; however, the distance was recorded at exactly , leading to the theory that the distance was just approximated and not accurately measured.

The first officially recognised record was set by Henri Desgrange at the Buffalo Velodrome, Paris in 1893 following the formation of the International Cycling Association, the forerunner of the modern-day UCI. Throughout the run up to the First World War, the record was broken on five occasions by Swiss rider Oscar Egg and Frenchman Marcel Berthet, and due to the attempts being highly popular and guaranteeing rich attendances, it is said that each ensured he did not beat the record by too much of a margin, enabling further lucrative attempts by the other.

The hour was attempted sporadically over the following 70 years, with most early attempts taking place at the Buffalo Velodrome in Paris, before the Velodromo Vigorelli in Milan became popular in 1930s and 1940s sparking attempts from leading Italian riders and former Giro d&#x27;Italia winners such as Fausto Coppi and Ercole Baldini. Coppi&#x27;s record set in 1942, during the Second World War, despite Milan being bombed nightly by Allied forces, was eventually broken in 1956 by Jacques Anquetil on his third attempt. In 1967, 11 years later, Anquetil again broke the hour record, with , but the record was disallowed because he refused to take the newly introduced post-race doping test. He had objected to what he saw as the indignity of having to urinate in a tent in front of a crowded velodrome and said he would take the test later at his hotel. The international judge ruled against the idea, and a scuffle ensued that involved Anquetil&#x27;s manager, Raphaël Géminiani. In 1968, Ole Ritter broke the record in Mexico City, the first attempt at altitude since Willie Hamilton in 1898.

The women&#x27;s hour record was first established in 1893 by Mlle de Saint-Sauveur at the Vélodrome Buffalo in Paris, setting a total distance of . The record was improved several times over the next years, until Louise Roger reached in 1897 also at Vélodrome Buffalo. In 1911 the longest standing men&#x27;s or women&#x27;s record (37 years) was set by the 157 cm (5 ft 2 in) tall Alfonsina Strada: riding a 20 kg (44 lbs) machine. From 1947 to 1952, Élyane Bonneau and Jeannine Lemaire set several new hour records, the last of which was by Lemaire in 1952. The first women&#x27;s hour record approved by the UCI was by Tamara Novikova in 1955. However Lemaire&#x27;s 1952 non-UCI record was not bettered until Elsy Jacobs broke the 40 kmh barrier in 1958, the year Jacobs had won the inaugural women&#x27;s road world championship. Jacobs&#x27; 1958 41.347 km UCI record would not be bettered until 1972.

=== Historical hour records ===


== UCI hour record (1972–2014) ==

=== 1972–1984: Merckx, Moser and new technology ===
In 1972, Eddy Merckx set a new hour record at in Mexico City at an altitude of where he proclaimed it to have been &quot;the hardest ride I have ever done&quot;.

The record would stand for 12 years until in January 1984, Francesco Moser set a new record at . This was the first noted use of disc wheels, which provided an aerodynamic gain as well as Moser wearing a skin suit. Moser&#x27;s record would eventually be moved in 1997 to &quot;best human effort&quot;.

=== 1990s: non-traditional riding positions ===

In 1993 and 1994, Graeme Obree, who built his own bikes, posted two records with his hands tucked under his chest. In 1994, Moser set the veteran&#x27;s record at in Mexico City. Moser beat his 1984 record, using bullhorn handlebars, steel airfoil tubing, disk wheels and skinsuit. It was also faster than Obree&#x27;s first record in 1993. Following the outlawing of the &quot;praying mantis&quot; style by the UCI in May 1994, Spaniard Miguel Induráin and Swiss Tony Rominger broke the record using a more traditional tri-bar setup with Rominger setting a distance of 55.291 km.
Chris Boardman took up the challenge using a modified version of the Lotus 110 bicycle, a successor to the earlier Lotus 108 bicycle he&#x27;d ridden to victory at the 1992 Olympic Games. South African company Aerodyne Technology built the frame. Boardman set the UCI Absolute record of in 1996, using another position pioneered by Obree, his arms out in front in a &quot;Superman&quot; position. This too was considered controversial by the UCI, and while the record was allowed to stand, the position was banned making Boardman&#x27;s record set in 1996, it was thought, effectively unbeatable using traditional bike position. The record stood as a best human effort until October 2022, when Filippo Ganna unified the records, beating Boardman&#x27;s best human effort record (and Daniel Bigham&#x27;s official UCI Hour record) on a traditionally shaped, though uniquely manufactured, bicycle.

=== 1997 UCI rule change ===
With the increasing gap between modern bicycles and what was available at the time of Merckx&#x27;s record, the UCI established two records in 1997:
*&quot;UCI Hour Record&quot;: which restricted competitors to roughly the same equipment as Merckx, banning time trial helmets, disc or tri-spoke wheels, aerodynamic bars and monocoque frames.
*&quot;Best Human Effort&quot;: also known as the UCI &quot;Absolute&quot; Record in which modern equipment was permitted.

As a result of the 1997 rule change, all records since 1972, including Boardman&#x27;s in 1996, were moved to Best Human Effort and the distance of Eddy Merckx set in 1972 once more became the official UCI benchmark. In 2000, Boardman attempted the UCI record on a traditional bike, and rode , topping Merckx by , an improvement of 0.02%.

In 2005, Ondřej Sosenka improved Boardman&#x27;s performance at using a 54×13 gear. However, Sosenka failed a doping control in 2001 and then again in 2008, the latter resulting in a career-ending suspension which puts in doubt the validity of his record. All women&#x27;s records from 1986 to 1996 were recategorized to Best Human Effort.

=== Hour record holders (men&#x27;s) ===



=== Hour record holders (women&#x27;s) ===



== UCI unified hour record (2014–present) ==

=== Unified rule change (2014) ===

In 2014, the UCI unified the two classifications into a single classification in line with regulations for current track pursuit bikes. Records previously removed for Chris Boardman and Graeme Obree were returned, however the benchmark record would remain at set in 2005 by Ondrej Sosenka, even though that was not the farthest distance. Under the new regulations riders may use any bike allowed by the UCI standards for endurance track events in place at the time of the attempt.

Riders are required to be part of the athlete biological passport program. However, of the men to attempt the record since the rule change, only five were on a UCI World Tour team at the time: Jens Voigt of Trek Factory Racing, Rohan Dennis of the BMC Racing Team, Alex Dowsett of the , Victor Campenaerts of Lotto Soudal, Filippo Ganna of Ineos Grenadiers. Matthias Brändle was with IAM Cycling, then a UCI Professional Continental team. Jack Bobridge was on Team Budget Forklifts, an Australian UCI Continental team. Thomas Dekker had been released from World Tour team Garmin–Sharp several months before. Gustav Larsson was riding for the Professional Continental team Cult Energy Pro Cycling, whilst Bradley Wiggins had left the World Tour&#x27;s shortly before his attempt, which was made in the colours of his own UCI Continental team .

As of October 2022, 26 attempts have been made for the men&#x27;s record, eight successfully, while nine attempts have been made on the women&#x27;s record, six of them successfully.

=== Unified hour record attempts (men&#x27;s) ===
Following the change in the rules, German Jens Voigt became the first rider to attempt the hour, on 18 September 2014 at the Velodrome Suisse, Grenchen, Switzerland. He set a new record of , beating the previous record set by Sosenka by . On 30 October 2014, Matthias Brändle set a new record of at the World Cycling Center in Aigle, Switzerland.

Further attempts by Australians Jack Bobridge and Rohan Dennis, and the Dutchman Thomas Dekker came within a few weeks, between 31 January and 25 February 2015. Dennis was the only one of the three to set a new record, and in doing so was the first rider to cover more than . Dekker&#x27;s attempt at the Aguascalientes Bicentenary Velodrome was the first attempt to take place at appreciable altitude. Aguascalientes is at above sea level, while Melbourne is at only , and, although in Switzerland, Grenchen and Aigle are at and respectively, and not in the mountains. High altitude is thought to result in faster times, providing the rider takes the time to acclimatise to the conditions. This is because the air density decreases with an increase in altitude, which reduces the aerodynamic drag.

Having postponed an earlier scheduled attempt due to a broken collarbone incurred in a crash while training, British cyclist Alex Dowsett exceeded Dennis&#x27;s mark, with a new record of , at Manchester Velodrome on 2 May 2015.

On 7 June 2015, Sir Bradley Wiggins broke Dowsett&#x27;s record, by completing a distance of at the Lee Valley VeloPark in London.

On 16 April 2019, Victor Campenaerts was the first to exceed 55 km/h by completing a distance of at the Velodromo Bicentenario in Aguascalientes.

The UCI rules require an athlete to participate in its anti-doping system, including having a biological passport. When Daniel Bigham rode to break Wiggins&#x27;s British national record on 1 October 2021 he was ineligible to attempt the UCI record as he was not part of the anti-doping system, estimating it would cost him £8,000.

=== Unified hour record attempts (women&#x27;s) ===

The last women&#x27;s hour record before the unified rule change was set on 1 October 2003 by Leontien van Moorsel, with a distance of .

In December 2014, it was announced that British Paralympian Sarah Storey would be the first woman to attempt the record following the unified rule change. She attempted the record on 28 February 2015 at Lee Valley Velo Park in London, setting new British, Para-Cycling and Masters Age 35–39 records but missing out on the Elite record with a distance of .

American Molly Shaffer Van Houweling broke the women&#x27;s UCI Hour Record, riding a distance of on 12 September 2015 in Aguascalientes, Mexico. Van Houweling had set three new US Hour Records in the year prior. The first was set on 15 December 2014, in Carson, California, with a distance of . The second was set on 25 February 2015, in Aguascalientes with a distance of . The third was set on 3 July 2015, also in Aguascalientes, with a distance of . This last mark was also the Pan-American and World Masters Age 40–44 record at the time, and exceeded the distance of the UCI hour record of van Moorsel. However, it did not qualify as the UCI Hour Record because Van Houweling had only been enrolled in the athlete biological passport program for three and a half months prior to setting this record. The UCI requires that riders be enrolled in this program for 5–10 months before they are eligible to set this mark. From 24 August 2015, Van Houweling was eligible to attempt the UCI Hour Record.

In October 2015, Australian rider Bridie O&#x27;Donnell announced her intention to aim for the hour record in January 2016. She broke the women&#x27;s hour at the Adelaide Super-Drome on 22 January 2016, riding . She was aged 41 years. Her record was broken by American rider Evelyn Stevens in the next month - the new record was , more than a kilometre nearer to the barrier.

Italian rider Vittoria Bussi, after two unsuccessful attempts on 7 October 2017 and on 12 September 2018, broke Stevens&#x27; world record by 27 metres riding on 13 September 2018.

British cyclist Joss Lowden set a new world record on 30 September 2021 with a distance of , beating the previous record by just under 400 metres, and also surpassing Jeannie Longo&#x27;s Best Human Effort distance. Lowden completed a total of 193 laps of the Tissot Velodrome in Grenchen, Switzerland.

On October 13, 2023, Vittoria Bussi set the world record again, at the Velodromo Bicentenario in Mexico, with a 50.267km distance.


== Statistics ==

== Para-cycling records ==

The new regulations for the making of accepted hour record attempts were extended to para-cycling in 2016. Although the first attempt on the hour record for women after the amendments to the regulations was made by Paralympian Sarah Storey, it was not a ratified attempt on the women&#x27;s C5 hour record under the new conditions, which at that point still did not extend to paracycling – albeit that Storey&#x27;s effort is recognized as a best C5 performance under the new rules, in addition to a British and masters world hour record in able-bodied cycling.

The first attempt on a para-cycling hour record after the new regulations were extended to para-cycling was by Irishman Colin Lynch in the C2 category, bettering the accepted best performance previously set by Laurent Thirionet in 1999 by 2 kilometres, and setting the first &#x27;ratified&#x27; para-cycling world hour record. The mark of 43.133 km was achieved on 1 October at the National Cycling Centre in Manchester, Great Britain.

===Men&#x27;s UCI para-cycling hour record===
;Unified regulations (since 2016)


===Women&#x27;s UCI para-cycling hour record===
;Unified regulations (since 2016)
===Historical para-cycling hour record ===
;Men&#x27;s UCI para-cycling hour record – Best Hour Performance &amp; Absolute Hour Record (1991–2016)




;Women&#x27;s UCI para-cycling hour record – Best Hour Performance &amp; Absolute Hour Record (1991–2016)


==Masters records==
===Current records by age-group===
===Men&#x27;s UCI Masters best performances===
;Best Performances 










===Women&#x27;s UCI Masters best performances===
;Best Performances  








==Junior records==
Although the UCI does not recognise hour record attempts at the Junior age-group, there have been multiple record attempts made.

== Other bicycle hour records ==
There are alternative bicycle hour records that do not fit the UCI-sanctioned categories due to a strict definition of a &quot;bicycle&quot; in UCI.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* UCI hour records
* Bike Cult listing of Hour records including data on machines and athlete
* Hour records with pictures of Vehicles
* A recent timeline of the Hour Record from Cycling Weekly
* A history of the womens Hour Record from Cyclingtips</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q766067" start="4" end="15" title="Hour record" label="hour record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215841" start="251" end="258" title="cycle sport" label="cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281298" start="420" end="435" title="upright bicycle" label="upright bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48663" start="469" end="498" title="Union Cycliste Internationale" label="Union Cycliste Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q830528" start="555" end="564" title="velodrome" label="velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="673" end="684" title="Frank Dodds" label="Frank Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554036" start="695" end="709" title="penny-farthing" label="penny-farthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q327191" start="758" end="769" title="James Moore (cyclist)" label="James Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q436679" start="1026" end="1041" title="Henri Desgrange" label="Henri Desgrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001911" start="1049" end="1066" title="Vélodrome Buffalo and Stade Buffalo" label="Buffalo Velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153991" start="1113" end="1146" title="International Cycling Association" label="International Cycling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q48663" start="1181" end="1184" title="Union Cycliste Internationale" label="UCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q870126" start="1287" end="1296" title="Oscar Egg" label="Oscar Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892951" start="1311" end="1325" title="Marcel Berthet" label="Marcel Berthet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512603" start="1688" end="1707" title="Velodromo Vigorelli" label="Velodromo Vigorelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="1808" end="1826" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219912" start="1843" end="1855" title="Fausto Coppi" label="Fausto Coppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q531777" start="1860" end="1874" title="Ercole Baldini" label="Ercole Baldini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2024" end="2040" title="Jacques Anquetil#Hour record" label="Jacques Anquetil"/>
<link wikidata="Q490613" start="2505" end="2522" title="Raphaël Géminiani" label="Raphaël Géminiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q581376" start="2533" end="2543" title="Ole Ritter" label="Ole Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="2564" end="2575" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q550116" start="3022" end="3038" title="Alfonsina Strada" label="Alfonsina Strada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3092" end="3106" title="Élyane Bonneau" label="Élyane Bonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226172" start="3111" end="3127" title="Jeannine Lemaire" label="Jeannine Lemaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178300" start="3262" end="3277" title="Tamara Novikova" label="Tamara Novikova"/>
<link wikidata="Q452635" start="3353" end="3364" title="Elsy Jacobs" label="Elsy Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q103756" start="3679" end="3690" title="Eddy Merckx" label="Eddy Merckx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="3719" end="3730" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q366657" start="3892" end="3907" title="Francesco Moser" label="Francesco Moser"/>
<link wikidata="Q161798" start="3962" end="3973" title="disc wheels" label="disc wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q545260" start="4204" end="4216" title="Graeme Obree" label="Graeme Obree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="4352" end="4363" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q105542" start="4624" end="4639" title="Miguel Induráin" label="Miguel Induráin"/>
<link wikidata="Q337118" start="4650" end="4663" title="Tony Rominger" label="Tony Rominger"/>
<link wikidata="Q514819" start="4767" end="4781" title="Chris Boardman" label="Chris Boardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685099" start="4882" end="4891" title="Lotus 108" label="Lotus 108"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="5139" end="5147" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q20971580" start="5461" end="5474" title="Filippo Ganna" label="Filippo Ganna"/>
<link wikidata="Q28806749" start="5550" end="5563" title="Daniel Bigham" label="Daniel Bigham"/>
<link wikidata="Q185948" start="5950" end="5960" title="time trial" label="time trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161151" start="6017" end="6026" title="monocoque" label="monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023849" start="6508" end="6522" title="Ondřej Sosenka" label="Ondřej Sosenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q166376" start="6609" end="6615" title="doping (sport)" label="doping"/>
<link wikidata="Q514819" start="7179" end="7193" title="Chris Boardman" label="Chris Boardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q545260" start="7198" end="7210" title="Graeme Obree" label="Graeme Obree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023849" start="7286" end="7300" title="Ondrej Sosenka" label="Ondrej Sosenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724432" start="7540" end="7559" title="biological passport" label="biological passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q635366" start="7654" end="7668" title="UCI World Tour" label="UCI World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q58855" start="7687" end="7697" title="Jens Voigt" label="Jens Voigt"/>
<link wikidata="Q682460" start="7701" end="7720" title="Trek–Segafredo (men&amp;#x27;s team)" label="Trek Factory Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q509227" start="7722" end="7734" title="Rohan Dennis" label="Rohan Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q787401" start="7742" end="7757" title="BMC Racing Team" label="BMC Racing Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092183" start="7759" end="7771" title="Alex Dowsett" label="Alex Dowsett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16682579" start="7781" end="7799" title="Victor Campenaerts" label="Victor Campenaerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q841014" start="7803" end="7815" title="Lotto Soudal" label="Lotto Soudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20971580" start="7817" end="7830" title="Filippo Ganna" label="Filippo Ganna"/>
<link wikidata="Q200009" start="7834" end="7850" title="Ineos Grenadiers" label="Ineos Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q688403" start="7852" end="7868" title="Matthias Brändle" label="Matthias Brändle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756552" start="7878" end="7889" title="IAM Cycling" label="IAM Cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17633789" start="7898" end="7926" title="List of 2014 UCI Professional Continental and Continental teams" label="UCI Professional Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q515920" start="7933" end="7946" title="Jack Bobridge" label="Jack Bobridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221598" start="7954" end="7975" title="Team Budget Forklifts" label="Team Budget Forklifts"/>
<link wikidata="Q36836" start="7991" end="8006" title="UCI Continental" label="UCI Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q532075" start="8013" end="8026" title="Thomas Dekker (cyclist)" label="Thomas Dekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q752425" start="8066" end="8078" title="Garmin–Sharp" label="Garmin–Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q351018" start="8102" end="8116" title="Gustav Larsson" label="Gustav Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26508" start="8166" end="8189" title="Cult Energy Pro Cycling" label="Cult Energy Pro Cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q193876" start="8198" end="8213" title="Bradley Wiggins" label="Bradley Wiggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q58855" start="8614" end="8624" title="Jens Voigt" label="Jens Voigt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512571" start="8697" end="8713" title="Velodrome Suisse" label="Velodrome Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q68248" start="8715" end="8723" title="Grenchen" label="Grenchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q688403" start="8831" end="8847" title="Matthias Brändle" label="Matthias Brändle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43195" start="8899" end="8904" title="Aigle" label="Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q515920" start="8952" end="8965" title="Jack Bobridge" label="Jack Bobridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q509227" start="8970" end="8982" title="Rohan Dennis" label="Rohan Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q532075" start="9001" end="9014" title="Thomas Dekker (cyclist)" label="Thomas Dekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q200805" start="9225" end="9239" title="Aguascalientes City" label="Aguascalientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="9367" end="9376" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511415" start="9631" end="9642" title="air density" label="air density"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="9701" end="9717" title="aerodynamic drag" label="aerodynamic drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092183" start="9845" end="9857" title="Alex Dowsett" label="Alex Dowsett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848810" start="9913" end="9933" title="Manchester Velodrome" label="Manchester Velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q193876" start="9970" end="9985" title="Bradley Wiggins" label="Bradley Wiggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q816241" start="10050" end="10069" title="Lee Valley VeloPark" label="Lee Valley VeloPark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16682579" start="10100" end="10118" title="Victor Campenaerts" label="Victor Campenaerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q200805" start="10212" end="10226" title="Aguascalientes City" label="Aguascalientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724432" start="10323" end="10342" title="biological passport" label="biological passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q28806749" start="10349" end="10362" title="Daniel Bigham" label="Daniel Bigham"/>
<link wikidata="Q234158" start="10709" end="10729" title="Leontien van Moorsel" label="Leontien van Moorsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q439085" start="10813" end="10825" title="Sarah Storey" label="Sarah Storey"/>
<link wikidata="Q816241" start="10956" end="10976" title="London Velopark" label="Lee Valley Velo Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q20968991" start="11119" end="11146" title="Molly Shaffer Van Houweling" label="Molly Shaffer Van Houweling"/>
<link wikidata="Q200805" start="11232" end="11246" title="Aguascalientes City" label="Aguascalientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q494690" start="11365" end="11383" title="Carson, California" label="Carson, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="11592" end="11604" title="Americas" label="Pan-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q19519036" start="12146" end="12167" title="Bridie O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Bridie O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935691" start="12275" end="12295" title="Adelaide Super-Drome" label="Adelaide Super-Drome"/>
<link wikidata="Q288780" start="12388" end="12402" title="Evelyn Stevens (cyclist)" label="Evelyn Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19281770" start="12504" end="12518" title="Vittoria Bussi" label="Vittoria Bussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47296738" start="12688" end="12699" title="Joss Lowden" label="Joss Lowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q233834" start="12839" end="12852" title="Jeannie Longo" label="Jeannie Longo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512571" start="12932" end="12948" title="Velodrome Suisse" label="Tissot Velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q68248" start="12952" end="12960" title="Grenchen" label="Grenchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19281770" start="12997" end="13011" title="Vittoria Bussi" label="Vittoria Bussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261949" start="13240" end="13252" title="para-cycling" label="para-cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q439085" start="13382" end="13394" title="Sarah Storey" label="Sarah Storey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26898361" start="13838" end="13849" title="Colin Lynch (cyclist)" label="Colin Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219537" start="13928" end="13945" title="Laurent Thirionet" label="Laurent Thirionet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795176" wikidata="Q383235" url="?curid=795176" title="The Flower Pot Men">
<text>The Flower Pot Men (sometimes spelled The Flowerpot Men) were an English pop group created in 1967 as a result of the single &quot;Let&#x27;s Go to San Francisco&quot;, recorded by session musicians, which became a major UK Top 20 and Continental Europe hit in the autumn of 1967. The group&#x27;s sound was characterised by rich, three-part vocal harmonies.

==History==
The Flower Pot Men were a studio recording construct created by John Carter and Ken Lewis, originally the main songwriters of The Ivy League. They notably were featured as backup vocalists for early Who albums and for the first recording of a song that Sagittarius covered, &quot;My World Fell Down&quot;. Ken Lewis departed as a result of his lack of interest in touring, and Carter joined him soon after to create a musical songwriting duo.

===&quot;Let&#x27;s Go to San Francisco&quot;===

&quot;Let&#x27;s Go to San Francisco&quot; was written and recorded by John Carter and Ken Lewis, a songwriting team known as Carter &amp; Lewis. The composition, psychedelic in nature, took vocal and instrumental inspiration from The Beach Boys. The name The Flower Pot Men was derived from the BBC children&#x27;s show &quot;Flower Pot Men&quot;, with the obvious psychedelic era puns on flower power and &quot;pot&quot; (cannabis). In the US, they were commonly deemed &quot;The Flower Men&quot; on radio airplay to avoid the drug reference.

The duo licensed the recording to Deram Records, who had a hit but no group to promote it. Carter and Lewis, having no interest in going on the road to promote the record, created the group from a hand-picked collective of recording studio session musicians and vocalists. Led by vocalist Tony Burrows, Neil Landon, Pete Nelson, Robin Shaw, the band also included Billie Davis&#x27;s backing band, and for a while (though not for recordings) later Deep Purple members Jon Lord, who replaced Billy Davidson on keyboards in January 1968, and Nick Simper on bass.

Carter and Lewis continued to write, record and produce most of the band&#x27;s subsequent recordings over the next three years.

===Other records===
The follow-up to &quot;Let&#x27;s Go to San Francisco&quot; was the similar-sounding &quot;A Walk in the Sky&quot;, released in November 1967. It was not a hit in the UK, but reached No. 4 in the Netherlands and also proved popular in Germany. Carter and Lewis continued writing and recording new material, but Deram wanted another hit to rival the success of &quot;Let&#x27;s Go to San Francisco&quot;. When the third Carter-Lewis single &quot;Man Without a Woman&quot; / &quot;You Can Never Be Wrong&quot; failed to chart in April 1968, the label had the touring band record &quot;In A Moment of Madness&quot; by Roger Greenaway without the involvement of Carter and Lewis, which also failed to chart. As Mark Frumento wrote in the liner notes of the retrospective Flower Pot Men album, &quot;Listen to the Flowers Grow&quot;: &quot;&quot;At this point Deram decided that the Flower Pot Men name was no longer commercial and the next single, &quot;Piccolo Man&quot; was released under the band name &#x27;Friends&#x27; ... The final Flower Pot Men single was released in 1969, but this time the writing team Roger Cook and Roger Greenaway were behind the production.&quot;&quot;

The line-up of the Flower Pot Men had changed considerably by then. Lord and Simper left in summer 1968, Neil Landon left in December 1968 to become lead singer of Fat Mattress. Neil was then replaced by backing band member Ricky Wolff in January 1969. Wolff, Burrows, Shaw and Nelson stayed with Roger Greenaway and Roger Cook, added new musicians and changed their name to White Plains, who scored a hit with &quot;My Baby Loves Lovin&#x27;&quot; in 1970. The Flower Pot Men dissolved at that point.

===Post 1970===
Burrows and Shaw later surfaced in another John Carter project, The First Class, whose sole Top 40 hit was &quot;Beach Baby&quot;. A harmony phrase shortly before the fade out of this record referenced &quot;Let&#x27;s Go to San Francisco&quot;. Carter also recorded a track &quot;Let&#x27;s Go Back To San Francisco (Parts 1 and 2)&quot;, released as &#x27;Beautiful People&#x27; in 1981. Later the song appeared on a First Class retrospective and ultimately appeared on a compilation album by the Flower Pot Men.

In 2000 Carter released a CD &quot;Peace Album&quot; / &quot;Past Imperfect&quot; that comprised two unreleased Flower Pot Men albums recorded between 1967 and 1969. Burrows still performs on the oldies circuit as does Landon. Shaw is still on the road with White Plains.

In the liner notes of &quot;Listen to the Flowers Grow&quot; (RPM Retro 809) from April 2007, Mark Frumento mentioned that &quot;sadly, Pete Nelson died a few years ago.&quot;

Tony Burrows worked with different bands including White Plains, Edison Lighthouse, Brotherhood of Man and the Pipkins and as a solo artist.

Robin Shaw would be the bass guitarist for Cliff Bennett and the Rebel Rousers from 1988 to 2002.

After a short stint in a band called Zenith in 1974, Pete Nelson retired from the music industry.

Lord and Simper&#x27;s connection to this pop band was later lampooned in the fake rock documentary &quot;Spinal Tap&quot;, whose fictional first hit was called &quot;(Listen to the) Flower People&quot;, a reference to &quot;Let&#x27;s Go to San Francisco&quot;.

From 2004 to 2006, Shaw was part of a reformed version of White Plains. A reunion tour took place in 2013, which featured Shaw and Burrows.

Pete Nelson (born 10 March 1943) died in Ealing, London on 23 October 2005, at the age of 62, after a short battle with cancer.

Neil Landon (born 26 July 1941) died in Hamburg, Germany on 26 March 2020, at the age of 78, after a short battle with cancer.

==Personnel==

*Tony Burrows – vocals
*Neil Landon – vocals
*Robin Shaw – vocals
*Pete Nelson – vocals
*Ricky Wolff - keyboards, sax, flute (from Autumn 1968), vocals (from January 1969)
*Ged Peck – guitar
*Carlo Little – drums
*Robin Box - guitar
*Nick Simper – bass
*Jon Lord – organ
*Mick Stewart – lead guitar
*Tony &#x27;Tex&#x27; Makins – bass
*Gordon Haskell – bass
*Billy Davidson – keyboards
*John Carroll – organ
*Tony Hall - sax
*Roger Hills - drums

==References==
==Sources==
*Mark Frumento, liner notes of &quot;Listen to the Flowers Grow&quot; (RPM Retro 809), April 2007.
*Mark Frumento, liner notes &quot;John Carter – A Rose by any Other Name&quot; (Rev-ola REV 84), October 2004.
*Bob Stanley, liner notes &quot;The John Carter Anthology – Measure by Measure&quot; (RPM rpmd268), 2003.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q383235" start="0" end="18" title="The Flower Pot Men" label="The Flower Pot Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532440" start="131" end="161" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Go to San Francisco" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Go to San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="181" end="198" title="session musicians" label="session musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="224" end="230" title="Top 40" label="Top 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="235" end="253" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="254" end="257" title="hit record" label="hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="348" end="357" title="harmony" label="harmonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699561" start="436" end="447" title="John Carter (English musician)" label="John Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434018" start="498" end="512" title="The Ivy League (band)" label="The Ivy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="571" end="574" title="The Who" label="Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399304" start="625" end="636" title="Sagittarius (band)" label="Sagittarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532440" start="872" end="902" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Go to San Francisco" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Go to San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699561" start="937" end="948" title="John Carter (English musician)" label="John Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814487" start="953" end="962" title="Ken Lewis (songwriter)" label="Ken Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047111" start="992" end="1010" title="Carter &amp;amp; Lewis" label="Carter &amp;amp; Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="1097" end="1111" title="The Beach Boys" label="The Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462189" start="1193" end="1207" title="Flower Pot Men" label="Flower Pot Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256213" start="1232" end="1247" title="psychedelic era" label="psychedelic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="1248" end="1251" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254661" start="1256" end="1268" title="flower power" label="flower power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="1290" end="1298" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733913" start="1446" end="1459" title="Deram Records" label="Deram Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="1576" end="1582" title="gramophone record" label="record"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="1652" end="1668" title="session musician" label="session musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330686" start="1701" end="1713" title="Tony Burrows" label="Tony Burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988839" start="1715" end="1726" title="Neil Landon" label="Neil Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903553" start="1776" end="1788" title="Billie Davis" label="Billie Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="1860" end="1871" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q192114" start="1880" end="1888" title="Jon Lord" label="Jon Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q346794" start="1952" end="1963" title="Nick Simper" label="Nick Simper"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="2011" end="2017" title="sound recording and reproduction" label="record"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2320" end="2331" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561888" start="2739" end="2754" title="Roger Greenaway" label="Roger Greenaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988839" start="3411" end="3422" title="Neil Landon" label="Neil Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397905" start="3470" end="3482" title="Fat Mattress" label="Fat Mattress"/>
<link wikidata="Q623012" start="3681" end="3693" title="White Plains (band)" label="White Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419315" start="3889" end="3904" title="The First Class" label="The First Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="3917" end="3923" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="4299" end="4316" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q623012" start="4599" end="4611" title="White Plains (band)" label="White Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101082" start="4976" end="5011" title="Cliff Bennett and the Rebel Rousers" label="Cliff Bennett and the Rebel Rousers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="5192" end="5201" title="parody" label="lampooned"/>
<link wikidata="Q741661" start="5237" end="5247" title="Spinal Tap (band)" label="Spinal Tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q83726" start="5577" end="5591" title="Ealing, London" label="Ealing, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="5705" end="5721" title="Hamburg, Germany" label="Hamburg, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330686" start="5809" end="5821" title="Tony Burrows" label="Tony Burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988839" start="5832" end="5843" title="Neil Landon" label="Neil Landon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5854" end="5864" title="Robin Shaw (musician)" label="Robin Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5875" end="5886" title="Pete Nelson (musician)" label="Pete Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5897" end="5908" title="Ricky Wolff" label="Ricky Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529629" start="5981" end="5989" title="Ged Peck" label="Ged Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497477" start="6000" end="6012" title="Carlo Little" label="Carlo Little"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6022" end="6031" title="Robin Box" label="Robin Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q346794" start="6042" end="6053" title="Nick Simper" label="Nick Simper"/>
<link wikidata="Q192114" start="6062" end="6070" title="Jon Lord" label="Jon Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q539911" start="6144" end="6158" title="Gordon Haskell" label="Gordon Haskell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795182" wikidata="Q1472582" url="?curid=795182" title="Grob's Attack">
<text>Grob&#x27;s Attack, or the Grob Opening, is an unconventional chess opening in which White begins with the move:
: 1. 

It is widely considered to be one of the worst possible first moves for White. International Master (IM) John Watson writes, &quot;As far as I can tell, 1 g4 is competitive with 1 h4 for the honour of being White&#x27;s worst first move. Against an informed or skilled opponent, it is simply masochistic.&quot;

==History and usage==
The opening takes its name from Swiss IM Henri Grob (1904–1974) who analysed it extensively and played hundreds of correspondence games with it. In Grob&#x27;s newspaper column analysis of this opening, he referred to it as the Spike Opening, a name which is still used occasionally. Other early references used the name Ahlhausen&#x27;s Opening, after Carl Ahlhausen (1835–1892) of Berlin, one of the first to play 1.g4. Savielly Tartakower sometimes played this opening in simultaneous exhibitions and called it the Genoa or San Pier D&#x27;Arena Opening, after the city and suburb of Genoa where he first used it. 

Along with several other uncommon first moves for White, the Grob is classified under the code A00 (&quot;irregular openings&quot; or &quot;uncommon openings&quot;) in the &quot;Encyclopedia of Chess Openings&quot;. White has three main plans: to support the g4-pawn with h3; pressure against d5 or on the h1–a8 diagonal, preventing Black from playing ...Bxg4 (e.g. 1.g4 d5 2.Bg2 Bxg4 3.c4, exploiting the pin against the b7-pawn); or advancing the h-pawn in a attack.

Perhaps the highest-profile game to feature the Grob was when Michael Basman defeated grandmaster John Nunn with it in 1978. The Grob was also forced upon Anatoly Karpov by former Soviet premier Mikhail Gorbachev in a friendly match against Susan Polgar in Lindsborg, Kansas 2005. Gorbachev made the ceremonial first move and played 1.g4. Normally players can simply retract ceremonial moves they do not like. In this case Gorbachev insisted Karpov play on, saying he wanted to &quot;cause some difficulties for the older player&quot;.

The Grob was included in the opening book for the superfinal of the 12th Top Chess Engine Championship season (April–July 2018). Both finalists, Stockfish and Komodo, evaluated the position after 1.g4 as providing a clear advantage for Black, and both failed to defend the White position.

==Responses==
IM Michael Basman and Grandmaster Spyridon Skembris are advocates of the opening. It has a certain surprise value, and the average player is unlikely to know how to refute it and more likely to get overconfident and make mistakes. Moreover, the lack of theory along this line may negate the repertoire of an experienced opponent. Intuitive play by Black can lead into dangerous traps. Many of these traps rely on Black&#x27;s replying with 1...d5, attacking the pawn with his . White can sacrifice the pawn with 2.Bg2 Bxg4 3.c4 with Qb3 to follow, giving White some pressure against the weakened squares d5 and b7.
 



Black is not obliged to give White these opportunities. In response to Grob&#x27;s Attack, Black may also play 1...e5. Good responses would be 2.Bg2 (dominating the light-squared centre diagonal) or 2.c4, the English Variation, preparing Nc3 to solidify White&#x27;s control of d5. After 1...e5, Black can take aim at the h4-square, left weak by White&#x27;s pawn advance. 2.Bg2 h5 will force a weakening of White&#x27;s pawn structure. 2.d3 (intending to answer 2...h5 with 3.g5) or 2.h3 can be answered by 2...Ne7 with the threat of ...Ng6 followed by ...Nf4 or ...Nh4, disrupting White&#x27;s kingside fianchetto.
Another frequently used setup for White in the Grob is 1.g4, 2.h3, and 3.Bg2. A Black counter-setup might be 1...d5, 2...e5, and 3...c6 (these moves may be played in any order), which, if used in conjunction with an eventual ...e4, negates White&#x27;s &#x27;s influence over the centre. IM Richard Palliser advocates instead the classical setup 1...d5, 2...e5, 3...Nc6, on the grounds that White is more likely to be familiar with the &quot;reversed French&quot; lines after 3...c6 4.d4 e4 5.c4 etc.

A key element of the Grob is deploying the king&#x27;s bishop on g2 and having it rule the diagonal. In order to further this goal, White must keep the centre clear of pawns. This leads to frequent &quot;tearing at the centre&quot; with c4 often being White&#x27;s third move.

Due to the unusual pawn structure White attains by playing g4 and c4 so early in the game, there is frequently little advantage to castling. Play often devolves into a wild and wide-open game, with a definitive advantage usually resolving itself in the first 20 moves.

Responses other than 1...d5 and 1...e5 are rarely encountered in serious games, though some such as 1...c5 and 1...Nc6 are reasonable.
=== Critical Lines In Engine Play ===
Leela, Stockfish, and Komodo have all failed to hold the Grob against engines of similar strength. 

After 1.g4 d5 white has five main moves;

*Bg2, pressuring the h1-a8 diagonal.
*c4, preparing Qb3xb7 and undermining d5.
*g5, moving the pawn out of harm&#x27;s way.
*e3, leading to French-type structures.
*h3, defending g4.

2. Bg2 or g5 is played in the vast majority of games as e3 and h3 surrenders the initiative and leads to inferior versions of more common openings. 2.c4 usually transposes to 2.Bg2 main lines but does give both Black and White a few options for unique sidelines.

==== Grob&#x27;s Gambit, 2.Bg2 Bxg4 3.c4 ====
Against the Grob Attack&#x27;s main line, Stockfish has opted to keep the initiative by giving back the b7 pawn as Black. After the moves 3... c6 4.Qb3 e6 5.Qxb7 Nd7 Black has gained a secure King and lead in development.

Due to White&#x27;s overextended Queen and general lack of coordination, Black retains a potentially decisive advantage. c6 is a poisoned pawn as Qxc6 would be met by Rc8 and Rxc4.

==== 2. g5 Gambit ====
An alternative attempt to save White&#x27;s game is to gambit the d4 pawn in exchange for rapid development with 1.g4 d5 2.g5 e5 3.d4 exd4 4.Nf3 c5. This line has been explored in a widely cited theoretical correspondence game on the TalkChess forum.

However, after 5.Bg2 Ne7 6.c3 dxc3 7.Nxc3 Nbc6 8.0-0 d5, Black still retains a possibly decisive advantage.

==See also==
* List of chess openings
* List of chess openings named after people
* Irregular chess openings

==References==
===Bibliography===
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1472582" start="0" end="18" title="Grob&amp;#x27;s Attack" label="Grob&amp;#x27;s Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472582" start="27" end="39" title="Grob&amp;#x27;s Attack" label="Grob Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q103632" start="62" end="75" title="chess opening" label="chess opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690563" start="199" end="219" title="International Master" label="International Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914729" start="225" end="236" title="John L. Watson" label="John Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q684458" start="495" end="505" title="Henri Grob" label="Henri Grob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128406" start="569" end="589" title="Correspondence chess" label="correspondence games"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="837" end="843" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161135" start="876" end="895" title="Savielly Tartakower" label="Savielly Tartakower"/>
<link wikidata="Q929009" start="929" end="952" title="simultaneous exhibition" label="simultaneous exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="1041" end="1046" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q764768" start="1179" end="1197" title="Irregular openings (chess)" label="irregular openings"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218856" start="1251" end="1281" title="Encyclopedia of Chess Openings" label="Encyclopedia of Chess Openings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926919" start="1605" end="1619" title="Michael Basman" label="Michael Basman"/>
<link wikidata="Q450419" start="1641" end="1650" title="John Nunn" label="John Nunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q131674" start="1698" end="1712" title="Anatoly Karpov" label="Anatoly Karpov"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="1738" end="1755" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q12823" start="1784" end="1796" title="Susan Polgar" label="Susan Polgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012266" start="1800" end="1817" title="Lindsborg, Kansas" label="Lindsborg, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048986" start="2153" end="2182" title="Top Chess Engine Championship" label="Top Chess Engine Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775686" start="2225" end="2234" title="Stockfish (chess)" label="Stockfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428455" start="2239" end="2245" title="Komodo (chess)" label="Komodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926919" start="2387" end="2401" title="Michael Basman" label="Michael Basman"/>
<link wikidata="Q105269" start="2406" end="2417" title="Grandmaster (chess)" label="Grandmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657148" start="2418" end="2435" title="Spyridon Skembris" label="Spyridon Skembris"/>
<link wikidata="Q507795" start="3609" end="3619" title="fianchetto" label="fianchetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328262" start="3912" end="3928" title="Richard Palliser" label="Richard Palliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q507795" start="4205" end="4222" title="Fianchetto" label="rule the diagonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q102877" start="4532" end="4540" title="castling" label="castling"/>
<link wikidata="Q189253" start="5127" end="5133" title="French Defence" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5833" end="5846" title="poisoned pawn" label="poisoned pawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q374709" start="6285" end="6307" title="List of chess openings" label="List of chess openings"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079730" start="6310" end="6351" title="List of chess openings named after people" label="List of chess openings named after people"/>
<link wikidata="Q764768" start="6354" end="6378" title="Irregular chess openings" label="Irregular chess openings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795184" wikidata="Q799000" url="?curid=795184" title="Badge">
<text>A badge is a device or accessory, often containing the insignia of an organization, which is presented or displayed to indicate some feat of service, a special accomplishment, a symbol of authority granted by taking an oath (e.g., police and fire), a sign of legitimate employment or student status, or as a simple means of identification. They are also used in advertising, publicity, and for branding purposes.

Badges can be made from metal, plastic, leather, textile, rubber, etc., and they are commonly attached to clothing, bags, footwear, vehicles, home electrical equipment, etc. Textile badges or patches can be either woven or embroidered, and can be attached by gluing, ironing-on, sewing or applique.

Badges have become highly collectable: in the UK, for example, the Badge Collectors&#x27; Circle has been in existence since 1980.

In the military, badges are used to denote the unit or arm to which the wearer belongs, and also qualifications received through military training, rank, etc. Similarly, youth organizations such as scouting and guiding use them to show group membership, awards and rank.

==History==
Badges were as popular as jewellery in the Middle Ages, and varied from extremely expensive works of jewellery, like the Dunstable Swan Jewel, to simple mold-made badges in lead or other base metals.
Specialized forms were the pilgrim badge, worn by those who had completed a pilgrimage, and heraldic or livery badges, worn to denote service or allegiance to a political figure — these last were especially popular in England, and became very controversial in the period leading up to the Wars of the Roses. One royal celebration in 1483 was marked by the distribution of 13,000 badges, a huge number relative to the population at the time. Other types were funerary badges, presumably presented to mourners for the funeral of important figures, and simple decorative badges with animals or hearts. The grandest form of badge was worn as a pendant to a metal collar, often in gold or silver-gilt.

From the livery badge, various badges of service evolved, worn by officials, soldiers and servants. In the British Army a metal (today often plastic) cap badge denoting the soldier&#x27;s regiment became standard by the 17th century, as in most European armies (though not always navies). By the 19th century a badge was an almost invariable part of any uniform, including school uniforms, which in the UK usually still feature the school&#x27;s badge in cloth on the breast pocket of the jacket or blazer.

==Various uses==
One of the best-known badges is the typically star-shaped U.S. sheriff&#x27;s badge, made famous in Westerns. The Chairman Mao badge is probably the most famous political badge. Members of fraternities and sororities often refer to the pins that signify their membership as badges.

The BBC children&#x27;s programme &quot;Blue Peter&quot; also awards its own &quot;Blue Peter badge&quot; to members of the public who appear on the show. These are highly collectable as they cannot be bought—except from people who have been awarded one and wish to sell it.

Case badges are thick, about deep, lucite stickers that are often packaged with various computer parts, such as processors and video cards. Modern computer cases are frequently embellished with an indentation on the case&#x27;s front panel to facilitate the affixing of a case badge.

Button badges are a highly collectible round badge with a plastic coating over a design or image. They often have a metal pin back or a safety pin style back. The most popular size is but the badges can range anywhere from this size right up to badges. This style of badge is used in political campaigning and often given as part of a birthday greeting such as a birthday card.

In the United States, the badges used by law enforcement, fire, and security guards are usually made of metal in various colors and finishes and are worn above the left chest pocket on the uniform shirt or jacket.
Detectives and other plainclothes personnel may wear them on a belt holder, or on a chain around the neck. Shapes are manifold, with municipal police departments tending to have some variation of a shield shape, and sheriff&#x27;s departments usually going with a 5, 6, or 7 point star shape. In most cases, an enameled seal of the organization, city, county, or company can be found in the center of the badge.
In computing, badges are used to demonstrate skills. In education, digital badges are used as alternative forms of credentials, similar to those being used in the MacArthur Foundation&#x27;s Badges for Lifelong Learning initiative.

In Japan, lawyers are often issued lapel pin badges which serve as an identification tool in court, or during their normal course of work. Since lawyers are vested with special powers by law, such as the power to compel government agencies to provide information, these badges provide a quick way for lawyers to identify themselves as such.

==Bibliography==
* Attwood, Philip, Badges. London: British Museum Press, 2004.
* Attwood, Philip, Acquisitions of badges (1978-1982). London : British Museum Occasional Paper 55, 1985.
* Attwood, Philip, Acquisition of badges (1983-1987). London: British Museum Occasional Paper 76, 1990.
* Bible, Don. Warrant Discs of the Gestapo &amp; Kripo, 1934-1946. Morristown, Tenn: Published privately by the author, 1991.
* C.G. Braxmar Co., Inc. (New York, N.Y.). Illustrated Catalogue of Fire &amp; Police Dept. Badges. New York: The company, 1921.
* Dinnes, Andrew Ross. Border War Badges: A Guide to South African Military &amp; Police Badges, 1964-1994. 2011.
* Houser, Todd R., Norm Sorenson, and Ronald L. Myers. A History of the City of Long Beach, California Police Badge. [Long Beach, Calif.]: Long Beach Police Historical Society, 2005.
* Mauldin, William. State Police &amp; State Highway Patrol Badge Guide. Meadows of Dan, Va: William Mauldin Productions, 1999.
* Taylor, Michael Bradley, and Victor Legender Wilkinson. Badges of Office: An Illustrated Guide to the Helmets and Badges of the British Police 1829 to 1989. Henley-on-Thames: Hazell, 1989.

== See also ==
==References==

* Setchfield, Frank (1986). &quot;Official Badge Collector&#x27;s Guide: From the 1890s to the 1980s&quot;. London: Longman. 

==External links==
*Badges in the Staten Island Historical Society Online Collections Database
*Badge Collectors&#x27; Circle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q799000" start="2" end="7" title="Badge" label="badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q552345" start="55" end="63" title="insignia" label="insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="70" end="82" title="organization" label="organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="438" end="443" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="445" end="452" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="454" end="461" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="463" end="470" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="472" end="478" title="natural rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q161928" start="536" end="544" title="footwear" label="footwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="760" end="762" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="853" end="861" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="1044" end="1052" title="scouting" label="scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1173" end="1184" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315707" start="1251" end="1271" title="Dunstable Swan Jewel" label="Dunstable Swan Jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q488638" start="1357" end="1370" title="pilgrim badge" label="pilgrim badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="1406" end="1416" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429148" start="1422" end="1430" title="heraldic badge" label="heraldic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429148" start="1434" end="1447" title="livery badges" label="livery badges"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="1619" end="1636" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q390584" start="2014" end="2025" title="silver-gilt" label="silver-gilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="2135" end="2147" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975547" start="2178" end="2187" title="cap badge" label="cap badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="2216" end="2224" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434" start="2382" end="2389" title="uniform" label="uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q862633" start="2401" end="2415" title="school uniform" label="school uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q883234" start="2527" end="2533" title="blazer" label="blazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278288" start="2611" end="2623" title="Sheriffs in the United States" label="U.S. sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="2653" end="2661" title="Western (genre)" label="Westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068080" start="2667" end="2685" title="Chairman Mao badge" label="Chairman Mao badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q996839" start="2742" end="2754" title="fraternities" label="fraternities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="2759" end="2769" title="sororities" label="sororities"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2840" end="2843" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247639" start="2876" end="2886" title="Blue Peter" label="Blue Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929623" start="2919" end="2935" title="Blue Peter badge" label="Blue Peter badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="3147" end="3153" title="lucite" label="lucite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132937" start="3397" end="3409" title="Pin-back button" label="Button badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q847301" start="3681" end="3702" title="political campaigning" label="political campaigning"/>
<link wikidata="Q20177666" start="3760" end="3773" title="birthday card" label="birthday card"/>
<link wikidata="Q44554" start="3817" end="3832" title="law enforcement" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578987" start="3834" end="3838" title="Fire guard" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q856887" start="3844" end="3859" title="security guards" label="security guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q842782" start="3990" end="3999" title="Detective" label="Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q116249968" start="4011" end="4033" title="Undercover" label="plainclothes personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="4123" end="4132" title="municipal" label="municipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="4133" end="4139" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="4405" end="4414" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276041" start="4469" end="4483" title="digital badges" label="digital badges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424691" start="4565" end="4585" title="MacArthur Foundation" label="MacArthur Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4638" end="4643" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="4645" end="4652" title="Lawyer" label="lawyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213426" start="4670" end="4679" title="lapel pin" label="lapel pin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795187" wikidata="Q642200" url="?curid=795187" title="Medina-Sidonia">
<text>Medina Sidonia is a city and municipality in the province of Cádiz in the autonomous community of Andalusia, southern Spain. Considered by some to be the oldest city in Europe, it is used as a military defence location because of its elevation. Locals are known as Asidonenses. The city&#x27;s name comes from Medina (Arabic for &quot;City&quot;) and Sidonia (of Sidon) and means &quot;City of Sidon&quot;.

Medina-Sidonia, one of Spain&#x27;s most important ducal seats in the 15th century, produced an admiral, Alonso Pérez de Guzmán, 7th Duke of Medina Sidonia, who led the Spanish Armada against England in 1588. The title of Duque de Medina Sidonia was bestowed upon the family of Guzmán El Bueno for his valiant role in taking the town. The line continues and was led until March 2008 by the controversial socialist Luisa Isabel Álvarez de Toledo, 21st Duchess of Medina Sidonia (born 1936).

==History==

This city was most likely ancient &quot;&quot;, an Iberian settlement which may have been founded by the Phoenicians, hence the later name &quot;Sidonia&quot; reflecting its foundation by Sidon. Its earliest phase is known through its coinage and its 2nd and 1st centuries BC issues bear the Latin inscription &quot;Asido&quot; but also Punic inscriptions such as &quot;&#x27;sdn&quot; or &quot;b&#x27;b&#x27;l&quot;, with Herakles and dolphins being notable obverse and reverse designs. The &quot;Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World&quot; equates this site with modern Medina Sidonia - lying within the ancient Roman province of Turdetania some inland from the southern Spanish coast, this site lay upon a hill c. to the east of Gades (modern Cadiz), and to the west of the &quot;Besilus&quot; river.
By the 3rd century BC the Romans had gained control over much of southern Spain; once coming under Roman hegemony this site was later referred to as Asido Caesarina.
In 571, Visigothic king Liuvigild attacked the Byzantines and captured Medina Sidonia.
In 712, the town was conquered by the Muslim commander Musa ibn Nusayr, and became the capital of the province of Sidonia in the emirate of Spain. The city was attacked by Vikings in 842. It returned to Christian hands with Alfonso X of Castile, in 1264, becoming a stronghold along the frontier with the last Muslim country in the Iberian Peninsula, the Kingdom of Granada. It was also the seat of several military orders.

In 1440, it became part of the lordship of the Dukes of Medina-Sidonia.

==Main sights==

The town is characterized by medieval walls and tidy, narrow cobbled streets flanked by rows of reja-fronted houses.
Sights include: 
*The Castle (13th-15th centuries)
*Roman archaeological complex (1st century AD)
*Town Hall (16th century)
*La Alameda (16th century)
*Ducal Stables (16th century)
*Castle of Torre-estrella (13th century)

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Duke of Medina Sidonia
* List of municipalities in Cádiz

==References==


&lt;br&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q642200" start="0" end="14" title="Medina-Sidonia" label="Medina Sidonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93178" start="29" end="41" title="Municipalities in Cadiz" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q81978" start="49" end="66" title="province of Cádiz" label="province of Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="74" end="94" title="Autonomous communities of Spain" label="autonomous community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="98" end="107" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="118" end="123" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="169" end="175" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="310" end="316" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="318" end="324" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="363" end="368" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="459" end="464" title="ducal" label="ducal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="504" end="511" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q278954" start="513" end="563" title="Alonso Pérez de Guzmán, 7th Duke of Medina Sidonia" label="Alonso Pérez de Guzmán, 7th Duke of Medina Sidonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="577" end="591" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="600" end="607" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122143" start="630" end="653" title="Duque de Medina Sidonia" label="Duque de Medina Sidonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734497" start="686" end="701" title="Guzmán El Bueno" label="Guzmán El Bueno"/>
<link wikidata="Q442262" start="822" end="884" title="Luisa Isabel Álvarez de Toledo, 21st Duchess of Medina Sidonia" label="Luisa Isabel Álvarez de Toledo, 21st Duchess of Medina Sidonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190992" start="963" end="970" title="Iberians" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1017" end="1028" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="1100" end="1105" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1204" end="1209" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="1249" end="1254" title="Punic" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="1335" end="1343" title="Herakles" label="Herakles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="1348" end="1356" title="Dolphin" label="dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725526" start="1371" end="1390" title="obverse and reverse" label="obverse and reverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863644" start="1410" end="1455" title="Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World" label="Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1526" end="1539" title="Ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8247313" start="1552" end="1562" title="Turdetania" label="Turdetania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="1666" end="1671" title="Cadiz" label="Cadiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="1829" end="1837" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q313065" start="1914" end="1923" title="Liuvigild" label="Liuvigild"/>
<link wikidata="Q740522" start="1937" end="1947" title="Spania" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="1998" end="2007" title="Islamic conquest of Spain" label="conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="2015" end="2021" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q301261" start="2032" end="2047" title="Musa ibn Nusayr" label="Musa ibn Nusayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="2106" end="2122" title="emirate of Spain" label="emirate of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="2180" end="2189" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47595" start="2201" end="2221" title="Alfonso X of Castile" label="Alfonso X of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="2309" end="2326" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="2332" end="2350" title="Kingdom of Granada" label="Kingdom of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q474717" start="2384" end="2399" title="Military order (monastic society)" label="military orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122143" start="2449" end="2472" title="Duke of Medina Sidonia" label="Dukes of Medina-Sidonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944889" start="2588" end="2592" title="reja" label="reja"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2631" end="2637" title="Castle of Medina-Sidonia" label="Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050430" start="2791" end="2815" title="Castle of Torre-estrella" label="Castle of Torre-estrella"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122143" start="2859" end="2881" title="Duke of Medina Sidonia" label="Duke of Medina Sidonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93178" start="2884" end="2915" title="List of municipalities in Cádiz" label="List of municipalities in Cádiz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795188" wikidata="Q15281541" url="?curid=795188" title="Luxury tax (sports)">
<text>A luxury tax in professional sports is a surcharge put on the aggregate payroll of a team to the extent to which it exceeds a predetermined guideline level set by the league. The ostensible purpose of this &quot;tax&quot; is to prevent teams in major markets with high incomes from signing almost all of the more talented players and hence destroying the competitive balance necessary for a sport to maintain fan interest. The money derived from the &quot;tax&quot; is either divided among the teams that play in the smaller markets, presumably to allow them to have more revenue to devote toward the contracts of high-quality players, or in the case of Major League Baseball, used by the league for other pre-defined purposes.

In North America, Major League Baseball has implemented the luxury tax system. The National Basketball Association also has a luxury tax provision; its utility is somewhat limited by the fact that the league also has a salary cap provision. The &quot;hard&quot; salary cap of the National Football League and the National Hockey League has prevented any need for a luxury tax arrangement.

==Methods for limiting payroll==
In the Big 4 North American sports leagues (Major League Baseball (MLB), National Basketball Association (NBA), National Football League (NFL), and National Hockey League (NHL)), there are three different methods employed to limit individual teams payroll: hard salary cap, soft salary cap with luxury tax, and luxury tax.

===Hard salary cap===
A hard salary cap is where the league sets a maximum amount of money allowed for player salaries, and no team can exceed that limit.

===Soft salary cap===
A soft salary cap has a set limit to player salaries, but there are several major exceptions that allow teams to exceed the salary cap. For example, in the case of the NBA, teams can exceed the salary cap when keeping players that are already on the team.

===Luxury tax===
A luxury tax system does not have a limit to how much money can be spent on player salaries. However, there is a tax levied on money spent above a threshold set by the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) between the players union and the owners. For every dollar a team spends above the tax threshold, they must also pay some fraction to the league. This system is used to discourage teams from greatly exceeding the tax threshold, with the goal of ensuring parity between large and small market teams.

==Luxury tax rules by league==

; Major League Baseball
: Luxury tax
; National Basketball Association
: Soft salary cap + luxury tax
; National Football League
: Hard salary cap
; National Hockey League
: Hard salary cap
; Major League Soccer
: Hard salary cap + Designated Player Rule exception (making it effectively a soft cap)
; Major League Rugby
: Hard salary cap
; Major League Lacrosse
: Hard salary cap
; National Lacrosse League
: Soft salary cap
===Major League Baseball (MLB)===
As explained by Fangraphs: &quot;Technically called the &#x27;Competitive Balance Tax&#x27;, the Luxury Tax is the punishment that large market teams get for spending too much money. While MLB does not have a set salary cap, the luxury tax charges teams with high payrolls a considerable amount of money, giving teams ample reason to want to keep their payrolls below that level.&quot;

The threshold level for the luxury tax will be $189MM in 2014 (up from $178MM from 2011 to 2013) and will remain at $189MM through 2016. From 2012 through 2016, teams who exceed the threshold for the first time must pay 17.5% of the amount they are over, 30% for the second consecutive year over, 40% for the third consecutive year over, and 50% for four or more consecutive years over the cap.

Only eight teams have ever exceeded the luxury tax threshold: the San Francisco Giants, the Boston Red Sox, the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, the Detroit Tigers, the Los Angeles Dodgers, the New York Yankees, the Chicago Cubs for the first time in 2016 and the Washington Nationals for the first time in 2018. Only the Red Sox, Dodgers and Yankees have exceeded it more than once. The LA Dodgers have exceeded it four times. Boston has exceeded it six times. New York has exceeded it fourteen times, or, every year since it has been in enforcement. In aggregate, the Yankees have paid out some $325.00 MM, 73.78% of the total fines assessed since the luxury tax began.

In 2016 a record six teams were issued the luxury tax by MLB. The Los Angeles Dodgers ($31.8 million), the New York Yankees ($27.4 million), the Boston Red Sox ($4.5 million), the Detroit Tigers ($4 million), the San Francisco Giants ($3.4 million) and the Chicago Cubs ($2.96 million).

In 2017 the same six teams from 2016 were issued the luxury tax by MLB. Against the $195 million threshold + $13 million for player benefits, payrolls for the Los Angeles Dodgers ($244 million), New York Yankees ($209.3 million ), Boston Red Sox ($187.9 million), Detroit Tigers ($190.4 million), San Francisco Giants ($186.4 million) and Chicago Cubs ($199.5 million) were in excess. This was the 15th straight year the New York Yankees paid the luxury tax.

In 2018 only two teams met the luxury tax by MLB: The Boston Red Sox ($9.4 million) and The Washington Nationals ($1.2 million). Several teams came just under the $197 million tax threshold: The San Francisco Giants ($196.66 million), The Chicago Cubs ($183.9 million), Houston Astros ($182.4 million), Los Angeles Dodgers ($181.99 million) and New York Yankees ($178.8 million).

The luxury tax is separate from revenue sharing, which is a system to balance out the income distribution between large and small market teams by dividing money from merchandise sales and media contracts. The money generated from the luxury tax is not distributed to the rest of the league, as is the case with the NBA, but rather is used for other purposes. The first $2,375,400 and 50% of the remaining total are used to fund player benefits, 25% goes to the Industry Growth Fund, and the remaining 25% is used to defray teams&#x27; funding obligations from player benefits.

===National Basketball Association (NBA)===
The NBA utilizes a soft salary cap, meaning there is a salary cap but there are a variety of exceptions that allow teams to exceed that cap. For example, teams can re-sign players already on the team to an amount up to the maximum salary allowed by the league for up to five years regardless of where their payroll is relative to the cap. This provision is known as the &quot;Larry Bird&quot; exception, named after the former Boston Celtics player who was retained by that team until his retirement under the provisions of this rule. The result is that the majority of teams are over the cap at any given time.

In addition to the soft cap, the NBA utilizes a luxury tax system that is applied if the team payroll exceeds a separate threshold higher than the salary cap. These teams pay a penalty for each dollar their team salary exceeds the tax level. From 2002 to 2013, if a team exceeded the luxury tax threshold, they must pay one dollar to the league for every dollar that they are over the limit. For the 2013–14 season and onward, teams paid an incremental rate based on their team salary. They also have to pay a repeat offender rate, which is an additional dollar for every dollar over. For 2014–15 teams pay the repeater rate if they also were taxpayers in all of the previous three seasons. For 2015-16 and all subsequent seasons, teams pay the repeater rate if they were taxpayers in at least three of the four previous seasons. The table of rates is shown below.

==== Current tax levels ====
The resulting total is then distributed to the remaining teams that are under the tax threshold.

There was no luxury tax implemented in the 2004–2005 season due to insufficient basketball-related income. 

===Canadian Football League===

The Canadian Football League has a luxury tax. Penalties for teams that breach the salary cap regulations are:

===Other leagues===
The National Football League (NFL) and the National Hockey League (NHL) both have hard salary caps, making it unnecessary to utilize the luxury tax.

Several other leagues in the United States and abroad use salary caps, but the luxury tax is uncommon.

==See also==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15281541" start="2" end="12" title="Luxury tax (sports)" label="luxury tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="732" end="745" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="747" end="768" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="812" end="843" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213980" start="855" end="865" title="NBA Salary Cap" label="luxury tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369344" start="948" end="958" title="salary cap" label="salary cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="1009" end="1033" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="1042" end="1064" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369344" start="1505" end="1515" title="salary cap" label="salary cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="2096" end="2127" title="Collective bargaining" label="Collective Bargaining Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="2468" end="2489" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="2505" end="2536" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="2570" end="2594" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="2615" end="2637" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="2658" end="2677" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132582" start="2698" end="2720" title="Designated Player Rule" label="Designated Player Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592108" start="2768" end="2786" title="Major League Rugby" label="Major League Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634225" start="2807" end="2828" title="Major League Lacrosse" label="Major League Lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550259" start="2849" end="2873" title="National Lacrosse League" label="National Lacrosse League"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="3775" end="3795" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="3801" end="3815" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="3821" end="3850" title="Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim" label="Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="3856" end="3870" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="3876" end="3895" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="3901" end="3917" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="3923" end="3935" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q825838" start="3971" end="3991" title="Washington Nationals" label="Washington Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="4446" end="4465" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="4487" end="4503" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="4525" end="4539" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="4560" end="4574" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="4593" end="4613" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="4637" end="4649" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="4827" end="4846" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="4863" end="4879" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="4899" end="4913" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="4932" end="4946" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="4965" end="4985" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="5007" end="5019" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="5089" end="5105" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6501" end="6533" title="NBA Salary Cap#Larry Bird exception" label="&amp;quot;Larry Bird&amp;quot; exception"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="6558" end="6572" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="7882" end="7906" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795191" wikidata="Q848852" url="?curid=795191" title="Eurobeat">
<text>Eurobeat refers to two styles of dance music that originated in Europe: one is a British variant of Italian Eurodisco-influenced dance-pop, and the other is a hi-NRG-driven form of Italo disco. Both forms were developed in the 1980s.

Producer trio Stock Aitken Waterman and pop band Dead or Alive made Eurobeat music more popular in the United States and Southeast Asia, where Eurobeat was historically marketed as hi-NRG (pronounced as &quot;high energy&quot;). For a short while, it also shared this term with early freestyle music and Italo disco.

==Overview==
In the late 1970s, Eurodisco musicians such as Silver Convention and Donna Summer were popular in America. 

In the 1980s, a highly polished production with &quot;musical simplicity&quot; at its core — from Bubblegum Pop-like lyrics, catchy (in some cases Italian, in other Eurodisco-like) melodies, to &quot;elementary&quot; song structures — an average British Eurobeat song took very little time to complete. Bananarama&#x27;s &quot;Venus&quot; and Mel &amp; Kim&#x27;s &quot;Showing Out (Get Fresh at the Weekend)&quot; were said to be completed in a day, according to Pete Waterman of Stock Aitken Waterman.

Eurobeat lyrics and melody are very simple. Italo disco, sometimes fast and happy music like EDM, with a sequenced octave bassline. Many feature guitars as a beginning section, followed by a thunderous, highly technical synthesizer riff which is then repeated after the chorus. Songs usually repeat the verse, bridge, and chorus multiple times during the song. The beginning is typically like an instrumental rendition of the verse, bridge, and chorus, while the riff is a lot like an instrumental version of the chorus.
==Use of the term==
British record producer Ian Levine&#x27;s Eastbound Expressway, released the single &quot;You&#x27;re a Beat&quot; in recognition of the slower tempo of hi-NRG music emerging from Europe. Many European acts managed to break through under this new recognition, namely the likes of Modern Talking, Bad Boys Blue, Taffy, and Spagna. The term &quot;Eurobeat&quot; was subsequently used commercially to describe the Stock Aitken Waterman–produced hits by Dead or Alive, Bananarama, Jason Donovan, Sonia, and Kylie Minogue which were heavily based on the British experience with Italo disco. During 1986–1988, it was used for specific Italian 1980s Eurodisco imports, such as Sabrina Salerno, Spagna, and Baltimora but was also used in the United States as a catch-all term for UK-based dance and electropop groups of the time such as Pet Shop Boys, purported to have a &quot;European beat&quot;, hence Eurobeat. By 1989, with the advent of Eurodance and Euro house, the term was dropped in the UK.

==History==
===United Kingdom===
The trio of British record producers, songwriters, and former DJs Mike Stock, Matt Aitken, and Pete Waterman were involved in the British underground club culture, encountering the Black American soul music-focused scene called Northern Soul, Italian pop-Eurodisco, and sped-up Motown Sound-inspired tracks. As underground record producers, they sought to recapture the &quot;nostalgia&quot; of Motown Sound with a hint of campy playfulness where the simplicity of musical structures, like in Italian disco, was preferred. This musical formula was proven to be successful enough to be capitalized on as they had a string of top 10 UK hits in the 1980s to the point of their version of Eurobeat becoming synonymous with British pop music as a whole.

Pete Burns of Dead or Alive regularly fought the production team over &quot;[having to adhere] to their production methods and concepts&quot; which SAW were &quot;quite firm about&quot;. Burns went on making a next album, produced by Burns and Dead or Alive drummer Steve Coy, without them, called &quot;Nude&quot;. Epic (licensed by Sony Europe) was reluctant about releasing the album but it turned out to be so successful in Japan that it was awarded the Japan Record Award Grand Prix for Best International Album of 1989 in the &#x27;Pop&#x27; or &#x27;Popular&#x27; Category.

===Italy and Japan===
====&quot;By the Italians, for the Japanese&quot;====
Meanwhile, in Japan in 1985, the term &quot;Eurobeat&quot; was applied to all continental-European dance music imports. These were mainly Italian and West German-produced Italo disco releases. That sound became the soundtrack of the Para Para nightclub culture, which has existed since the early 1980s. Japan experienced Italo disco through the success of the West German group Arabesque, which broke up in 1984. This did not prevent the release of two Italo disco-sounding singles in 1985 and 1986, produced and mixed by Michael Cretu (of Enigma). The later solo success of Arabesque&#x27;s lead singer Sandra further introduced this sound to Japan. This attracted the attention of many Italo disco producers (mostly Italians and Germans), though by the late 1980s the West Germans had faded out of Italo disco and focused on more popular scenes, mainly trance. 


The Japanese Para Para dance culture is influenced by Eurobeat.
In the early 1990s, Eurobeat&#x27;s popularity was gradually decreasing in Japan. Two Japanese men, namely Masato &quot;Max&quot; Matsuura the owner and a managing director of Avex a small import record shop at the time, decided to release a compilation CD. They went to Italy and met Giancarlo Pasquini (later known as Dave Rodgers), then a member of the Italo disco band Aleph. Together they restarted in the end of 1990 the &quot;Super Eurobeat&quot; compilation, which was beforehand an Italo-disco based CD series released by Beat Freak Label in 1990, a compilation CD which saw instant success and re-ignited Eurobeat&#x27;s popularity in Japan. Avex also collaborated with foundational Eurobeat labels A-Beat C, Time, and Delta long after Eurobeat&#x27;s mainstream popularity peak.

Eurobeat&#x27;s sound (in the Japanese market) is its main link to its Italo disco origins, where it was just one of many different experiments in pure electronic dance. There are certain synth instruments that recur across the entire genre: a sequenced octave bass, the energetic (sometimes wild) and heavy use of synths, distinctive brass and harp sounds, and tight, predictable percussion in the background.

The 1996 video game Sega Touring Car Championship first featured Eurobeat as racing music. The anime series &quot;Initial D&quot;, based on the manga by Shuichi Shigeno, uses Eurobeat music regularly in its episodes during racing scenes between the characters, and because of this it has come to the attention of some anime fans outside Japan. The series, as well as the video games by Sega, use a large playlist of Eurobeat songs (for example, the trio of &quot;Deja Vu&quot; by Dave Rodgers, &quot;Running in the 90s&quot; by Max Coveri, and &quot;Gas Gas Gas&quot; by Manuel Caramori). There are also many Eurobeat songs based on the series itself, including: &quot;Takumi&quot; by Neo, &quot;Speed Car&quot; by D-Team and &quot;DDD Initial D (My Car is Fantasy)&quot; by Mega NRG Man. &quot;Initial D&quot;″s successor, MF Ghost, uses Eurobeat as background music in the same way as its predecessor. Another anime called &quot;Dear Boys&quot;, which focuses on basketball, also features Eurobeat during basketball game sequences. 

In 1998, Bemani, a branch of the video game company Konami made a hit video dance machine, &quot;Dance Dance Revolution&quot;. The game acquired Eurobeat songs from the &quot;Dancemania&quot; compilation series published by Toshiba EMI. Though there was not much Eurobeat from 2006&#x27;s SuperNOVA on, the series still features some tracks as of 2021. Other music games in Konami&#x27;s lineup feature a large number of Eurobeat tracks, including &quot;Beatmania&quot;, &quot;Beatmania IIDX&quot;, &quot;jubeat&quot;, and many more. The popularity of the genre also led Konami to create a Para Para game, &quot;ParaParaParadise&quot;, though it was less successful than their other series.

&quot;Wangan Midnight the Movie&quot;, which was a film adaptation of the manga and anime series of the same name, features some Eurobeat songs, though only in some scenes as it has an original score playing through race sequences. Similarly, the &quot;Wangan Midnight Maximum Tune&quot; arcade games by Namco feature a trance soundtrack, in a similar way to how &quot;Initial D&quot; has Eurobeat.

==J-Euro==

Types of music called &quot;J-Euro&quot; (Japanese Eurobeat) include:

* Eurobeat songs made in Italy, covered by Japanese artists with Japanese lyrics. This type of &quot;J-Euro&quot; appeared first in the early 1990s. Notable artists of this type of &quot;J-Euro&quot; have included MAX, D&amp;D, V6, Dream, and the &quot;Queen of J-pop&quot; Namie Amuro.
* J-pop songs made in Japan, remixed in the style of Eurobeat by Italian Eurobeat producers. This type of &quot;J-Euro&quot; appeared first on the 1999 issue of &quot;Super Eurobeat&quot;, &quot;Vol. 100&quot;, with several tracks of this type of &quot;J-Euro&quot; by MAX, Every Little Thing, and Ayumi Hamasaki. This type of &quot;J-Euro&quot; has been popular in the para para scene since around 2000. Avex Trax launched the &quot;Super Eurobeat Presents : J-Euro&quot; series in 2000. This series included &quot;Ayu-ro Mix 1, 2 and 3&quot;, plus a fourth remix album missing the &quot;Super Eurobeat&quot; tag featuring Ayumi Hamasaki, &quot;Euro Every Little Thing&quot; featuring Every Little Thing, &quot;Hyper Euro MAX&quot; featuring MAX, &quot;Euro global&quot; featuring globe, &quot;Euro Dream Land&quot; featuring Dream, &quot;J-Euro Best&quot;, &quot;J-Euro Non-Stop Best&quot;, etc.

* Eurobeat songs made in Japan, and sung by Japanese artists themselves. This type of Eurobeat has always been present since the 2000s, but only started to gain attention once the para para scene began promoting songs in this style. Most songs are anime remixes or J-pop covers, which has led to some calling it an &quot;anime boom&quot;. Eurobeat labels that showcase this type of J-Euro are &quot;A-One&quot;, &quot;Akiba Koubou INC/Akiba Records&quot;, &quot;Eurobeat Union&quot;, &quot;Fantasy Dance Tracks&quot;, &quot;Plum Music&quot;, Sound Holic, &quot;SuganoMusic&quot;, &quot;TTL Sound&quot;, &quot;Takanashi Koubou&quot; and more.

===Para Para===

One of the dance moves Eurobeat spawned was , a type of Eurobeat music-inspired Japanese youth social dance performed in unison.

==See also==
*List of Eurobeat artists
*Super Eurobeat
*Eurobeat Disney
*&quot;Initial D&quot;
*Italo disco

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q848852" start="0" end="8" title="Eurobeat" label="Eurobeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="33" end="44" title="dance music" label="dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="64" end="70" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374731" start="108" end="117" title="Eurodisco" label="Eurodisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q211756" start="129" end="138" title="dance-pop" label="dance-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q606393" start="159" end="165" title="hi-NRG" label="hi-NRG"/>
<link wikidata="Q744417" start="181" end="192" title="Italo disco" label="Italo disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q945153" start="249" end="270" title="Stock Aitken Waterman" label="Stock Aitken Waterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q368961" start="284" end="297" title="Dead or Alive (band)" label="Dead or Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q606393" start="416" end="422" title="hi-NRG" label="hi-NRG"/>
<link wikidata="Q655514" start="519" end="534" title="Latin freestyle" label="freestyle music"/>
<link wikidata="Q125533" start="613" end="630" title="Silver Convention" label="Silver Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q908933" start="635" end="647" title="Donna Summer" label="Donna Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q997481" start="773" end="786" title="Bubblegum Pop" label="Bubblegum Pop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1002" end="1007" title="Venus (Shocking Blue song)#Bananarama version" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503259" start="1045" end="1083" title="Showing Out (Get Fresh at the Weekend)" label="Showing Out (Get Fresh at the Weekend)"/>
<link wikidata="Q945153" start="1156" end="1177" title="Stock Aitken Waterman" label="Stock Aitken Waterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="1273" end="1276" title="Electronic dance music" label="EDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1721" end="1728" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779765" start="1745" end="1755" title="Ian Levine" label="Ian Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27417" start="2001" end="2015" title="Modern Talking" label="Modern Talking"/>
<link wikidata="Q681697" start="2017" end="2030" title="Bad Boys Blue" label="Bad Boys Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980088" start="2032" end="2037" title="Taffy (singer)" label="Taffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q265508" start="2043" end="2049" title="Spagna" label="Spagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q945153" start="2132" end="2153" title="Stock Aitken Waterman" label="Stock Aitken Waterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q368961" start="2171" end="2184" title="Dead or Alive (band)" label="Dead or Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q725926" start="2186" end="2196" title="Bananarama" label="Bananarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q287817" start="2198" end="2211" title="Jason Donovan" label="Jason Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q437107" start="2213" end="2218" title="Sonia (singer)" label="Sonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="2224" end="2237" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374731" start="2364" end="2373" title="Eurodisco" label="Eurodisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q232479" start="2391" end="2406" title="Sabrina Salerno" label="Sabrina Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q265508" start="2408" end="2414" title="Spagna" label="Spagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q353025" start="2420" end="2429" title="Baltimora" label="Baltimora"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2455" end="2468" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="2502" end="2507" title="dance music" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188450" start="2512" end="2522" title="electropop" label="electropop"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="2550" end="2563" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q216961" start="2656" end="2665" title="Eurodance" label="Eurodance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928583" start="2976" end="2989" title="northern soul" label="Northern Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082089" start="3498" end="3508" title="Pete Burns" label="Pete Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q368961" start="3512" end="3525" title="Dead or Alive (band)" label="Dead or Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879248" start="3802" end="3806" title="Nude (Dead or Alive album)" label="Nude"/>
<link wikidata="Q241257" start="3956" end="3974" title="Japan Record Award" label="Japan Record Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q744417" start="4327" end="4338" title="Italo disco" label="Italo disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331500" start="4389" end="4398" title="Para Para" label="Para Para"/>
<link wikidata="Q261058" start="4534" end="4543" title="Arabesque (group)" label="Arabesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q77006" start="4678" end="4691" title="Michael Cretu" label="Michael Cretu"/>
<link wikidata="Q485512" start="4696" end="4702" title="Enigma (German band)" label="Enigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q76901" start="4760" end="4766" title="Sandra Cretu" label="Sandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q170435" start="5011" end="5017" title="Trance music" label="trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331500" start="5035" end="5044" title="Para Para" label="Para Para"/>
<link wikidata="Q565134" start="5193" end="5224" title="Max Matsuura" label="Masato &amp;quot;Max&amp;quot; Matsuura"/>
<link wikidata="Q790686" start="5262" end="5266" title="Avex Group" label="Avex"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="5328" end="5342" title="compilation CD" label="compilation CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205935" start="5406" end="5418" title="Dave Rodgers" label="Dave Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716166" start="5459" end="5464" title="Aleph (musician)" label="Aleph"/>
<link wikidata="Q840526" start="5519" end="5533" title="Super Eurobeat" label="Super Eurobeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528947" start="5805" end="5809" title="Time Records" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="6029" end="6045" title="Electronic dance music" label="electronic dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446169" start="6309" end="6338" title="Sega Touring Car Championship" label="Sega Touring Car Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="6384" end="6389" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q164883" start="6403" end="6412" title="Initial D" label="Initial D"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="6433" end="6438" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280124" start="6442" end="6457" title="Shuichi Shigeno" label="Shuichi Shigeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q721641" start="6660" end="6671" title="Initial D (video game series)" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="6675" end="6679" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205935" start="6769" end="6781" title="Dave Rodgers" label="Dave Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q723546" start="6817" end="6827" title="Maurizio De Jorio" label="Max Coveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q48746227" start="7113" end="7121" title="MF Ghost" label="MF Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q703071" start="7220" end="7229" title="Dear Boys" label="Dear Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q45700" start="7377" end="7383" title="Konami" label="Konami"/>
<link wikidata="Q908392" start="7422" end="7444" title="Dance Dance Revolution" label="Dance Dance Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215367" start="7500" end="7510" title="Dancemania" label="Dancemania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365614" start="7549" end="7560" title="Toshiba EMI" label="Toshiba EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q591361" start="7779" end="7788" title="Beatmania" label="Beatmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322130" start="7802" end="7816" title="Beatmania IIDX" label="Beatmania IIDX"/>
<link wikidata="Q911617" start="7830" end="7836" title="jubeat" label="jubeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331500" start="7915" end="7924" title="Para Para" label="Para Para"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191800" start="7937" end="7953" title="ParaParaParadise" label="ParaParaParadise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633503" start="8091" end="8130" title="Wangan Midnight" label="manga and anime series of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q309996" start="8321" end="8326" title="Namco" label="Namco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272730" start="8714" end="8717" title="MAX (band)" label="MAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q848608" start="8719" end="8726" title="D&amp;amp;D (band)" label="D&amp;amp;D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156338" start="8728" end="8730" title="V6 (band)" label="V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155446" start="8732" end="8737" title="Dream (Japanese band)" label="Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q266676" start="8774" end="8785" title="Namie Amuro" label="Namie Amuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272730" start="9056" end="9059" title="MAX (band)" label="MAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137848" start="9061" end="9079" title="Every Little Thing (band)" label="Every Little Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188111" start="9085" end="9099" title="Ayumi Hamasaki" label="Ayumi Hamasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331500" start="9157" end="9166" title="para para" label="para para"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988428" start="9192" end="9201" title="Avex Trax" label="Avex Trax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700256" start="9303" end="9315" title="Super Eurobeat Presents Ayu-ro Mix" label="Ayu-ro Mix 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700256" start="9317" end="9318" title="Super Eurobeat Presents Ayu-ro Mix 2" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q793347" start="9323" end="9324" title="Rmx Works from Super Eurobeat Presents Ayu-ro Mix 3" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q15715389" start="9339" end="9345" title="Ayu-mi-x 7 Presents Ayu-ro Mix 4" label="fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188111" start="9411" end="9425" title="Ayumi Hamasaki" label="Ayumi Hamasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11245104" start="9433" end="9456" title="Super Eurobeat presents Euro Every Little Thing" label="Euro Every Little Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137848" start="9473" end="9491" title="Every Little Thing (band)" label="Every Little Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11245107" start="9499" end="9513" title="Super Eurobeat presents Hyper Euro Max" label="Hyper Euro MAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272730" start="9530" end="9533" title="MAX (band)" label="MAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q307165" start="9569" end="9574" title="Globe (band)" label="globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060540" start="9582" end="9597" title="Super Eurobeat Presents Euro Dream Land" label="Euro Dream Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155446" start="9614" end="9619" title="Dream (Japanese band)" label="Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103709" start="9652" end="9672" title="J-Euro Non-Stop Best" label="J-Euro Non-Stop Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331500" start="9866" end="9875" title="para para" label="para para"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996465" start="10490" end="10514" title="List of Eurobeat artists" label="List of Eurobeat artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q840526" start="10516" end="10530" title="Super Eurobeat" label="Super Eurobeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411694" start="10532" end="10547" title="Eurobeat Disney" label="Eurobeat Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q164883" start="10555" end="10564" title="Initial D" label="Initial D"/>
<link wikidata="Q744417" start="10572" end="10583" title="Italo disco" label="Italo disco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795192" wikidata="Q312402" url="?curid=795192" title="Setnakhte">
<text>Userkhaure-setepenre Setnakhte (also called Setnakht or Sethnakht) was the first pharaoh (1189 BC–1186 BC) of the Twentieth Dynasty of the New Kingdom of Egypt and the father of Ramesses III.

==Accession==

Setnakhte was not the son, brother or a direct descendant of either Twosret or Merneptah Siptah—the immediately preceding two pharaohs—nor that of Siptah&#x27;s predecessor Seti II, whom Ramesses III, Setnakhte&#x27;s son, formally considered the last legitimate ruler in his Medinet Habu kinglist. Setnakhte was a man of unknown origins who seized the throne during a time of crisis and political unrest likely from Twosret and he was presumably a minor descendant of Ramesses II through a separate family line from that of Seti II, Siptah and Twosret. As Aidan Dodson writes, Setnakhte&#x27;s accession to power as an usurper is confirmed by a victory stela at Elephantine at Aswan, which shows his rise to power was accompanied by violence and a civil war: The great assembly of the gods is pleased with his plans like Re, since the land had been in confusion...[The great god] stretched out his arm and selected his person, l.p.h., from among the millions, dismissing the hundreds of thousands prior to him...Now his person, l.p.h., was like his father Sutekh, who flexed his arms to rid Egypt of those who had led it astray...Fear of him has seized the hearts of opponents before him: they flee like [flocks] of sparrows with a falcon after them. They left silver and gold...which they had given to these Asiatics in order for them to bring reinforcements...Their plans failed and the plans were futile, as every god and goddess performed wonders for the good god, proclaiming the [onse]t of a slaughter under him...On Year 2, II Shemu 10 [of king Setnakhte] there were no (more) opponents of his person, l.p.h., in any lands. They came to inform his person, l.p.h.: ‘Let your heart be happy, O lord of this land; those things that the god foretold have come to pass and your foes do not exist in the land...&quot;

Setnakhte&#x27;s opponents are depicted to be desperate enough to hire supporters from Syria and Palestine, in this stela. 

Senakhte married Tiy-Merenese, who was perhaps a daughter of Merneptah. A connection between Setnakhte&#x27;s successors and the preceding Nineteenth Dynasty is also suggested by one of Ramesses II&#x27;s children bearing this name and that similar names are shared by Setnakhte&#x27;s descendants, such as Ramesses, Amun-her-khepshef, Seth-her-khepshef and Monthu-her-khepshef.

==Reign length==
Setnakhte was originally believed to have enjoyed a reign of only two years based upon his Year 2 Elephantine stela but his third regnal year is now attested in Inscription No. 271 on Mount Sinai. If his theoretical accession date is assumed to be II Shemu 10, based on the date of his Elephantine stela, Setnakhte would have ruled Egypt for at least two years and 11 months before he died, or nearly three full years. This date is 1 day removed from Twosret&#x27;s highest known date of Year 8, II Shemu 9 (although Twosret is known to have ruled for a minimum of 6 more months at her mortuary temple at Gournah), and is based upon a calculation of Ramesses III&#x27;s known accession date of I Shemu 26. Peter Clayton also assigned Setnakhte a reign of three years in his 1994 book on the Egyptian pharaohs.
In a mid-January 2007 issue of the Egyptian weekly &quot;Al-Ahram&quot; however, Egyptian antiquity officials announced that a recently discovered and well-preserved quartzite stela belonging to the High Priest of Amun Bakenkhunsu was explicitly dated to Year 4 of Setnakhte&#x27;s reign. The &quot;Al-Ahram&quot; article notes that this data: contradicts...the official record, which says Setnakhte ruled Egypt for only three years. According to the new information provided by the stela, Setnakhte&#x27;s reign certainly lasted for four years, and may have continued for [a little] longer.

Zahi Hawass, the former Secretary General of Egypt&#x27;s Supreme Council of Antiquities, declared the discovery to be one of the most important finds of 2006 because &quot;it adjusts the history of the 20th Dynasty and reveals more about the life of Bakenkhunsu.&quot; As Setnakhte&#x27;s reign was short, he may have come to the throne fairly late in life.

However, the &quot;Al-Ahram&quot; figure does not change the fact that Setnakhte likely truly ruled Egypt for only three, rather than four, full years since there are no Year 1 dates attested for him, and his famous Year 2 Elephantine stela states that Setnakhte finally secured his kingship after defeating all his opponents and challengers to the throne in his second year. The date of the Elephantine stela in Year 2 II Shemu day 10 of Setnakhte&#x27;s reign—the date of which is mentioned only halfway in the stela rather than at its start—is immediately followed by this proclamation: &quot;There were no opponents against His Majesty, l.p.h., in all the lands.&quot;

This reference to the defeat of Setnakhte&#x27;s enemies implies that this specific date marked the termination of a conflict—presumably Setnakhte&#x27;s struggle for the throne—which extended partly into his second year and means that Setnakhte&#x27;s first year would have overlapped with Twosret&#x27;s final year, if Twosret was his opponent. Therefore, he likely did not even rule Egypt in his theoretical first year and could only properly administer the country from sometime during his second year. In any event, there was an interregnum lasting at least a year in which no ruler controlled all of Egypt and Setnakhte&#x27;s effective reign length should be reduced by a year from 4 to 3 years.

Setnakhte&#x27;s Elephantine stela touches on this chaotic period and refers explicitly to the expulsion of certain Asiatics, who fled Egypt, abandoning the gold which they had looted from Egyptian temples. It is uncertain the degree to which this inscription referred to contemporary events or rather repeated anti-Asiatic sentiment from the reign of Pharaoh Ahmose I. Setnakhte identified with the God Atum or Temu, and built a temple to this God at Per-Atum (Biblical Pithom).
After his death, Setnakhte was buried in KV14 which was originally designed to be Twosret&#x27;s royal tomb. His mummy has never been identified with certainty, although the so–called &quot;mummy in the boat&quot; found in KV35 was sometimes identified with him, an attribution rejected by Aidan Dodson who rather believes the body belonged to a royal family member of Amenhotep II of the 18th Dynasty. In any case the mummy was destroyed in a looting in 1901, thus preventing any analysis of it.

==Monuments==

While Setnakhte&#x27;s reign was still comparatively brief, it was just long enough for him to stabilize the political situation in Egypt and establish his son, Rameses III, as his successor to the throne of Egypt. The Bakenkhunsu stela reveals that it was Setnakhte who began the construction of a Temple of Amun-Re in Karnak which was eventually completed by his son, Ramesses III. Setnakhte also started work on a tomb, KV11, in the Valley of the Kings, but stopped it when the tombcarvers accidentally broke into the tomb of the Nineteenth Dynasty Pharaoh Amenmesse. Setnakhte then appropriated the tomb of Queen Twosret (KV14), his predecessor, for his own use.
==Papyrus Harris==
The beginning of the Great Harris Papyrus or Papyrus Harris I, which documents the reign of Ramesses III, provides some details about Setnakhte&#x27;s rise to power. An excerpt of James Henry Breasted&#x27;s 1906 translation of this document is provided below:

:The land of Egypt was overthrown from without, and every man was thrown out of his right; they had no &quot;chief mouth&quot; for many years formerly until other times. The land of Egypt was in the hands of chiefs and of rulers of towns; one slew his neighbour, great and small. Other times having come after it, with empty years, Irsu (&#x27;a self-made man&#x27;), a certain Syrian (Kharu) was with them as chief (wr). He set plundering their (i.e., the people&#x27;s) possessions. They made gods like men, and no offerings were presented in the temples.

:But when the gods inclined themselves to peace, to set the land in its rights according to its accustomed manner, they established their son, who came forth from their limbs, to be ruler, LPH, of every land, upon their great throne, Userkhaure-setepenre-meryamun, LPH, the son of Re, Setnakht-merire-meryamun, LPH. He was Khepri-Set, when he is enraged; he set in order the entire land which had been rebellious; he slew the rebels who were in the land of Egypt; he cleansed the great throne of Egypt; he was ruler of the Two Lands, on the throne of Atum. He gave ready faces to those who had been turned away. Every man knew his brother who had been walled in. He established the temples in possession of divine offerings, to offer to the gods according to their customary stipulations.

Until 2000, Chancellor Bay was considered the only plausible candidate for this Irsu. However, an IFAO Ostracon no. 1864 found at Deir el-Medina dated to Year 5 records that &#x27;Pharaoh (Siptah) LPH has killed the great enemy, Bay&#x27;. Because Chancellor Bay died at least 3 years before this &#x27;Irsu&#x27;, he can no longer be considered a plausible candidate for this historical figure.

==Genetics==
In December 2012, a genetic study conducted by the same researchers who decoded King Tutankhamun&#x27;s DNA found that Ramesses III, Setnakhte&#x27;s son and second pharaoh of the Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt belonged to Y-DNA E-V38, alternatively known as haplogroup E1b1a.

==References==
==Bibliography==

* James H. Breasted, Ancient Records of Egypt, Vol No.4,(1906)
* Erik Hornung, &quot;Untersuchungen zur Chronologie und Geschichte des Neuen Reiches&quot; (1964)
* J. Von Beckerath, Chronologie des Pharaonischen Ägypten, Philip Von Zabern, (Mainz: 1997), pp. 94–98 and pp. 201–202</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312402" start="0" end="30" title="Setnakhte" label="Userkhaure-setepenre Setnakhte"/>
<link wikidata="Q312402" start="44" end="52" title="Setnakhte" label="Setnakht"/>
<link wikidata="Q312402" start="56" end="65" title="Setnakhte" label="Sethnakht"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="81" end="88" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033104" start="90" end="97" title="1180s BC" label="1189 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033104" start="98" end="105" title="1180s BC" label="1186 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q583501" start="114" end="131" title="Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Twentieth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="139" end="159" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528" start="178" end="190" title="Ramesses III" label="Ramesses III"/>
<link wikidata="Q158012" start="276" end="283" title="Twosret" label="Twosret"/>
<link wikidata="Q158059" start="297" end="303" title="Siptah" label="Siptah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048" start="381" end="388" title="Seti II" label="Seti II"/>
<link wikidata="Q158012" start="625" end="632" title="Twosret" label="Twosret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="677" end="688" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q403881" start="765" end="777" title="Aidan Dodson" label="Aidan Dodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q284009" start="871" end="882" title="Elephantine" label="Elephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="886" end="891" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321008" start="2171" end="2183" title="Tiy-Merenese" label="Tiy-Merenese"/>
<link wikidata="Q158043" start="2215" end="2224" title="Merneptah" label="Merneptah"/>
<link wikidata="Q157956" start="2293" end="2311" title="Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Nineteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="2340" end="2351" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="2661" end="2666" title="stela" label="stela"/>
<link wikidata="Q286468" start="3418" end="3426" title="Al-Ahram" label="Al-Ahram"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="3527" end="3536" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q140575" start="3954" end="3965" title="Zahi Hawass" label="Zahi Hawass"/>
<link wikidata="Q40535" start="4012" end="4042" title="Supreme Council of Antiquities" label="Supreme Council of Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248622" start="4737" end="4742" title="Season of the Harvest" label="Shemu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7222" start="6052" end="6060" title="Ahmose I" label="Ahmose I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170569" start="6096" end="6100" title="Atum" label="Atum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="6104" end="6108" title="Ra" label="Temu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278571" start="6144" end="6147" title="Per (hieroglyph)" label="Per"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630019" start="6163" end="6169" title="Pithom" label="Pithom"/>
<link wikidata="Q684908" start="6213" end="6217" title="KV14" label="KV14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633253" start="6395" end="6399" title="KV35" label="KV35"/>
<link wikidata="Q158052" start="6541" end="6553" title="Amenhotep II" label="Amenhotep II"/>
<link wikidata="Q146055" start="6561" end="6573" title="18th Dynasty" label="18th Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q385280" start="7108" end="7112" title="KV11" label="KV11"/>
<link wikidata="Q133423" start="7121" end="7140" title="Valley of the Kings" label="Valley of the Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q157956" start="7218" end="7236" title="Nineteenth Dynasty" label="Nineteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q158065" start="7245" end="7254" title="Amenmesse" label="Amenmesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q158012" start="7302" end="7309" title="Twosret" label="Twosret"/>
<link wikidata="Q684908" start="7311" end="7315" title="KV14" label="KV14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578003" start="7416" end="7432" title="Papyrus Harris I" label="Papyrus Harris I"/>
<link wikidata="Q365982" start="7551" end="7571" title="James Henry Breasted" label="James Henry Breasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640057" start="7965" end="7969" title="Irsu" label="Irsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448143" start="7979" end="7992" title="self-made man" label="self-made man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077606" start="8381" end="8384" title="ankh wedja seneb" label="LPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364296" start="8715" end="8724" title="Upper and Lower Egypt" label="Two Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q791534" start="8994" end="9008" title="Chancellor Bay" label="Chancellor Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q158059" start="9171" end="9177" title="Siptah" label="Siptah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528" start="9511" end="9523" title="Ramesses III" label="Ramesses III"/>
<link wikidata="Q583501" start="9572" end="9598" title="Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651795" start="9617" end="9622" title="Haplogroup_E-V38" label="E-V38"/>
<link wikidata="Q365982" start="9701" end="9718" title="James H. Breasted" label="James H. Breasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q117212" start="9764" end="9776" title="Erik Hornung" label="Erik Hornung"/>
<link wikidata="Q66417" start="9863" end="9879" title="Jürgen von Beckerath" label="J. Von Beckerath"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795194" wikidata="Q2165477" url="?curid=795194" title="SNK European Democrats">
<text>The SNK European Democrats () is a political party in the Czech Republic, led by Zdeňka Marková. The first regular chairperson of this party was Jana Hybášková. The party was created in January 2006 by the merger of two Czech non-parliamentary political parties – SNK Union of Independents (), led by the former Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec, and the European Democrats (), led by Jan Kasl, the former Mayor of Prague.

== European Democrats ==
The European Democrats were founded by Kasl, who resigned from his post as Mayor of Prague in protest at the policies of the Civic Democratic Party (ODS), Prague&#x27;s municipal government. In the 2002 Prague municipal election, the ED won 15 seats, finishing in second place and becoming the main opposition party. In the 2004 Czech regional elections, the party won three seats running by itself in the Karlovy Vary Region, two in coalition with STAN in the Zlín Region, and one on a joint list with SNK in the Central Bohemian Region. In Senate elections the same year, they won one seat out of 27, in the Karlovy Vary district. Kasl remained the party&#x27;s chairman until the party merged with SNK Union of Independents in 2006.

== SNK Union of Independents ==
The SNK Union of Independents was a small liberal-conservative party (registered as a &#x27;movement&#x27; (&quot;hnutí&quot;) by the Czech authorities), founded in 2000 in order to help various non-party affiliated town mayors take part in regional assembly elections. The party won two seats in the Senate elections in 2002.

== Cooperation and merger ==

In the 2004 European Parliament election, the European Democrats and SNK Union of Independents stood on a joint ticket, winning 11.02% of the vote with three MEPs elected: two members of SNK (Josef Zieleniec and Tomáš Zatloukal) and one European Democrat (Jana Hybášková).

Merger negotiations began immediately after the positive results in the 2004 elections, and in February 2006 the two parties merged to become SNK European Democrats (SNK ED), a pro-European, liberal-conservative party. The extended delay to the merger was because, according to Czech law, &quot;if two parties unite to form a new party then they would lose their right to the money for their mandates&quot; (950 000 CZK per senator per year and around 12 000 000 CZK for all their seats in Prague&#x27;s municipal government), funds which were crucial for the forthcoming parliament elections. Instead of appointing a chairman, the unified party was led by former Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec as the &quot;political leader&quot; and Kasl as Executive Vice Chairman. European Democrat members who did not join the new party later renamed the rump party as United Democrats - Association of Independents.

There were subsequently tensions between former SNK and ED members and a dispute over funding, when Social Democrat Finance Minister Bohuslav Sobotka refused to pay out the money for ED&#x27;s seats in Prague&#x27;s municipal government (around 15 000 000 CZK), despite declarations from the Czech Ombudsman, and the Supreme Administrative and Constitutional Court that ED had the right to these funds. In the 2006 general election, the SNK European Democrats received 2.1% of the vote and failed to have any representatives elected.

Jana Hybášková, elected as an MEP, became the party&#x27;s first regular chair.

== Election results ==

* 2002 Chamber of Deputies: SNK – 2.78% – no seats
* 2002 Senate: SNK – 2 seats, ED – no seats
* 2002 Prague&#x27;s municipal government: SNK – no seats, ED – 15 seats
* 2004 Senate: SNK – 1 seat, ED – 1 seat
* 2004 European Parliament: SNK and ED in coalition – 11.02% – 3 seats
* 2006 Chamber of Deputies: 2.1% – no seats
* 2006 Senate: no seats
* 2008 Senate: no seats

== See also ==
* Liberal conservatism
* List of political parties in the Czech Republic

== References ==
== External links ==
*SNK – European Democrats official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2165477" start="4" end="26" title="SNK European Democrats" label="SNK European Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="58" end="72" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981008" start="145" end="159" title="Jana Hybášková" label="Jana Hybášková"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165477" start="264" end="289" title="SNK European Democrats" label="SNK Union of Independents"/>
<link wikidata="Q447452" start="329" end="344" title="Josef Zieleniec" label="Josef Zieleniec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165477" start="354" end="372" title="SNK European Democrats" label="European Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q630367" start="384" end="392" title="Jan Kasl" label="Jan Kasl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553961" start="405" end="420" title="Mayor of Prague" label="Mayor of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q828099" start="573" end="595" title="Civic Democratic Party (Czech Republic)" label="Civic Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11932251" start="646" end="676" title="2002 Prague municipal election" label="2002 Prague municipal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11932538" start="772" end="801" title="2004 Czech regional elections" label="2004 Czech regional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q191091" start="854" end="873" title="Karlovy Vary Region" label="Karlovy Vary Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586610" start="897" end="901" title="Mayors and Independents" label="STAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q192536" start="909" end="920" title="Zlín Region" label="Zlín Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q188399" start="962" end="985" title="Central Bohemian Region" label="Central Bohemian Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508870" start="990" end="1020" title="2004 Czech Senate election" label="Senate elections the same year"/>
<link wikidata="Q384544" start="1058" end="1070" title="Karlovy Vary" label="Karlovy Vary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508495" start="1518" end="1542" title="2002 Czech Senate election" label="Senate elections in 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449639" start="1582" end="1615" title="2004 European Parliament election in the Czech Republic" label="2004 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="1733" end="1737" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q447452" start="1767" end="1782" title="Josef Zieleniec" label="Josef Zieleniec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488946" start="1787" end="1802" title="Tomáš Zatloukal" label="Tomáš Zatloukal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981008" start="1831" end="1845" title="Jana Hybášková" label="Jana Hybášková"/>
<link wikidata="Q131016" start="2265" end="2268" title="CZK" label="CZK"/>
<link wikidata="Q131016" start="2312" end="2315" title="CZK" label="CZK"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055619" start="2708" end="2754" title="United Democrats - Association of Independents" label="United Democrats - Association of Independents"/>
<link wikidata="Q341148" start="2857" end="2872" title="Czech Social Democratic Party" label="Social Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q890971" start="2890" end="2906" title="Bohuslav Sobotka" label="Bohuslav Sobotka"/>
<link wikidata="Q131016" start="3013" end="3016" title="CZK" label="CZK"/>
<link wikidata="Q24162" start="3167" end="3188" title="2006 Czech legislative election" label="2006 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="3322" end="3325" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q24176" start="3399" end="3423" title="2002 Czech legislative election" label="2002 Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449639" start="3608" end="3633" title="2004 European Parliament election in the Czech Republic" label="2004 European Parliament:"/>
<link wikidata="Q24162" start="3679" end="3703" title="2006 Czech legislative election" label="2006 Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043096" start="3787" end="3807" title="Liberal conservatism" label="Liberal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992734" start="3810" end="3857" title="List of political parties in the Czech Republic" label="List of political parties in the Czech Republic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795197" wikidata="Q5477956" url="?curid=795197" title="Framekiller">
<text>A framekiller (or framebuster or framebreaker) is a technique used by websites and web applications to prevent their web pages from being displayed within a frame. A frame is a subdivision of a Web browser window and can act like a smaller window. A framekiller is usually used to prevent a website from being loaded from within a frameset without permission or as an attack, as with clickjacking.

Framekiller scripts have largely been replaced by the usage of codice_1 and codice_2 headers, which prevent the page from being loaded in a frame in the first place. These headers are supported by all modern browsers and do not require the use of JavaScript. These headers are also intended to be specified inside the web server software, rather than directly inside the HTML.

==Implementations==
Framekillers are implemented using JavaScript that validates if the current window is the main window. The recommended approach is to block rendering of the window by default and only unblock it after confirming the current window is the main one:
&lt;style&gt;html{display:none;}&lt;/style&gt;
&lt;script&gt;
 if (self == top) {
 document.documentElement.style.display = &#x27;block&#x27;; 
 } else {
 top.location = self.location; 
&lt;/script&gt;
This approach was proposed in 2010 by Gustav Rydstedt, Elie Bursztein, Dan Boneh and Collin Jackson in a paper that highlighted the limitations of existing frame-busting techniques along with techniques allowing to bypass them.

=== Alternative solutions ===
An alternative choice is to allow the user to determine whether to let the framekiller work.
var framekiller = false;
window.onbeforeunload = function() { 
 if (framekiller) {
 return &quot;...&quot;; // any message that helps user to make decision
};
and the code below should be added after the frame tag:
//&quot;my_frame&quot; should be changed according to the real id of the frame in your page 
document.getElementById(&quot;my_frame&quot;).onload = function() { 
 framekiller = true;


===Original framekillers===

Historically, the first framekiller scripts were as simple as this:
&lt;script type=&quot;text/javascript&quot;&gt;
 if (top != self) top.location.replace(location);
&lt;/script&gt;
The logic here was to display the page, but check if the top location is the same as the current page, and replace the top by current if not. This method however can be easily bypassed by blocking execution of the framebuster script from the outer frame.

==Framekiller limitations==

Client-side JavaScript solution relies on the end-user&#x27;s browser enforcing their own security. This makes it a beneficial, but unreliable, means of disallowing your page to be embedded in other pages. The following situations may render the script above useless:

* The user agent does not support JavaScript.
* The user agent supports JavaScript but the user has turned support off.
* The user agent&#x27;s JavaScript support is flawed or partially implemented.

==Anti-framekiller==
The iframe in HTML5 has a attribute. The attribute&#x27;s value is a set of allowed capabilities for the iframe&#x27;s content. If the value is empty or not set, the iframe&#x27;s content will not execute JavaScript, and won&#x27;t allow top-level navigation. By specifying in the space separated set of exceptions in the value, the iframe will allow JavaScript, but will still disallow top-level navigation, rendering framekillers in the iframe impotent.

== See also ==
* Clickjacking - discusses more sophisticated methods to prevent embedding in a frame, such as X-Frame-Options header

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5477956" start="2" end="13" title="Framekiller" label="framekiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477956" start="18" end="29" title="Framekiller" label="framebuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477956" start="33" end="45" title="Framekiller" label="framebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="70" end="78" title="websites" label="websites"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="83" end="98" title="web application" label="web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q36774" start="117" end="125" title="web page" label="web page"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="157" end="162" title="HTML element#Frames" label="frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q163231" start="384" end="396" title="clickjacking" label="clickjacking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="462" end="470" title="Clickjacking#X-Frame-Options" label="codice_1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="475" end="483" title="Clickjacking#Content_Security_Policy" label="codice_2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428315" start="484" end="491" title="List_of_HTTP_header_fields" label="headers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="646" end="656" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="717" end="727" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="832" end="842" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360702" start="1302" end="1316" title="Elie Bursztein" label="Elie Bursztein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896470" start="1318" end="1327" title="Dan Boneh" label="Dan Boneh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="2495" end="2517" title="Client-side JavaScript" label="Client-side JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2989" end="2995" title="HTML element#Frames" label="iframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q163231" start="3459" end="3471" title="Clickjacking" label="Clickjacking"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795199" wikidata="Q22728" url="?curid=795199" title="Breast milk">
<text>Breast milk (sometimes spelled as breastmilk) or mother&#x27;s milk is milk produced by the mammary glands in the breasts of women. Breast milk is the primary source of nutrition for newborn infants, comprising fats, proteins, carbohydrates, and a varying composition of minerals and vitamins. Breast milk also contains substances that help protect an infant against infection and inflammation, such as symbiotic bacteria and other microorganisms and immunoglobulin A, whilst also contributing to the healthy development of the infant&#x27;s immune system and gut microbiome.

==Use and methods of consumption==
The World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF recommend exclusive breastfeeding with breast milk for the first six months of an infant’s life. This period is followed by the incorporation of nutritionally adequate and safe complementary solid foods at six months, a stage when an infant’s nutrient and energy requirements start to surpass what breast milk alone can provide. Continuation of breastfeeding is recommended up to two years of age. This guidance is due to the protective benefits of breast milk, which include fewer infections such as diarrhea—a protection not afforded by formula milk.

Breast milk constitutes the sole source of nutrition for exclusively breastfed newborns, supplying all necessary nutrients for infants up to six months. Beyond this age, breast milk continues to be a source of energy for children up to two years old, providing over half of a child&#x27;s energy needs up to the age of one and a third of the needs between one and two years of age.

Despite the capability of most newborns to latch onto the mother&#x27;s breast within an hour of birth, globally, sixty percent of infants are not breastfed within this crucial first hour. Breastfeeding within the first hour of life protects the newborn from acquiring infections and reduces risk of death during the neonatal period.

Alternatively, breast milk can be expressed using a breast pump and administered via baby bottle, cup, spoon, supplementation drip system, or nasogastric tube. This method is especially beneficial for preterm babies who may initially lack the ability to suck effectively. Using cups to feed expressed breast milk and other supplements results in improved breastfeeding outcomes in terms of both duration and extent, compared with traditional bottle and tube feeding.

For mothers unable to produce an adequate supply of breast milk, the use of pasteurized donor human breast milk is a viable option. In the absence of pasteurized donor milk, commercial formula milk is recommended as a secondary alternative. However, unpasteurized breast milk from a source other than the infant&#x27;s mother, particularly when shared informally, carries the risk of vertically transmitting bacteria, viruses (such as HIV), and other microorganisms from the donor to the infant, rendering it an unsafe alternative.

==Benefits==

Breastfeeding offers health benefits to mother and child even after infancy. These benefits include proper heat production and adipose tissue development, a 73% decreased risk of sudden infant death syndrome, increased intelligence, decreased likelihood of contracting middle ear infections, cold and flu resistance, a tiny decrease in the risk of childhood leukemia, lower risk of childhood onset diabetes, decreased risk of asthma and eczema, decreased dental problems, decreased risk of obesity later in life, and a decreased risk of developing psychological disorders, including in adopted children. In addition, feeding an infant breast milk is associated with lower insulin levels and higher leptin levels compared feeding an infant via powdered-formula. Many of the infection-fighting and immune system related benefits are associated with human milk oligosaccharides.

Breastfeeding also provides health benefits for the mother. It assists the uterus in returning to its pre-pregnancy size and reduces post-partum bleeding, through the production of oxytocin (see Production). Breastfeeding can also reduce the risk of breast cancer later in life. Lactation may also reduce the risk for both mother and infant from both types of diabetes. Lactation may protect the infant from specifically developing Type 2 diabetes, as studies have shown that bioactive ingredients in human breast milk could prevent excess weight gain during childhood via contributing to a feeling of energy and satiety. The lower risk of child-onset diabetes may be more applicable to infants who were born from diabetic mothers. The reason is that while breastfeeding for at least the first six months of life minimizes the risk of type 1 diabetes from occurring in the infant, inadequate breastfeeding in an infant prenatally exposed to diabetes was associated with a higher risk of the child developing diabetes later. There are arguments that breastfeeding may contribute to protective effects against the development of type 1 diabetes because the alternative of bottle-feeding may expose infants to unhygienic feeding conditions.

Though it is almost universally prescribed, in some countries during the 1950s, the practice of breastfeeding went through a period where it was out of vogue and the use of infant formula was considered superior to breast milk. However, it is since universally recognized that there is no commercial formula that can adequately substitute for breast milk. In addition to the appropriate amounts of carbohydrate, protein, and fat, breast milk provides vitamins, minerals, digestive enzymes, and hormones. Breast milk also contains antibodies and lymphocytes from the mother that may help the baby resist infections. The immune function of breast milk is individualized, as the mother, through her touching and taking care of the baby, comes into contact with pathogens that colonize the baby, and, as a consequence, her body makes the appropriate antibodies and immune cells.

At around four months of age, the internal iron supplies of the infant, held in the hepatic cells of the liver, are exhausted. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that at this time that an iron supplement should be introduced. Other health organisations such as the NHS in the UK have no such recommendation. Breast milk contains less iron than formula, but the iron is more bioavailable as lactoferrin, which carries more safety for mothers and children than ferrous sulphate.

Both the AAP and the NHS recommend vitamin D supplementation for breastfed infants. Vitamin D can be synthesised by the infant via exposure to sunlight; however, many infants are deficient due to being kept indoors or living in areas with insufficient sunlight. Formula is supplemented with vitamin D for this reason.

==Production==

Under the influence of the hormones prolactin and oxytocin, women produce milk after childbirth to feed the baby. The initial milk produced is referred to as colostrum, which is high in the immunoglobulin IgA, which coats the gastrointestinal tract. This helps to protect the newborn until its own immune system is functioning properly. It also creates a mild laxative effect, expelling meconium and helping to prevent the build-up of bilirubin (a contributory factor in jaundice). Male lactation can occur; the production or administration of the hormone prolactin is necessary to induce lactation (see male lactation).

Actual inability to produce enough milk is rare, with studies showing that mothers from malnourished regions still produce amounts of milk of similar quality to that of mothers in developed countries. There are many reasons a mother may not produce enough breast milk. Some of the most common reasons are an improper latch (i.e., the baby does not connect efficiently with the nipple), not nursing or pumping enough to meet supply, certain medications (including estrogen-containing hormonal contraceptives), illness, and dehydration. A rarer reason is Sheehan&#x27;s syndrome, also known as postpartum hypopituitarism, which is associated with prolactin deficiency and may require hormone replacement.

The amount of milk produced depends on how often the mother is nursing and/or pumping: the more the mother nurses her baby or pumps, the more milk is produced. It is beneficial to nurse when the baby wants to nurse rather than on a schedule. A Cochrane review came to the conclusion that a greater volume of milk is expressed whilst listening to relaxing audio during breastfeeding, along with warming and massaging of the breast prior to and during feeding. A greater volume of milk expressed can also be attributed to instances where the mother starts pumping milk sooner, even if the infant is unable to breastfeed.

Sodium concentration is higher in hand-expressed milk, when compared with the use of manual and electric pumps, and fat content is higher when the breast has been massaged, in conjunction with listening to relaxing audio. This may be important for low birthweight infants. If pumping, it is helpful to have an electric, high-grade pump so that all of the milk ducts are stimulated. Galactagogues increase milk supply, although even herbal variants carry risks. Non-pharmaceutical methods should be tried first, such as pumping out the mother&#x27;s breast milk supply often, warming or massaging the breast, as well as starting milk pumping earlier after the child is born if they cannot drink milk at the breast.

== Composition ==

Breast milk contains fats, proteins, carbohydrates (including lactose and human milk oligosaccharides), and a varying composition of minerals and vitamins. The composition changes over a single feed as well as over the period of lactation. Changes are particularly pronounced in marsupials.

During the first few days after delivery, the mother produces colostrum. This is a thin yellowish fluid that is the same fluid that sometimes leaks from the breasts during pregnancy. It is rich in protein and antibodies that provide passive immunity to the baby (the baby&#x27;s immune system is not fully developed at birth). Colostrum also helps the newborn&#x27;s digestive system to grow and function properly.

Colostrum will gradually change to become mature milk. In the first 3–4 days it will appear thin and watery and will taste very sweet; later, the milk will be thicker and creamier. Human milk quenches the baby&#x27;s thirst and hunger and provides the proteins, sugar, minerals, and antibodies that the baby needs.

In the 1980s and 1990s, lactation professionals (De Cleats) used to make a differentiation between foremilk and hindmilk. But this differentiation causes confusion as there are not two types of milk. Instead, as a baby breastfeeds, the fat content very gradually increases, with the milk becoming fattier and fattier over time.

The level of Immunoglobulin A (IgA) in breast milk remains high from day 10 until at least 7.5 months post-partum.

Human milk contains 0.8–0.9% protein, 4.5% fat, 7.1% carbohydrates, and 0.2% ash (minerals). Carbohydrates are mainly lactose; several lactose-based oligosaccharides (also called human milk oligosaccharides) have been identified as minor components. The fat fraction contains specific triglycerides of palmitic and oleic acid (O-P-O triglycerides), and also lipids with trans bonds (see: trans fat). The lipids are vaccenic acid, and conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) accounting for up to 6% of the human milk fat.

The principal proteins are alpha-lactalbumin, lactoferrin (apo-lactoferrin), IgA, lysozyme, and serum albumin. In an acidic environment such as the stomach, alpha-lactalbumin unfolds into a different form and binds oleic acid to form a complex called HAMLET that kills tumor cells. This is thought to contribute to the protection of breastfed babies against cancer.

Non-protein nitrogen-containing compounds, making up 25% of the milk&#x27;s nitrogen, include urea, uric acid, creatine, creatinine, amino acids, and nucleotides. Breast milk has circadian variations; some of the nucleotides are more commonly produced during the night, others during the day.

Mother&#x27;s milk has been shown to supply endocannabinoids (the natural neurotransmitters that cannabis simulates) 2-arachidonoylglycerol, anandamide, oleoylethanolamide, palmitoylethanolamide, N-arachidonoyl glycine, eicosapentaenoyl ethanolamide, docosahexaenoyl ethanolamide, N-palmitoleoyl-ethanolamine, dihomo-γ-linolenoylethanolamine, N-stearoylethanolamine, prostaglandin F2alpha ethanolamides and prostaglandin F2 ethanolamides, Palmitic acid esters of hydroxy-stearic acids (PAHSAs). They may act as an appetite stimulant, but they also regulate appetite so infants do not eat too much. That may be why formula-fed babies have a higher caloric intake than breastfed babies.

Breast milk is not sterile and has its own microbiome, but contains as many as 600 different species of various bacteria, including beneficial &quot;Bifidobacterium breve&quot;, &quot;B. adolescentis&quot;, &quot;B. longum&quot;, &quot;B. bifidum&quot;, and &quot;B. dentium&quot;, which contribute to colonization of the infant gut. As a result, it can be defined as a probiotic food, depending on how one defines &quot;probiotic&quot;. Breast milk also contains a variety of somatic cells and stem cells and the proportion of each cell type differs from individual to individual. The somatic cells are mainly and myoepithelial cells derived from the mother&#x27;s mammary glands. The stem cells found in human breast milk have been shown to be able to differentiate into a variety of other cells involved in the production of bodily tissues and a small proportion of these cross over the nursing infant&#x27;s intestinal tract into the bloodstream to reach certain organs and transform into fully functional cells. Because of its diverse population of cells and multifarious functions, researchers have argued that breast milk should be considered a living tissue.

Breast milk contains a unique type of sugars, human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs), which were not present in traditional infant formula, however they are increasing added by many manufacturers. HMOs are not digested by the infant but help to make up the intestinal flora. They act as decoy receptors that block the attachment of disease causing pathogens, which may help to prevent infectious diseases. They also alter immune cell responses, which may benefit the infant. As of 2015 more than a hundred different HMOs have been identified; both the number and composition vary between women and each HMO may have a distinct functionality.

The breast milk of diabetic mothers has been shown to have a different composition from that of non-diabetic mothers. It may contain elevated levels of glucose and insulin and decreased polyunsaturated fatty acids. A dose-dependent effect of diabetic breast milk on increasing language delays in infants has also been noted, although doctors recommend that diabetic mothers breastfeed despite this potential risk.

Women breastfeeding should consult with their physician regarding substances that can be unwittingly passed to the infant via breast milk, such as alcohol, viruses (HIV or HTLV-1), or medications. Even though most infants infected with HIV contract the disease from breastfeeding, most infants that are breastfed by their HIV positive mothers never contract the disease. While this paradoxical phenomenon suggests that the risk of HIV transmission between an HIV positive mother and her child via breastfeeding is small, studies have also shown that feeding infants with breast milk of HIV-positive mothers can actually have a preventative effect against HIV transmission between the mother and child. This inhibitory effect against the infant contracting HIV is likely due to unspecified factors exclusively present in breast milk of HIV-positive mothers.

Most women that do not breastfeed use infant formula, but breast milk donated by volunteers to human milk banks can be obtained by prescription in some countries. In addition, research has shown that women who rely on infant formula could minimize the gap between the level of immunity protection and cognitive abilities a breastfed child benefits from versus the degree to which a bottle-fed child benefits from them. This can be done by supplementing formula-fed infants with bovine milk fat globule membranes (MFGM) meant to mimic the positive effects of the MFGMs which are present in human breast milk.

== Storage of expressed breast milk ==
Expressed breast milk can be stored. Lipase may cause thawed milk to taste soapy or rancid due to milk fat breakdown. It is still safe to use, and most babies will drink it. Scalding it will prevent rancid taste at the expense of antibodies. It should be stored with airtight seals. Some plastic bags are designed for storage periods of less than 72 hours. Others can be used for up to 12 months if frozen. This table describes safe storage time limits.

== Comparison to other milks ==
All mammalian species produce milk, but the composition of milk for each species varies widely and other kinds of milk are often very different from human breast milk. As a rule, the milk of mammals that nurse frequently (including human babies) is less rich, or more watery, than the milk of mammals whose young nurse less often. Human milk is noticeably thinner and sweeter than cow&#x27;s milk.

Whole cow&#x27;s milk contains too little iron, retinol, vitamin E, vitamin C, vitamin D, unsaturated fats or essential fatty acids for human babies. Whole cow&#x27;s milk also contains too much protein, sodium, potassium, phosphorus and chloride which may put a strain on an infant&#x27;s immature kidneys. In addition, the proteins, fats and calcium in whole cow&#x27;s milk are more difficult for an infant to digest and absorb than the ones in breast milk.

The composition of marsupial and monotreme milk contains essential nutrients, growth factors and immunological properties to support the development of joeys and puggles.
 Note: Milk is generally fortified with vitamin D in the U.S. and Canada. Non-fortified milk contains only 2 IU per 3.5 oz.

==Effects of medications and other substances on milk content==
Almost all medicines, or drugs, pass into breastmilk in small amounts by a concentration gradient. The amount of the drug bound by maternal plasma proteins, the size of the drug molecule, the pH and/or pKa of the drug, and the lipophilicity of the drug all determine whether and how much of the drug will pass into breastmilk. Medications that are mostly non-protein bound, low in molecular weight, and highly lipid-soluble are more likely to enter the breast milk in larger quantities. Some drugs have no effect on the baby and can be used whilst breastfeeding, while other medications may be dangerous and harmful to the infant.

Some medications considered generally safe for use by a breastfeeding mother, with a doctor’s or pharmacist’s advice, include simple analgesics or pain killers such as paracetamol/acetaminophen, anti-hypertensives such as the ACE-inhibitors enalapril and captopril, anti-depressants of the SSRI and SNRI classes, and medications for gastroesophageal reflux such as omeprazole and ranitidine.

Conversely, there are medications that are known to be toxic to the baby and thus should not be used in breastfeeding mothers, such as chemotherapeutic agents which are cytotoxic like cyclosporine, immunosuppressants like methotrexate, amiodarone, or lithium.

Furthermore, drugs of abuse, such as cocaine, amphetamines, heroin, and marijuana cause adverse effects on the infant during breastfeeding. Adverse effects include seizures, tremors, restlessness, and diarrhea.

To reduce infant exposure to medications used by the mother, use topical therapy or avoid taking the medication during breastfeeding times when possible.

Hormonal products and combined oral contraceptives should be avoided during the early postpartum period as they can interfere with lactation.

There are some medications that may stimulate the production of breast milk. These medications may be beneficial in cases where women with hypothyroidism may be unable to produce milk. A Cochrane review looked at the drug domperidone (10 mg three times per day) with results showing a significant increase in volume of milk produced over a period of one to two weeks. However, another review concluded little evidence that use of domperidone and metoclopramide to enhance milk supply works. Instead, non-pharmacological approaches such as support and more frequent breastfeeding may be more efficacious.

Finally, there are other substances besides medications that may appear in breast milk. Alcohol use during pregnancy carries a significant risk of serious birth defects, but consuming alcohol after the birth of the infant is considered safe. High caffeine intake by breastfeeding mothers may cause their infants to become irritable or have trouble sleeping. A meta-analysis has shown that breastfeeding mothers who smoke expose their infants to nicotine, which may cause respiratory illnesses, including otitis media in the nursing infant.

== Market ==

There is a commercial market for human breast milk, both in the form of a wet nurse service and as a milk product.

As a product, breast milk is exchanged by human milk banks, as well as directly between milk donors and customers as mediated by websites on the internet. Human milk banks generally have standardized measures for screening donors and storing the milk, sometimes even offering pasteurization, while milk donors on websites vary in regard to these measures. A study in 2013 came to the conclusion that 74% of breast milk samples from providers found from websites were colonized with gram-negative bacteria or had more than 10,000 colony-forming units/mL of aerobic bacteria. Bacterial growth happens during transit. According to the FDA, bad bacteria in food &quot;at room temperature&quot; can double every 20 minutes.

Human milk is considered to be healthier than cow&#x27;s milk and infant formula when it comes to feeding an infant in the first six months of life, but only under extreme situations do international health organizations support feeding an infant breast milk from a healthy wet nurse rather than that of its biological mother. One reason is that the unregulated breast milk market is fraught with risks, such as drugs of abuse and prescription medications being present in donated breast milk. The transmission of these substances through breast milk can do more harm than good when it comes to the health outcomes of the infant recipient.

===Fraud===
In the United States, the online marketplace for breast milk is largely unregulated and the high premium has encouraged food fraud. Human breast milk may be diluted with other liquids to increase volume including cow’s milk, soy milk, and water, thus undermining its health benefits. 

A 2015 CBS article cites an editorial led by Dr. Sarah Steele in the &quot;Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine&quot;, in which they say that &quot;health claims do not stand up clinically and that raw human milk purchased online poses many health risks.&quot; CBS found a study from the Center for Biobehavioral Health at Nationwide Children&#x27;s Hospital in Columbus that &quot;found that 11 out of 102 breast milk samples purchased online were actually blended with cow&#x27;s milk.&quot; The article also explains that milk purchased online may be improperly sanitized or stored, so it may contain food-borne illness and infectious diseases such as hepatitis and HIV.

== Consumption by adults ==
=== Restaurants and recipes ===
A minority of people, including restaurateurs Hans Lochen of Switzerland and Daniel Angerer of Austria, who operates a restaurant in New York City, have used human breast milk, or at least advocated its use, as a substitute for cow&#x27;s milk in dairy products and food recipes. An Icecreamist in London&#x27;s Covent Garden started selling an ice cream named Baby Gaga in February 2011. Each serving cost £14. All the milk was donated by a Mrs Hiley who earned £15 for every 10 ounces and called it a &quot;great recession beater&quot;. The ice cream sold out on its first day. Despite the success of the new flavour, the Westminster Council officers removed the product from the menu to make sure that it was, as they said, &quot;fit for human consumption.&quot; Tammy Frissell-Deppe, a family counsellor specialized in attachment parenting, published a book, titled &quot;A Breastfeeding Mother&#x27;s Secret Recipes&quot;, providing a lengthy compilation of detailed food and beverage recipes containing human breast milk. Human breast milk is not produced or distributed industrially or commercially, because the use of human breast milk as an adult food is considered unusual to the majority of cultures around the world, and most disapprove of such a practice.

In Costa Rica, there have been trials to produce human cheese, and custard from human milk, as an alternative to weaning.

=== Bodybuilders ===
While there is no scientific evidence that shows that breast milk is advantageous for adults, according to several 2015 news sources, breast milk is being used by bodybuilders for its nutritional value. In a February 2015 ABC News article, one former competitive body builder said, &quot;It isn&#x27;t common, but I&#x27;ve known people who have done this. It&#x27;s certainly talked about quite a bit on the bodybuilding forums on the Internet.&quot; Calling bodybuilders &quot;a strange breed of individuals&quot;, he said, &quot;Even if this type of thing is completely unsupported by research, they&#x27;re prone to gym lore and willing to give it a shot if there is any potential effect.&quot; At the time the article was written, in the U.S., the price of breast milk procured from milk banks that pasteurize the milk, and have expensive quality and safety controls, was about , and the price in the alternative market online, bought directly from mothers, ranges from , compared to cow&#x27;s milk at about .

=== Erotic lactation ===

For sexual purposes, some couples have decided to induce lactation outside a pregnancy through a practice called &quot;Erotic lactation&quot;.

== Breast milk contamination ==
Breast milk is oftentimes used as an environmental bioindicator given its ability to accumulate certain chemicals, including organochlorine pesticides. Research has found that certain organic contaminants such as PCBs, organochlorine pesticides, PCDDs, PBDEs, and DDT can contaminate breastmilk. According to research done in 2002, the levels of the organochlorine pesticides, PCBs, and dioxins have declined in breast milk in countries where these chemicals have been banned or otherwise regulated, while levels of PBDEs are rising.

=== Pesticide contamination in breastmilk ===
Pesticides and other toxic substances bioaccumulate; i.e., creatures higher up the food chain will store more of them in their body fat. This is an issue in particular for the Inuit, whose traditional diet is predominantly meat. Studies are looking at the effects of polychlorinated biphenyls and persistent organic pollutants in the body; the breast milk of Inuit mothers is extraordinarily high in toxic compounds.

The CDC has provided some resources for breastfeeding mothers to reference for safe medication use, including LactMed, Mother to Baby, and The InfantRisk Center.

===Contamination effects of organochlorine pesticides on infants===
When a mother is exposed to organochlorine pesticides (OCP&#x27;s), her infant can be exposed to these OCP&#x27;s through breast milk intake. This result is supported by a study done in India, which revealed that in each lactation period there is a loss of OCPs from the mother&#x27;s body involved in the nursing of their children. A longitudinal study was conducted to assess pesticide residues in human breast milk samples and evaluate the risk-exposure of infants to these pesticides from consumption of mother’s milk in Ethiopia. The estimated daily intake (EDI) of infants in the present study was above provisional tolerable daily intake (PTDI) during the first month of breastfeeding which indicates that there is a health risk for infants consuming breast milk at an early stage of breastfeeding in the study areas. Based on these studies, the exposure of women during pregnancy to these OCPs may lead to various health problems for fetus such as low birth weight, disturbance of thyroid hormone, and neurodevelopmental delay.

== See also ==
*Breastmilk storage and handling
*Blocked milk duct
*Breastfeeding in public
*Breast milk jewelry
*Human milk banking in North America
*La Leche League International
*Lactation room
*Lactivism
*Mary Rose Tully

==References==
== External links ==
* Drug Interactions with Human Milk
* &quot;Human milk and lactation&quot; by Carol L. Wagner (Overview article, eMedicine, December 14, 2010)
* United Nations University Centre – Constituents of human milk – including comparison of human and cow&#x27;s milk ones
* Children&#x27;s Health Topics: Breastfeeding
* A comparison between human milk and cow&#x27;s milk and The composition of cow&#x27;s milk
* Meigs, EB (August 30, 1913) The comparative composition of human milk and of cow&#x27;s milk, J.Biol.Chem 147–168</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22728" start="0" end="11" title="Breast milk" label="Breast milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22728" start="34" end="44" title="Breast milk" label="breastmilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22728" start="49" end="67" title="Breast milk" label="mother&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="71" end="75" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q189961" start="92" end="106" title="mammary glands" label="mammary glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q9103" start="114" end="121" title="breasts" label="breasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="191" end="198" title="infants" label="infants"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614056" start="403" end="446" title="Human milk microbiome" label="symbiotic bacteria and other microorganisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q79453" start="451" end="467" title="immunoglobulin A" label="immunoglobulin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="542" end="555" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="560" end="574" title="gut microbiome" label="gut microbiome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="616" end="641" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="652" end="658" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="669" end="692" title="Breastfeeding#Duration and exclusivity" label="exclusive breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287198" start="1198" end="1210" title="formula milk" label="formula milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q427017" start="1983" end="1994" title="breast pump" label="breast pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q797906" start="2016" end="2027" title="baby bottle" label="baby bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575857" start="2073" end="2089" title="nasogastric tube" label="nasogastric tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="2132" end="2146" title="preterm babies" label="preterm babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="2475" end="2486" title="pasteurized" label="pasteurized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834381" start="2783" end="2806" title="Vertical transmission" label="vertically transmitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="2834" end="2837" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q161801" start="3125" end="3153" title="sudden infant death syndrome" label="sudden infant death syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="3165" end="3177" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q223254" start="3215" end="3236" title="middle ear infections" label="middle ear infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="3247" end="3250" title="flu" label="flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097982" start="3294" end="3312" title="childhood leukemia" label="childhood leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="3344" end="3352" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="3372" end="3378" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="3383" end="3389" title="eczema" label="eczema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259414" start="3401" end="3416" title="dental problems" label="dental problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="3436" end="3443" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="3494" end="3517" title="psychological disorders" label="psychological disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="3532" end="3539" title="adoption" label="adopted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287198" start="3689" end="3705" title="Infant formula" label="powdered-formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909074" start="3793" end="3819" title="human milk oligosaccharide" label="human milk oligosaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="4073" end="4086" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q719426" start="4102" end="4111" title="Lactation" label="Lactation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="5158" end="5171" title="breastfeeding" label="breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287198" start="5235" end="5249" title="infant formula" label="infant formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="5460" end="5472" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="5474" end="5481" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="5487" end="5490" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="5513" end="5520" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="5523" end="5531" title="Mineral (nutrient)" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q419557" start="5533" end="5549" title="digestive enzyme" label="digestive enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="5556" end="5564" title="hormones" label="hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q463305" start="6069" end="6099" title="American Academy of Pediatrics" label="American Academy of Pediatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="6214" end="6217" title="National Health Service" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6225" end="6227" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="6323" end="6335" title="bioavailability" label="bioavailable"/>
<link wikidata="Q410246" start="6339" end="6350" title="lactoferrin" label="lactoferrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="6462" end="6471" title="vitamin D" label="vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q66590068" start="6798" end="6807" title="prolactin" label="prolactin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169960" start="6812" end="6820" title="oxytocin" label="oxytocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="6847" end="6857" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="6870" end="6874" title="baby" label="baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q192746" start="6920" end="6929" title="colostrum" label="colostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="6952" end="6966" title="immunoglobulin" label="immunoglobulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79453" start="6967" end="6970" title="IgA" label="IgA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="6988" end="7010" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="7060" end="7073" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q937557" start="7149" end="7157" title="meconium" label="meconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q104219" start="7197" end="7206" title="bilirubin" label="bilirubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="7233" end="7241" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q862472" start="7366" end="7380" title="male lactation" label="male lactation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641325" start="7621" end="7651" title="low milk supply" label="not produce enough breast milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292449" start="7867" end="7890" title="hormonal contraceptives" label="hormonal contraceptives"/>
<link wikidata="Q535876" start="7937" end="7960" title="Sheehan&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Sheehan&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q922411" start="7987" end="8002" title="hypopituitarism" label="hypopituitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q427017" start="8166" end="8173" title="breast pump" label="pumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105187" start="8332" end="8347" title="Cochrane review" label="Cochrane review"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="8708" end="8714" title="Sodium" label="Sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128476" start="8956" end="8971" title="low birthweight" label="low birthweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181749" start="9090" end="9102" title="Galactagogue" label="Galactagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q25336" start="9721" end="9730" title="marsupial" label="marsupial"/>
<link wikidata="Q192746" start="9796" end="9805" title="colostrum" label="colostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q79453" start="10808" end="10824" title="Immunoglobulin A" label="Immunoglobulin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q127900" start="11029" end="11036" title="lactose" label="lactose"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909074" start="11090" end="11116" title="human milk oligosaccharide" label="human milk oligosaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q186319" start="11196" end="11209" title="triglycerides" label="triglycerides"/>
<link wikidata="Q209727" start="11213" end="11221" title="palmitic acid" label="palmitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207688" start="11226" end="11236" title="oleic acid" label="oleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q243465" start="11299" end="11308" title="trans fat" label="trans fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q419047" start="11326" end="11339" title="vaccenic acid" label="vaccenic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q56696202" start="11345" end="11369" title="conjugated linoleic acid" label="conjugated linoleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799818" start="11457" end="11468" title="lactalbumin" label="lactalbumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410246" start="11470" end="11481" title="lactoferrin" label="lactoferrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24779410" start="11506" end="11514" title="lysozyme" label="lysozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q424232" start="11520" end="11533" title="serum albumin" label="serum albumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="11572" end="11579" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q847556" start="11599" end="11606" title="protein folding" label="unfolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q207688" start="11639" end="11649" title="oleic acid" label="oleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11675" end="11681" title="Experimental cancer treatment#HAMLET (human alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells)" label="HAMLET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="11693" end="11698" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="11885" end="11889" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q105522" start="11891" end="11900" title="uric acid" label="uric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q223600" start="11902" end="11910" title="creatine" label="creatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q426660" start="11912" end="11922" title="creatinine" label="creatinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="11924" end="11934" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="11941" end="11951" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="11970" end="11979" title="circadian" label="circadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q422936" start="12129" end="12144" title="endocannabinoid" label="endocannabinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="12182" end="12190" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209320" start="12202" end="12224" title="2-Arachidonoylglycerol" label="2-arachidonoylglycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q410228" start="12226" end="12236" title="anandamide" label="anandamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086404" start="12238" end="12256" title="oleoylethanolamide" label="oleoylethanolamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159860" start="12258" end="12279" title="palmitoylethanolamide" label="palmitoylethanolamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378715" start="12281" end="12303" title="N-arachidonoyl glycine" label="N-arachidonoyl glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191618" start="12790" end="12797" title="Sterilization (microbiology)" label="sterile"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614056" start="12806" end="12824" title="Human milk microbiome" label="its own microbiome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614056" start="12875" end="12891" title="Human milk microbiome" label="various bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q132656" start="12920" end="12935" title="Bifidobacterium" label="Bifidobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="13192" end="13201" title="probiotic" label="probiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q725508" start="13248" end="13260" title="somatic cell" label="somatic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="13266" end="13275" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476681" start="13386" end="13404" title="myoepithelial cell" label="myoepithelial cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="13606" end="13613" title="Tissue (biology)" label="tissues"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909074" start="13985" end="14011" title="human milk oligosaccharide" label="human milk oligosaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="14192" end="14208" title="intestinal flora" label="intestinal flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q19887779" start="14222" end="14237" title="decoy receptors" label="decoy receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="14283" end="14292" title="pathogens" label="pathogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q42395" start="14357" end="14368" title="immune cell" label="immune cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="14999" end="15012" title="breastfeeding" label="breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="15140" end="15147" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="15158" end="15161" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280388" start="15165" end="15171" title="HTLV-1" label="HTLV-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287198" start="15889" end="15903" title="infant formula" label="infant formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997156" start="16336" end="16361" title="milk fat globule membrane" label="milk fat globule membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q125747078" start="16528" end="16534" title="Breastmilk storage and handling" label="stored"/>
<link wikidata="Q380967" start="16536" end="16542" title="Lipase" label="Lipase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="16990" end="16996" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="17427" end="17431" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q424976" start="17433" end="17440" title="retinol" label="retinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q141180" start="17442" end="17451" title="vitamin E" label="vitamin E"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="17453" end="17462" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="17464" end="17473" title="vitamin D" label="vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q652555" start="17475" end="17490" title="unsaturated fat" label="unsaturated fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="17505" end="17515" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="17580" end="17587" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="17589" end="17595" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="17597" end="17606" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="17608" end="17618" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44791900" start="17623" end="17631" title="chloride" label="chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="17684" end="17691" title="kidneys" label="kidneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="17729" end="17736" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q856634" start="18282" end="18304" title="concentration gradient" label="concentration gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q425056" start="18347" end="18362" title="plasma proteins" label="plasma proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q325519" start="18409" end="18412" title="pKa" label="pKa"/>
<link wikidata="Q898401" start="18434" end="18447" title="lipophilicity" label="lipophilicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q145623" start="18588" end="18604" title="molecular weight" label="molecular weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q57055" start="19007" end="19032" title="Paracetamol" label="paracetamol/acetaminophen"/>
<link wikidata="Q288280" start="19065" end="19079" title="ACE inhibitor" label="ACE-inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q422185" start="19080" end="19089" title="enalapril" label="enalapril"/>
<link wikidata="Q421119" start="19094" end="19103" title="captopril" label="captopril"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="19129" end="19133" title="SSRI" label="SSRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273909" start="19138" end="19142" title="SNRI" label="SNRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q422210" start="19204" end="19214" title="omeprazole" label="omeprazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q423037" start="19219" end="19229" title="ranitidine" label="ranitidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="19367" end="19390" title="chemotherapeutic agents" label="chemotherapeutic agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q246181" start="19401" end="19410" title="cytotoxic" label="cytotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q367700" start="19416" end="19428" title="cyclosporine" label="cyclosporine"/>
<link wikidata="Q249619" start="19430" end="19448" title="immunosuppressants" label="immunosuppressants"/>
<link wikidata="Q422232" start="19454" end="19466" title="methotrexate" label="methotrexate"/>
<link wikidata="Q410061" start="19468" end="19478" title="amiodarone" label="amiodarone"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="19483" end="19490" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="19506" end="19520" title="drugs of abuse" label="drugs of abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16501" start="20142" end="20156" title="hypothyroidism" label="hypothyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="20696" end="20703" title="Alcohol (drug)" label="Alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="20855" end="20863" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223254" start="21112" end="21124" title="otitis media" label="otitis media"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="21185" end="21191" title="Market (economics)" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="21237" end="21246" title="wet nurse" label="wet nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458164" start="21321" end="21336" title="human milk bank" label="human milk bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="21555" end="21569" title="pasteurization" label="pasteurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="21761" end="21783" title="gram-negative bacteria" label="gram-negative bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q954757" start="21808" end="21827" title="colony-forming unit" label="colony-forming unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193124" start="21835" end="21851" title="aerobic bacteria" label="aerobic bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="22273" end="22282" title="wet nurse" label="wet nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191988" start="22772" end="22782" title="food fraud" label="food fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="22865" end="22875" title="cow’s milk" label="cow’s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q192199" start="22877" end="22885" title="soy milk" label="soy milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="22891" end="22896" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="22945" end="22948" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296198" start="23013" end="23053" title="Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine" label="Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q513631" start="23140" end="23154" title="Raw milk" label="raw human milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979874" start="23265" end="23300" title="Nationwide Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Nationwide Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="23304" end="23312" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="23413" end="23428" title="cow&amp;#x27;s milk" label="cow&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="23597" end="23606" title="hepatitis" label="hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="23611" end="23614" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="23738" end="23749" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="23772" end="23779" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="23924" end="23929" title="dairy" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219239" start="23948" end="23954" title="recipe" label="recipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493173" start="24500" end="24520" title="attachment parenting" label="attachment parenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="24879" end="24886" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="25002" end="25008" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q625825" start="25014" end="25021" title="custard" label="custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q333203" start="25060" end="25067" title="weaning" label="weaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q124100" start="25254" end="25266" title="bodybuilders" label="bodybuilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="25313" end="25321" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26184" end="26200" title="Lactation#Without pregnancy, induced_lactation, relactation" label="induce lactation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="26523" end="26527" title="Polychlorinated biphenyl" label="PCBs"/>
<link wikidata="Q426809" start="26529" end="26553" title="organochlorine pesticide" label="organochlorine pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11087111" start="26556" end="26561" title="Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins" label="PCDDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q205944" start="26563" end="26568" title="Polybrominated diphenyl ethers" label="PBDEs"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="26574" end="26577" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q864231" start="26929" end="26942" title="bioaccumulate" label="bioaccumulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q159462" start="26974" end="26984" title="food chain" label="food chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="27018" end="27026" title="body fat" label="body fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="27067" end="27072" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986874" start="27080" end="27096" title="Inuit diet" label="traditional diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="27158" end="27183" title="polychlorinated biphenyls" label="polychlorinated biphenyls"/>
<link wikidata="Q912951" start="27188" end="27217" title="persistent organic pollutants" label="persistent organic pollutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q125747078" start="28593" end="28624" title="Breastmilk storage and handling" label="Breastmilk storage and handling"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048004" start="28626" end="28643" title="Blocked milk duct" label="Blocked milk duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959808" start="28645" end="28668" title="Breastfeeding in public" label="Breastfeeding in public"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052481" start="28670" end="28689" title="Breast milk jewelry" label="Breast milk jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003494" start="28691" end="28726" title="Human milk banking in North America" label="Human milk banking in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716401" start="28728" end="28757" title="La Leche League International" label="La Leche League International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468983" start="28759" end="28773" title="Lactation room" label="Lactation room"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469002" start="28775" end="28784" title="Lactivism" label="Lactivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780644" start="28786" end="28801" title="Mary Rose Tully" label="Mary Rose Tully"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795202" wikidata="Q1565507" url="?curid=795202" title="HMS Temeraire">
<text>Six ships and two shore establishments of the Royal Navy have been called HMS &quot;Temeraire&quot;. The name entered the navy with the capture of the first &quot;Temeraire&quot; (French for &quot;reckless&quot;) from the French in 1759:
* was a 74-gun third-rate ship of the line captured from the French after the Battle of Lagos on 19 August 1759 and sold in 1784.
* HMS &quot;Temeraire&quot; was a cutter or xebec that captured in 1795 in the Mediterranean. The French Navy had commissioned her in October 1793 as the 6-gun &quot;Révolutionaire&quot; and renamed her &quot;Téméraire&quot; in 1794. She served under this name until being broken up in 1803.
* was a 98-gun second rate launched in 1798. She fought in the Battle of Trafalgar and was later used as a prison ship and then a receiving ship, and was broken up in 1838, recorded in &quot;The Fighting Temeraire Tugged To Her Last Berth To Be Broken Up&quot; by J.M.W. Turner. 
* was an iron-hulled screw-propelled ship launched in 1876. She carried two disappearing guns on board. She became a training ship and was renamed &quot;Indus II&quot; in 1904, &quot;Akbar&quot; in 1915, and was sold in 1921.
* was a launched in 1907 and sold in 1921.
* was to have been a . She was laid down in 1939 but construction was suspended later that year, and she was cancelled in 1944.
* HMS &quot;Temeraire&quot; was the Upper Yardmen training establishment at Port Edgar, South Queensferry, Scotland between 1955 and 1960.
* HMS &quot;Temeraire&quot; is the Directorate of Naval Physical Training and Sport (DNPTS) in Portsmouth. It was established in 1910 and commissioned as HMS &quot;Temeraire&quot; in 1971.

== See also ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7619063" start="18" end="37" title="shore establishment" label="shore establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="46" end="56" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565507" start="74" end="93" title="HMS Temeraire" label="HMS &amp;quot;Temeraire"/>
<link wikidata="Q892492" start="253" end="263" title="third-rate" label="third-rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207452" start="264" end="280" title="ship of the line" label="ship of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q464226" start="316" end="331" title="Battle of Lagos" label="Battle of Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q30598985" start="370" end="395" title="French ship Révolutionnaire (1793)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Temeraire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q683363" start="402" end="408" title="Cutter (ship)" label="cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q837491" start="412" end="417" title="xebec" label="xebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q892368" start="675" end="686" title="second rate" label="second rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="723" end="742" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Battle of Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498196" start="767" end="778" title="prison ship" label="prison ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416413" start="790" end="804" title="receiving ship" label="receiving ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q257580" start="851" end="914" title="The Fighting Temeraire Tugged To Her Last Berth To Be Broken Up" label="The Fighting Temeraire Tugged To Her Last Berth To Be Broken Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="924" end="937" title="J.M.W. Turner" label="J.M.W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518040" start="1016" end="1032" title="disappearing gun" label="disappearing gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q660668" start="1057" end="1070" title="training ship" label="training ship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1339" end="1364" title="Port_Edgar#HMS_Temeraire" label="HMS &amp;quot;Temeraire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888079" start="1571" end="1581" title="HMNB Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795203" wikidata="Q724457" url="?curid=795203" title="Chris Curtis (musician)">
<text>Chris Curtis (born Christopher Crummey; 26 August 1941 – 28 February 2005) was an English musician. He was best known for being with the 1960s beat band The Searchers. He originated the concept behind Deep Purple and formed the band in its original incarnation of &#x27;Roundabout&#x27;.

Born in Oldham, Lancashire on 26 August 1941, his family moved to Liverpool in 1945. Curtis attended St Mary&#x27;s College. He was the drummer for The Searchers from 1960 to April 1966. After leaving the Searchers, Curtis recorded one solo song, a cover version of the Walker Brothers&#x27;s &quot;(Baby) You Don&#x27;t Have to Tell Me&quot;. In 1967, Curtis contacted Tony Edwards about a new group he was putting together, to be called Roundabout. Curtis&#x27; vision was a &quot;supergroup&quot; where the band members would leave and be replaced all the time, like a musical roundabout. The first person hired was Curtis&#x27; flatmate, Jon Lord. This group later evolved into Deep Purple.

Later on in life, Chris worked as a civil servant, retiring early due to poor health. Just before his death, he appeared weekly with live musicians for the Merseycats charity at the Marconi club in Huyton. After not answering phone calls for a few days, his sister discovered him dead in his flat in Aintree on 28 February 2005 at the age of 63. He had many illnesses, including Diabetes. His sister recalled phoning him the night before; Curtis had the flu but refused to see the doctors about it. Many of his online obituaries incorrectly credit Curtis to be the brainchild behind &quot;Let&#x27;s Go To San Francisco&quot; by The Flower Pot Men, when it was really a creation by John Carter.
==Further reading==
*Spencer Leigh, &#x27;Drumming for the Searchers&#x27;, &quot;Record Collector&quot;, March 1998

==References==
==External links==
*Spencer Leigh BBC interview 1998 Retrieved 2 March 2005
*Spencer Leigh BBC interview 2003 Retrieved 2 March 2005
*The Searchers Records</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q724457" start="0" end="12" title="Chris Curtis (musician)" label="Chris Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q724457" start="19" end="38" title="Chris Curtis (musician)" label="Christopher Crummey"/>
<link wikidata="Q546264" start="143" end="147" title="Beat music" label="beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132434" start="153" end="166" title="The Searchers (band)" label="The Searchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="201" end="212" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q202628" start="297" end="303" title="Oldham" label="Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594470" start="390" end="412" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s College, Crosby" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132434" start="437" end="450" title="The Searchers (band)" label="The Searchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q607920" start="559" end="574" title="The Walker Brothers" label="Walker Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4544573" start="588" end="625" title="(Baby) You Don&amp;#x27;t Have to Tell Me" label="(Baby) You Don&amp;#x27;t Have to Tell Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912905" start="659" end="671" title="Tony Edwards (manager)" label="Tony Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="772" end="782" title="Supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q192114" start="931" end="939" title="Jon Lord" label="Jon Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="971" end="982" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639484" start="1183" end="1189" title="Huyton" label="Huyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q406146" start="1285" end="1292" title="Aintree" label="Aintree"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="1364" end="1372" title="Diabetes" label="Diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532440" start="1574" end="1604" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Go to San Francisco" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Go To San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q383235" start="1614" end="1632" title="The Flower Pot Men" label="The Flower Pot Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699561" start="1667" end="1678" title="John Carter (English musician)" label="John Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246561" start="1762" end="1778" title="Record Collector" label="Record Collector"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795206" wikidata="Q1127311" url="?curid=795206" title="Lauburu">
<text>The lauburu (from Basque &quot;lau&quot;, &quot;four&quot; + &quot;buru&quot;, &quot;head&quot;) is an ancient hooked cross with four comma-shaped heads and the most widely known traditional symbol of the Basque Country and the Basque people. In the past, it has also been associated with the Galicians, Illyrians and Asturians. 

A variant of lauburu consisting of geometrically curved lines can be constructed with a compass and straightedge, beginning with the formation of a square template; each head can be drawn from a neighboring vertex of this template with two compass settings, with one radius half the length of the other.

== Background ==
Historians and authorities have attempted to apply allegorical meaning to the ancient symbol of lauburu. Augustin Chaho said it signifies the &quot;four heads or regions&quot; of the Basque Country. The lauburu does not appear in any of the seven historical provinces&#x27; coats-of-arms that have been combined in the arms of the Basque Country: Biscay, Gipuzkoa, Araba, Upper Navarre, Lower Navarre, Labourd, and Soule. While some authors have suggested that the four heads of lauburu could signify, e.g., form, life, sensibility, and conscience, lauburu is more generally considered just a symbol of prosperity and good fortune.

After the time of the Antonines, Camille Jullian finds no specimen of hooked crosses, round or straight, in the Basque areas until modern times.

Louis Colas considers that the lauburu is not related to the swastika but comes from Paracelsus and marks the tombs of healers of animals and healers of souls (i.e., priests).
Around the end of the 16th century, the lauburu appears abundantly as a Basque decorative element, in wooden chests or tombs, perhaps as another form of the cross. Straight swastikas are not found until the 19th century.

Many Basque homes and shops display the symbol over the doorway as a sort of talisman. Sabino Arana interpreted it as a solar symbol, to support his own theory of a hypothetical Basque solar cult (based on etymologies that have later been shown to be incorrect) in the first issue of the daily newspaper &quot;Euzkadi&quot; in 1913.

The lauburu has been featured on flags and emblems of various Basque political organisations including Eusko Abertzale Ekintza (EAE-ANV). 

The use of the lauburu as a cultural icon fell into some disuse during the Francoist regime in Spain (1939–1975), which repressed many elements of Basque culture. 

== Etymology ==
&quot;Lau buru&quot; means &quot;four heads&quot;, &quot;four ends&quot; or &quot;four summits&quot; in modern Basque. In some sources it has been argued that this might be a folk etymology applied to the Latin &quot;labarum&quot;.

However, Father Fidel Fita thought the relation reversed, &quot;labarum&quot; being adapted from Basque, under Augustus Caesar&#x27;s rule.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
*Hilarri
*Armenian eternity sign
* Fylfot
* Lábaru
* Triskelion

== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;La croix Basque, lauburu&quot;: demonstrating the layout for scribing the arms.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1127311" start="4" end="11" title="Lauburu" label="lauburu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="18" end="24" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="111" end="123" title="hooked cross" label="hooked cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q161736" start="134" end="139" title="comma (punctuation)" label="comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="191" end="197" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="205" end="219" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="228" end="241" title="Basque people" label="Basque people"/>
<link wikidata="Q752526" start="293" end="302" title="Galicians" label="Galicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="304" end="313" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573453" start="318" end="327" title="Asturians" label="Asturians"/>
<link wikidata="Q103896" start="419" end="426" title="Compass (drawing tool)" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q354733" start="431" end="443" title="straightedge" label="straightedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871561" start="758" end="772" title="Augustin Chaho" label="Augustin Chaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q174944" start="791" end="828" title="laurak Bat" label="the &amp;quot;four heads or regions&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="836" end="850" title="Basque Country (historical territory)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q93366" start="1000" end="1006" title="Biscay" label="Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q95010" start="1008" end="1016" title="Gipuzkoa" label="Gipuzkoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q81801" start="1018" end="1023" title="Álava" label="Araba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="1025" end="1038" title="Navarre" label="Upper Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q638503" start="1040" end="1053" title="Lower Navarre" label="Lower Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q671023" start="1055" end="1062" title="Labourd" label="Labourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q673040" start="1068" end="1073" title="Soule" label="Soule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="1308" end="1317" title="Nerva-Antonine dynasty" label="Antonines"/>
<link wikidata="Q333292" start="1319" end="1334" title="Camille Jullian" label="Camille Jullian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1432" end="1443" title="Louis Colas" label="Louis Colas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="1907" end="1915" title="amulet" label="talisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q332663" start="1917" end="1929" title="Sabino Arana" label="Sabino Arana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241584" start="1950" end="1962" title="solar symbol" label="solar symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="2015" end="2025" title="Sun worship" label="solar cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="2036" end="2047" title="etymologies" label="etymologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061209" start="2140" end="2147" title="Euzkadi (daily)" label="Euzkadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q339176" start="2267" end="2290" title="Eusko Abertzale Ekintza" label="Eusko Abertzale Ekintza"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="2379" end="2388" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="2389" end="2404" title="Francoist Spain" label="regime in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="2660" end="2674" title="folk etymology" label="folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2690" end="2695" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q118117" start="2702" end="2709" title="labarum" label="labarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8961578" start="2734" end="2744" title="Fidel Fita" label="Fidel Fita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2829" end="2844" title="Augustus Caesar" label="Augustus Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391249" start="2889" end="2896" title="Hilarri" label="Hilarri"/>
<link wikidata="Q36713" start="2898" end="2920" title="Armenian eternity sign" label="Armenian eternity sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053175" start="2923" end="2929" title="Fylfot" label="Fylfot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364473" start="2932" end="2938" title="Cantabrian labarum" label="Lábaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q183534" start="2941" end="2951" title="Triskelion" label="Triskelion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795209" wikidata="Q418060" url="?curid=795209" title="Desloratadine">
<text>Desloratadine sold under the brand name Clarinex among others, is a tricyclic H1 inverse agonist that is used to treat allergies. It is an active metabolite of loratadine.
It was patented in 1984 and came into medical use in 2001. It was brought to the market in the US by Schering Corporation, later named Schering-Plough.

== Medical uses ==
Desloratadine is used to treat allergic rhinitis, nasal congestion and chronic idiopathic urticaria (hives). It is the major metabolite of loratadine and the two drugs are similar in safety and effectiveness. Desloratadine is available in many dosage forms and under many brand names worldwide.

An emerging indication for desloratadine is in the treatment of acne, as an inexpensive adjuvant to isotretinoin and possibly as maintenance therapy or monotherapy.

== Side effects ==
The most common side-effects are fatigue (1.2%), dry mouth (3%), and headache (0.6%).

== Interactions ==
Co-administration with erythromycin, ketoconazole, azithromycin, fluoxetine, or cimetidine resulted in elevated blood plasma concentrations of desloratadine and its metabolite 3-hydroxydesloratadine in studies. However, no clinically relevant changes were observed.

== Pharmacology ==
=== Pharmacodynamics ===
Desloratadine is a selective H1-antihistamine which functions as an inverse agonist at the histamine H1 receptor.

At very high doses, is also an antagonist at various subtypes of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. This effect is not relevant for the drug&#x27;s action at therapeutic doses.

=== Pharmacokinetics ===
Desloratadine is well absorbed from the gut and reaches highest blood plasma concentrations after about three hours. In the bloodstream, 83 to 87% of the substance are bound to plasma proteins.

Desloratadine is metabolized to 3-hydroxydesloratadine in a three-step sequence in normal metabolizers. First, N-glucuronidation of desloratadine by UGT2B10; then, 3-hydroxylation of desloratadine N-glucuronide by CYP2C8; and finally, a non-enzymatic deconjugation of 3-hydroxydesloratadine N-glucuronide. Both desloratadine and 3-hydroxydesloratadine are eliminated via urine and feces with a half-life of 27 hours in normal metabolizers.

It exhibits only peripheral activity since it does not readily cross the blood–brain barrier; hence, it does not normally cause drowsiness because it does not readily enter the central nervous system.

Desloratadine does not have a strong effect on a number of tested enzymes in the cytochrome P450 system. It was found to weakly inhibit CYP2B6, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4/CYP3A5, and not to inhibit CYP1A2, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, or CYP2C19. Desloratadine was found to be a potent and relatively selective inhibitor of UGT2B10, a weak to moderate inhibitor of UGT2B17, UGT1A10, and UGT2B4, and not to inhibit UGT1A1, UGT1A3, UGT1A4, UGT1A6, UGT1A9, UGT2B7, UGT2B15, UGT1A7, and UGT1A8.

=== Pharmacogenomics ===
2% of Caucasian people and 18% of people from African descent are desloratadine poor metabolizers. In these people, the drug reaches threefold higher plasma concentrations at seven hours after intake, and it has a half-life of 89 hours (compared to a 27-hour half-life in normal metabolizers). Adverse effects were reported at similar rates in poor metabolizers, suggesting that it is not clinically relevant.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q418060" start="0" end="13" title="Desloratadine" label="Desloratadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q418060" start="40" end="48" title="Desloratadine" label="Clarinex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539074" start="68" end="77" title="tricyclic" label="tricyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328275" start="78" end="96" title="H1 antagonist" label="H1 inverse agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="119" end="128" title="allergy" label="allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677569" start="139" end="156" title="active metabolite" label="active metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q424049" start="160" end="170" title="loratadine" label="loratadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q249723" start="307" end="322" title="Schering-Plough" label="Schering-Plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="375" end="392" title="allergic rhinitis" label="allergic rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245488" start="394" end="410" title="nasal congestion" label="nasal congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296062" start="415" end="443" title="chronic idiopathic urticaria" label="chronic idiopathic urticaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q187440" start="445" end="450" title="hives" label="hives"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="469" end="479" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q424049" start="483" end="493" title="loratadine" label="loratadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="704" end="708" title="acne" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q287029" start="740" end="752" title="isotretinoin" label="isotretinoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="858" end="865" title="fatigue (medical)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162276" start="874" end="883" title="dry mouth" label="dry mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="894" end="902" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q213511" start="954" end="966" title="erythromycin" label="erythromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407883" start="968" end="980" title="ketoconazole" label="ketoconazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q165399" start="982" end="994" title="azithromycin" label="azithromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422244" start="996" end="1006" title="fluoxetine" label="fluoxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409492" start="1011" end="1021" title="cimetidine" label="cimetidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="1096" end="1106" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q324089" start="1274" end="1287" title="antihistamine" label="antihistamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671731" start="1310" end="1325" title="inverse agonist" label="inverse agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q309513" start="1333" end="1354" title="HRH1" label="histamine H1 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q410943" start="1388" end="1398" title="receptor antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q410959" start="1426" end="1459" title="muscarinic acetylcholine receptor" label="muscarinic acetylcholine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="1629" end="1641" title="blood plasma" label="blood plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q425056" start="1742" end="1756" title="plasma protein" label="plasma protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032283" start="1909" end="1916" title="UGT2B10" label="UGT2B10"/>
<link wikidata="Q14916190" start="1974" end="1980" title="CYP2C8" label="CYP2C8"/>
<link wikidata="Q686886" start="2154" end="2163" title="biological half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="2274" end="2293" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077823" start="2329" end="2339" title="drowsiness" label="drowsiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="2378" end="2400" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="2484" end="2499" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912267" start="2539" end="2545" title="CYP2B6" label="CYP2B6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271142" start="2547" end="2553" title="CYP2D6" label="CYP2D6"/>
<link wikidata="Q424440" start="2559" end="2565" title="CYP3A4" label="CYP3A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q17912018" start="2566" end="2572" title="CYP3A5" label="CYP3A5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737406" start="2593" end="2599" title="CYP1A2" label="CYP1A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14916190" start="2601" end="2607" title="CYP2C8" label="CYP2C8"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014962" start="2609" end="2615" title="CYP2C9" label="CYP2C9"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737532" start="2620" end="2627" title="CYP2C19" label="CYP2C19"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032283" start="2706" end="2713" title="UGT2B10" label="UGT2B10"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032285" start="2747" end="2754" title="UGT2B17" label="UGT2B17"/>
<link wikidata="Q18041113" start="2756" end="2763" title="UGT1A10" label="UGT1A10"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032282" start="2769" end="2775" title="UGT2B4" label="UGT2B4"/>
<link wikidata="Q14901445" start="2796" end="2802" title="UGT1A1" label="UGT1A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18041150" start="2804" end="2810" title="UGT1A3" label="UGT1A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q18041145" start="2812" end="2818" title="UGT1A4" label="UGT1A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q18041117" start="2820" end="2826" title="UGT1A6" label="UGT1A6"/>
<link wikidata="Q18041129" start="2828" end="2834" title="UGT1A9" label="UGT1A9"/>
<link wikidata="Q14907739" start="2836" end="2842" title="UGT2B7" label="UGT2B7"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032284" start="2844" end="2851" title="UGT2B15" label="UGT2B15"/>
<link wikidata="Q18041115" start="2853" end="2859" title="UGT1A7" label="UGT1A7"/>
<link wikidata="Q18041114" start="2865" end="2871" title="UGT1A8" label="UGT1A8"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129609" start="2905" end="2921" title="Caucasian race" label="Caucasian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152227" start="2979" end="2995" title="poor metabolizer" label="poor metabolizer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795210" wikidata="Q8045" url="?curid=795210" title="Ramesses VIII">
<text>Usermaatre Akhenamun Ramesses VIII (also written Ramses and Rameses) or Ramesses Sethherkhepshef Meryamun (&#x27;Set is his Strength, beloved of Amun&#x27;) (reigned 1130–1129 BC, or 1130 BC), was the seventh Pharaoh of the Twentieth Dynasty of the New Kingdom of Egypt, and was the 9th of the 10 sons of Ramesses III. Before ascending to the throne, he was simply known as Prince Sethherkhepsef II. 

==Reign==

Ramesses VIII is the most obscure ruler of the 20th Dynasty, and the current information from his brief kingship suggests that he lasted on the throne for one year at the most. The fact that he succeeded to power after the death of Ramesses VII —his half-nephew and a son of Ramesses VI—may indicate a continuing problem in the royal succession. Similar to Ramesses IV and Ramesses VI, Ramesses VIII was also a son of pharaoh Ramesses III.

Ramesses VIII&#x27;s Prenomen, Usermaatre Akhenamun, means &quot;Powerful is the maat of Ra, Effective for Amun.&quot; Monuments from his reign are scarce, and consist primarily of an inscription at Medinet Habu, a mention of this ruler in one document — Berlin stele 2081 of Hori at Abydos — and one scarab. His only known date is a Year 1, I Peret day 2 graffito in the tomb of Kyenebu (Theban Tomb 113) at Thebes. According to Erik Hornung in a 2006 book, the accession date of Ramesses VIII has been established by Amin Amer in a 1981 article to date to an eight-month interval between I Peret day 2 and I Season of the Inundation day 13.

The tomb inscription notes that it took 3½ months, from Year 1, I Akhet day 13 of Ramesses VIII, to start work and paint scenes on a tomb chapel in Kyenebu&#x27;s tomb, and up until Year 1, I Peret day 2 to complete the work. Since no year change occurs in this time interval, the accession date for Ramesses VIII must fall outside this period of this text, &quot;i.e., within I Peret 3 to I Akhet 12.&quot;

==Burial==
He is the sole pharaoh of the Twentieth Dynasty whose tomb has not been definitely identified in the Valley of the Kings, though some scholars have suggested that the tomb of Prince Mentuherkhepshef, KV19, the son of Ramesses IX, was originally started for Ramesses VIII but proved unsuitable when he became a king in his own right. An all-Egyptian team of researchers headed by Afifi Rohiem under the supervision of Dr. Zahi Hawass were looking for the pharaoh&#x27;s tomb. Work on the tomb of Ramesses VIII might have started before he ascended the throne, when he was known as prince Sethherkhepshef, as suggested by an ostracon discovered in the Valley of the Queens.

Before he became Pharaoh, the tomb QV43 in the Valley of the Queens was constructed for him, however, the tomb was never used.

==References==
== External links ==

* Theban Mapping Project – Plan of the tomb and other details.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8045" start="21" end="34" title="Ramesses VIII" label="Ramesses VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045" start="49" end="55" title="Ramesses VIII" label="Ramses"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045" start="60" end="67" title="Ramesses VIII" label="Rameses"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="209" end="216" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q583501" start="224" end="241" title="Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Twentieth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="249" end="269" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528" start="305" end="317" title="Ramesses III" label="Ramesses III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532" start="770" end="781" title="Ramesses IV" label="Ramesses IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167" start="786" end="797" title="Ramesses VI" label="Ramesses VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528" start="839" end="851" title="Ramesses III" label="Ramesses III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240901" start="875" end="883" title="Prenomen" label="Prenomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170471" start="935" end="939" title="maat" label="maat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="943" end="945" title="Ra" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q58373" start="961" end="965" title="Amun" label="Amun"/>
<link wikidata="Q932622" start="1053" end="1065" title="Medinet Habu (temple)" label="Medinet Habu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="1116" end="1121" title="stele" label="stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q770568" start="1464" end="1488" title="Season of the Inundation" label="Season of the Inundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133423" start="2019" end="2038" title="Valley of the Kings" label="Valley of the Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q834935" start="2100" end="2116" title="Mentuherkhepshef" label="Mentuherkhepshef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719126" start="2118" end="2122" title="KV19" label="KV19"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009" start="2135" end="2146" title="Ramesses IX" label="Ramesses IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q140575" start="2339" end="2350" title="Zahi Hawass" label="Zahi Hawass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107717" start="2541" end="2549" title="Ostracon of Prince Sethherkhepshef" label="ostracon"/>
<link wikidata="Q260386" start="2568" end="2588" title="Valley of the Queens" label="Valley of the Queens"/>
</links>
</doc>
