<doc id="816396" wikidata="Q2940332" url="?curid=816396" title="Economy car">
<text>Economy car is a term mostly used in the United States for cars designed for low-cost purchase and operation. Typical economy cars are small (compact or subcompact), lightweight, and inexpensive to both produce and purchase. Stringent design constraints generally force economy car manufacturers to be inventive. Many innovations in automobile design were originally developed for economy cars, such as the Ford Model T and the Austin Mini.

==Definition==
The precise definition of what constitutes an economy car has varied with time and place, based on the conditions prevailing at the time, such as fuel prices, disposable income of buyers, and cultural mores. It typically refers to a car that is designed to be small and lightweight to offer low-cost operation. In any given decade globally, there has generally been some rough consensus on what constituted the minimum necessary requirements for a highway-worthy car, constituting &quot;the&quot; most economical car possible&quot;.&quot; However, whether that consensus could be a commercial success in any given country depended on local culture. Thus in any given decade, every country has had a rough national consensus on what constituted the minimum necessary requirements for the least expensive car that wasn&#x27;t undesirable, that is, that had some commercially attractive amount of market demand, making it a mainstream economy car. In many countries at various times, mainstream economy and maximum economy have been one and the same.

==Background==
From its inception into the 1920s, the Ford Model T fulfilled both of these roles simultaneously in the U.S. and in many markets around the world. In Europe and Japan in the 1920s and 1930s, this was achieved by the much smaller Austin 7 and its competitors and derivatives. From the 1940s and into the 1960s, the Volkswagen Beetle played both roles throughout much of the world, particularly in Germany and Latin America – due to high fuel consumption, British, French, Italian, and Japanese models, all with better fuel economy, were able to capture the maximum-economy position in their home countries. By the 1970s the hatchback had become the standard body type for new economy car models.

From 1960-1994 the Soviet Union sold the economy car Zaporozhets (and in the 80s, its successors, ZAZ-1102, and VAZ-1111) on the world market. In the mid-1980s, the Yugoslavian Zastava Koral (Yugo), was being sold as the cheapest new car on the U.S. market. South Korea&#x27;s Hyundai models also sold well in the U.S., and have gone on to be successful around the world.

Since the 1990s, the automotive industry has become extensively globalized, with all major manufacturers being multinational corporations who use globally sourced raw materials and components, with most moving assembly to the lowest labour cost countries. Today, a majority of major manufacturer offers economy cars, including at least one truly small car that may fall into subclassifications such as subcompact car, supermini, B-segment; city car; microcar; and others.

Gordon Murray, the Formula 1 and McLaren F1 designer, said when designing his new Murray T.25 city car: &quot;I would say that building a car to sell for six thousand pounds and designing that for a high-volume production, where you have all the quality issues under control, is a hundred times more difficult than designing a McLaren F1, or even a racing car. It is certainly the biggest challenge I&#x27;ve ever had from a design point of view.&quot;

==History==

===1886-1920===
The history of the automobile after many experimental models dating back at least a hundred years, started with the first production car – the 1886 Benz Tricycle. This began a period that was later known as the Brass era which is considered to be from 1890 to 1918 in the U.S. In the UK this is split into the pre-1905 Veteran era and Edwardian era to 1918. The U.S. Veteran era is usually dated pre-1890.

In the 1890s and into the first decade of the twentieth century; the motorized vehicle was considered a replacement for the carriages of the rich, or simply a dangerous toy, that annoyed and inconvenienced the general public. For example, the 1908 children&#x27;s book &quot;The Wind in the Willows&quot;, pokes fun at early privileged motorists. The automotive industry in France were the world leaders during this period – the Locomotives Act 1865 (the &#x27;Red Flag Act&#x27;) had obstructed automotive development in the UK until it was mostly repealed by the Locomotives on Highways Act 1896. The high wheeler was an early car body style virtually unique to the United States. It was typified by large-diameter slender wheels, frequently with solid tires, to provide ample ground clearance on the primitive roads in much of the country at the turn of the 20th century. For the same reason, it usually had a wider track than normal automobiles.

The first car to be marketed as an &#x27;economy car&#x27; was the 1901–1907 Oldsmobile Curved Dash - it was produced by the thousands, with over 19,000 built in all. It was inspired by the buckboard type horse and buggy, (used like a small two-seat pickup truck) popular in rural areas of the U.S. It had two seats, but was less versatile than the vehicle that inspired it. It was produced after a fire at the Oldsmobile plant, when the prototype was saved by a nightwatchman named Stebbins (who later became the Mayor of Detroit) and was the only product available to the company to produce.

Although cars were becoming more affordable before it was launched, the 1908–1927 Ford Model T is considered to be the first true economy car, because the very few previous vehicles at the bottom of the market were &#x27;horseless carriages&#x27; rather than practical cars. The major manufacturers at the time had little interest in low-priced models. The first &#x27;real&#x27; cars had featured the FR layout first used by the French car maker Panhard and so did the Model T.


Henry Ford declared at the launch of the vehicle:
I will build a car for the great multitude. It will be large enough for the family, but small enough for the individual to run and care for. It will be constructed of the best materials, by the best men to be hired, after the simplest designs that modern engineering can devise. But it will be low in price that no man making a good salary will be unable to own one - and enjoy with his family the blessing of hours of pleasure in God&#x27;s great open spaces.

The Ford Model T was a large scale mass-produced car; that very innovation, along with the attributes it required a simple inexpensive design, that allowed it to be the first car to exemplify the ideals of the economy car. Although it followed the Panhard mechanical layout, it used an epicyclic gearbox more like later automatic gearboxes, rather than the Panhard type manual gearbox, which in a developed form is still in common use today. The innovations involved in making it a successful design were in its production and materials technology; particularly the use of new vanadium steel alloys. Model T production was a leading example of the Taylorism school of scientific management (also known as Fordism) and its production techniques evolved at the Highland Park Ford Plant that opened in 1910, after it outgrew the Piquette Avenue Plant. The River Rouge Plant which opened in 1919, was the most technologically advanced in the world, raw materials entered at one end and finished cars emerged from the other. The innovation of the moving assembly line, was inspired by the &#x27;dis-assembly&#x27; plants of the Chicago meat packing industry, reduced production time from twelve and a half hours, to just an hour and thirty-three minutes per car. Black was the only colour available because it was the only paint that would dry in the required production time. The continuous improvement of production methods, and economies of scale from larger and larger scale production, allowed Henry Ford to progressively lower the price of the Model T throughout its production run. It was far less expensive, smaller, and more austere than its hand-built pre-first world war contemporaries. The size of the Model T was arrived at, by making its track to the width of the ruts in the unsurfaced rural American roads of the time, ruts made by horse-drawn vehicles. It was specifically designed with a large degree of axle articulation, and a high ground clearance, to deal with these conditions effectively. It had an under stressed engine. It set the template for American vehicles being larger than comparable vehicles in other countries, which would later on have economy cars scaled to their narrower roads with smaller engines.

In 1912 Edward G. Budd founded the Budd Company, which initially specialized in the manufacture of pressed-steel frames for automobiles. This built on his railroad experience. In 1899 he had taken his knowledge of pressed steel to the railroad industry. He worked with the Pullman Company on a contract for Pennsylvania Railroad, building the first all-steel railcar.

In 1913 in the UK, the 1018 cc &quot;Bullnose&quot; Morris Oxford was the first model launched by Morris Motors. Only 1302 were made. The Oxford was available as a two-seater, or van but the chassis was too short to allow four-seat bodies to be fitted. It made extensive use of bought in components, including many from the U.S. to reduce costs. The 1915-1919 Morris Cowley (about 1400 produced) powered by a new US Continental engine was a bigger stronger better finished version of the first Oxford. The post–First World War Oxford was a deluxe version of that, now made plainer, 1915-1919 Cowley. They were larger cars with 50% bigger engines than the 1913 Oxford. By 1925 Cowleys and Oxfords were 41 per cent of British private car production and limousine and landaulet bodies for 14/28 Oxfords were supplied ex-factory. Morris then added a commercial vehicle operation and bought Wolseley Motors the following year. Cecil Kimber, a Morris employee, founded MG (Morris Garages) aiming to sell more Morrises. After the Second World War Morris Motors, having swept in Riley, merged with the Austin Motor Company together forming the British Motor Corporation.

In 1913 the British Trojan company had its prototype ready for production. It had a two-stroke engine with four cylinders arranged in pairs, and each pair shared a common combustion chamber - a doubled-up version of what would later be called the &quot;split-single&quot; engine. The pistons in each pair drove the crankshaft together as they were coupled to it by a V-shaped connecting rod. For this arrangement to work, it is necessary for the connecting rod to flex slightly, which goes completely against normal practice. The claim was that each engine had only seven moving parts, four pistons, two connecting rods and a crankshaft. This was connected to a two-speed epicyclic gearbox, to simplify gear changing, and a chain to the rear wheels. Solid tyres were used, even though these were antiquated for car use, to prevent punctures and very long springs used to give some comfort. Before production could start war broke out and from 1914 to 1918, the company made tools and gauges for the war effort.

In 1914 Ford was producing half a million Model Ts a year, with a sale price of less than . This was more than the rest of the U.S. auto industry combined and ten times the total national car production of 1908, the year of the cars launch. Also in that year Ford made headlines by increasing the minimum wage of his workers from $2.83 for a nine-hour day to $5.00 for an eight-hour day, to combat low workforce morale, and employee turnover problems because of the repetitive and stressful nature of working on the production line, and more radically, to turn his semi-skilled workers into potential customers.

The Ford Model T was the first automobile produced in many countries at the same time. It was the first &#x27;World Car&#x27;, since they were being produced in Canada and in Manchester, England starting in 1911 and were later assembled in Germany, Argentina, France, Spain, Denmark, Norway, Belgium, Brazil, Mexico, and Japan.

At the New York Motor Show in January 1915, William C. Durant the head of Chevrolet (and founder of GM), launched the Chevrolet Four-Ninety, a stripped-down version of the Series-H, to compete with Henry Ford&#x27;s Model T, and went into production in June. To aim directly at Ford, Durant said the new car would be priced at (the source of its name), the same as the Model T touring. Its introductory price was , however, although it was reduced to later when the electric starter and lights were made a option. Henry Ford responded by reducing the Model T to .

In 1916 Edward G. Budd&#x27;s first big order for the Budd Company was from the Dodge brothers, who purchased 70,000 bodies, mounting the steel bodies onto conventional chassis frames.

=== 1920s ===
During the 1920s Edward G. Budd&#x27;s pressed steel bodies were fast replacing traditional coachbuilt bodies all around the world. These were fully closed roofed bodies, until this time open tourer bodies were the standard body on the market. Budd envisioned pushing his technology even further, and in 1924 he found another visionary in André Citroën. By 1934, they had developed the Citroën Traction Avant, the first unibody, pressed-steel automobile. Budd also pioneered the use of electric arc welding in automobile manufacturing. It would be the 1930s before this technology was generally applied to economy cars.

The cyclecar was an attempt in the period before 1922 in the post-First World War austerity period, as a form of &quot;four-wheeled motorcycle&quot;, with all the benefits of a motorcycle and side-car, in a more stable package.

In 1920 Trojan in Britain made its first series of six cars from a works in Croydon and the final revised production version was shown at the 1922 London Motor Show. An agreement was reached with Leyland Motors to produce the cars at their Kingston upon Thames factory where work on reconditioning ex RAF wartime trucks was running down. This arrangement would continue until 1928 when Leyland wanted factory space for truck production. During the nearly seven years of the agreement 11,000 cars and 6700 vans were made. The car known as the Trojan Utility Car went onto the market at £230, reducing to £125 in 1925, the same as a Model T Ford. Nothing was conventional. Rather than a chassis the car had a punt shaped tray which housed the engine and transmission below the seats. This is a similar idea to the chassis-less design of the contemporary 1922 Italian Lancia Lambda luxury car. The transmission used a chain to drive the solid tyre shod wheels. The 1527-cc engine to the ingenious Hounsfield design was started by pulling a lever on the right of the driver. To prove how economical the car was to run, the company ran the slogan &quot;Can you afford to walk?&quot; and calculated that over it would cost more in shoes and socks than to cover the distance by Trojan car.

The astronomical success of the Model T accelerated after the First World War, and by the time Ford made his 10 millionth car, half of all cars in the world were Fords. It was so successful that Ford did not purchase any advertising between 1917 and 1923; more than 15 million Model Ts were manufactured, reaching a rate of 9,000 to 10,000 cars a day in 1925, or 2 million annually, more than any other model of its day, at a price of just $240. The need for constant reductions in price through the 1920s reflected increasing competition from newer designs for the relatively unchanged and increasingly obsolescent Model T.

In 1923 Chevrolet developed a new car to compete with the Model T, the Chevrolet Series M &#x27;Copper-Cooled&#x27;, air-cooled car, designed by General Motors engineer at AC Delco Charles Kettering, (who invented the points/condenser ignition system that was in use until the 1980s). It was a rare failure for him, due to uneven cooling of the inline four-cylinder engine.

The most development of small economy cars occurred in Europe. There was less emphasis on long-distance automobile travel, a need for vehicles that could navigate narrow streets and alleys in towns and cities (many were unchanged since medieval times), and the narrow and winding roads commonly found in the European countryside. Ettore Bugatti designed a small car for Peugeot. The 1911 Peugeot Bébé Type 19. It had an 850 cc 4-cylinder engine. The Citroën Type A was the first car produced by Citroën from June 1919 to December 1921 in Paris. Citroën had been established to produce the double bevel gears that its logo resembles, but had ended the First World War with large production facilities, from the production of much needed artillery shells for the French army. Andre Citroën was a keen adopter of U.S. car manufacturing ideas and technology in the 1920s and 1930s. Andre Citroën re-equipped his factory as a scaled down version of the Ford River Rouge Plant, that he had visited in Detroit Michigan. It was advertised as &quot;Europe&#x27;s first mass production car.&quot; The Type A reached a production number of 24,093 vehicles. The Opel 4 PS, Germany&#x27;s first &#x27;peoples car&#x27;, popularly known as the Opel Laubfrosch (Opel Treefrog), was a small two-seater car introduced by the then family owned auto maker Opel, early in 1924, which bore an uncanny resemblance to the little Torpedo Citroën 5 CV of 1922.

On an even smaller scale, European cars, such as the 747 cc Austin Seven, (which made cyclecars obsolete overnight.) The Austin 7 was considerably smaller than the Ford Model T. The wheelbase was only , and the track only . Equally it was lighter - less than half the Ford&#x27;s weight at . The engine required for adequate performance was therefore equally reduced and the sidevalve was quite capable with a modest output. It would also start to catch on in Japan during the same time period, as a Datsun Type 11 that may have been pirated, at the start of their own automobile industry. It was also produced as a BMW Dixi and BMW 3/15 in Germany, Rosengart in France with French styled bodywork, and by American Austin Car Company with American styling, (later American Bantam) in the U.S. It displaced the motorcycle and sidecar combination that was popular in Europe in the 1920s. It spawned a whole industry of &#x27;specials&#x27; builders. Swallow Sidecars switched to making cars based on Austin Seven chassis during the 1920s, then made their own complete cars in the 1930s as SS. With the advent of Nazi Germany the company changed its name to Jaguar. The Seven continued to be produced until the late 1930s along with an updated and restyled closed body, known as the &quot;Big Seven&quot; until World War II, but still on the early 1920s running gear, but with a slightly enlarged chassis and widened track.


In the late 1920s, General Motors finally overtook Ford, as the U.S. new car market doubled in size, and fragmented into niches on a wave of prosperity, with GM producing a range of cars to match. This included a Chevrolet economy car that was just an entry-level model for the range of cars. It was only a small part of the marketing strategy - &quot;A car for every purse and purpose&quot; of GM head Alfred P. Sloan. Harley Earl was appointed as head of the newly formed GM &quot;Art and Color Section&quot; in 1927. Harley Earl and Alfred P. Sloan implemented planned obsolescence and the annual model change to emphasise design as an engine for the success of the company&#x27;s products. This moved cars from being utilitarian items to fashionable status symbols - that needed regular replacement &quot;to keep up with the Joneses.&quot; Later in 1937, the Art and Color Section was renamed the Styling Section, and a few years afterward became one of the GM technical staff operations as the Styling Staff. It was funded by high-interest/low-regular-payments consumer credit, as was the 1920s boom in other consumer durable products. It marked the beginning of mass market consumerism, that had been enabled by the efficiency of mass production and the moving production line. Until this time, manufacturers of consumer goods were concerned, by the possibility that the market would be fulfilled and demand would dry up. The seller&#x27;s market in new cars in the U.S. was over, as customers wanted choice. The &#x27;one model&#x27; policy had nearly bankrupted the Ford Motor Company. By the end of production in 1927 it seemed outdated, and was replaced by the Model A. The Ford Model T was voted Car of the Century on December 18, 1999 in Las Vegas, Nevada.

In 1929 Chevrolet replaced the straight-4 engine that dated from 1913, with the Stovebolt Six engine that was to last until the 1960s as Chevrolet&#x27;s base engine. A few years later Ford developed the Model 18 with the flathead V8. The same car was available with a slightly reworked Model A engine, marketed until 1933 (in U.S.) as the Model B. In Europe, it remained in the Ford lineup, as the Ford V8 in Britain in the 1930s which was re-styled and relaunched as the post-war Ford Pilot. They were viewed as large cars in Europe. The 1932 Ford V8 (Model 18) coupe became the car of choice for post-war hot rodders. It was the first V8 engine in a low priced car, and along with the Chevrolet 6, showed how the U.S. was diverging from the rest of the world in its ideas about what constituted a basic economy car.

In 1928 Morris launched the first Morris Minor (1928) in Britain to compete with the Austin Seven. Also that year German motorcycle manufacturer DKW launched their first car, the P15, a rear-wheel-drive, wood-and-fabric bodied monocoque car, powered by a 600 cc inline two-cylinder two-stroke engine.

Also, in the 1920s, Ford (with the Model T in Manchester, England), General Motors (who took over Opel in Germany and Vauxhall in Britain), expanded into Europe. Most Ford and GM European cars, especially economy cars, were technologically conservative and all were rear-wheel-drive to a smaller European size, with improvements focused mainly on styling, (apart from the introduction of the 1935 monocoque Opel Olympia, and the Macpherson strut by Ford in the 1950s), until the late 1970s and early 1980s.


=== 1930s-1945 ===
In 1931 the DKW F1 was launched. This was the first successful mass-produced front-wheel drive car in the world. It was priced at . (The British 1928-30 Alvis cars &#x27;FWD&#x27; models had handling problems and only 150 were made. The British 1929 BSA was a three-wheel competitor to Morgan and the motorcycle combination market, the 1931 four-wheeler was very short-lived. The 1929 U.S. Cord L-29 having been seriously flawed, production ended at 4,429. The 1930 U.S. Ruxton made about 500, production lasted for only four months.) The F1 featured a front-engine, front-wheel-drive layout using a water-cooled 494 cc or 584 cc transverse two-cylinder two-stroke engine with chain drive. This was developed through the 1930s into the 1938 F8 model and the F9 that was not put into production because World War II started, 250,000 were made. By this time DKW had become the largest manufacturer of motorcycles in the world. Their two-stroke engine technology was to appear in the postwar products of Harley-Davidson, BSA, Trabant, Wartburg, Saab, Subaru, Piaggio, Puch, Kawasaki, Mitsubishi, Mazda, Daihatsu, Honda, and Suzuki. The DKW type of two stroke engine was replaced with four strokes in western economy cars by the 1960s, but lived on in stagnating and cash strapped Communist East Germany&#x27;s Trabant and Wartburg and Communist Poland&#x27;s FSO Syrena until the 1980s.

In the late 1920s in Germany, Josef Ganz independent car engineer/inventor and editor of Motor-Kritik magazine had been a fierce opponent of the status quo of car design. He became a consultant engineer to Adler in December 1930. In the first months of 1931, Ganz constructed a lightweight economy car or peoples car, prototype at Adler with a tubular chassis, a mid-mounted engine, and swing axle independent rear suspension. After completion in May 1931, Ganz nicknamed his new prototype &quot;Maikäfer&quot; (German for cockchafer) which is a species of beetle. In July 1931 he was also consultant engineer to BMW on the 1932-34 BMW 3/20 successor to the BMW 3/15 model. It featured transverse leaf independent front and rear suspension and an updated overhead-valve cylinder head version of the Austin 7 based engine. After a demonstration of the Adler Maikäfer by Ganz, the German Standard Fahrzeugfabrik company (unrelated to the British &#x27;Standard&#x27; company), then purchased a license from Ganz to develop and build a small car according to his design. The prototype of this new model, which was to be called Standard Superior, was finished in 1932. It featured a tubular chassis, a mid-mounted engine, and independent wheel suspension with swing-axles at the rear. At about the same time from 1931, two years prior to Hitler&#x27;s accession to power, Ferdinand Porsche founded &quot;Dr. Ing. h. c. F. Porsche GmbH&quot; - the Porsche company to offer motor vehicle development work and consulting. Together with Zündapp they developed the prototype Porsche Type 12 &quot;Auto für Jedermann&quot; (&quot;car for everyone&quot;), which was the first time the name &quot;Volkswagen&quot; was used. Porsche preferred a 4-cylinder flat engine, but Zündapp used a water-cooled 5-cylinder radial engine. In 1932 three prototypes were running but were not put into production. All three cars were lost during the war, the last in 1945 in Stuttgart during a bombing raid.

In 1932 ASAP-Škoda in Mladá Boleslav Bohemia Czechoslovakia, produced a type Škoda 932 prototype of a streamlined 4-seater two-door car with a rear air-cooled flat-four engine designed by Karel Hrdlička and Vsevold Korolkov. This car&#x27;s bodywork closely resembled the small car designs yet to come.

In Berlin in February 1933, the first production model of the Standard Superior was introduced at the IAMA (Internationale Automobil- und Motorradausstellung). It had a 396 cc 2-cylinder 2-stroke engine. Because of some criticism of the body design, not in the least by Josef Ganz in Motor-Kritik, it was followed in April 1933 by a slightly altered model. In November 1933, the Standard Fahrzeugfabrik introduced yet another new and improved model for 1934, which was slightly longer with one additional window on each side and had a small seat for children or as luggage space in the back. This car was advertised as the German Volkswagen. During the early 1930s German car manufacturers one by one adopted the progressive ideas published in Motor-Kritik since the 1920s. In the meantime in May 1933, the Jewish Josef Ganz was arrested by the Gestapo on trumped up charges of blackmail of the automotive industry, at the instigation of those that he had ferociously criticized. He was eventually released, but his career was systematically destroyed and his life endangered. He fled Germany in June 1934 – the same month Adolf Hitler gave Ferdinand Porsche the brief for designing a mass-producible car for a consumer price of . Production of the Standard Superior ended in 1935. The Standard company was forbidden by the Nazis from using the term &#x27;Volkswagen&#x27;.


The Volkswagen Beetle would be the longest-lasting icon of this 1930s era. Adolf Hitler admired the ideals exemplified by the Ford Model T, (even though he didn&#x27;t drive himself), and sought the help of Ferdinand Porsche to create a &#x27;peoples-car&#x27; (&quot;volkswagen&quot;), with the same ideals for the people of Germany. This car was to complement the new Autobahns that were to be built. They had been planned under the Weimar Republic, but he stole the credit for them. Many of the design ideas were plagiarised from the work of Hans Ledwinka, the Tatra T97 and Tatra V570 with the Czechoslovakian Tatra (car) company. It was also suspiciously similar in many ways to the Josef Ganz–designed cars, it even looked very similar to the Mercedes-Benz 120H prototype of 1931. The Nazi Kraft durch Freude (German for Strength through Joy, abbreviated KdF) &quot;KdF-Wagen&quot; or &quot;Strength through Joy - Car&quot; project ground to a halt before serious production had started because of World War II. The KdF, was the Nazi state propaganda organisation to promote holiday and leisure activities of the population, approved of, and monitored by, the state. The &#x27;price&#x27; of the free or subsidised activities was extensive Nazi ideological indoctrination. When the German car industry was unable to meet Hitler&#x27;s demand that the Volkswagen be sold at or less, the project was taken over by the German Labour Front (Deutsche Arbeitsfront, DAF). This was the national labour organization of the Nazi Party, which replaced the various independent trade unions in Germany during the process of &quot;Gleichschaltung&quot; or Nazification. Now working for the DAF, Porsche built a new Volkswagen factory at Fallersleben, called &quot;Stadt des KdF-Wagens bei Fallersleben&quot; (Wolfsburg after 1945), at a huge cost which was partly met by raiding the DAF&#x27;s accumulated assets and misappropriating the dues paid by DAF members. The Volkswagen was sold to German workers on an installment plan where buyers of the car made payments and posted stamps in a stamp-savings book, which when full, would be redeemed for the car. Due to the shift of wartime production, no consumer ever received a &quot;Kdf-Wagen&quot; (although after the war, Volkswagen did give some customers a DM 200 discount for their stamp-books). The project was not commercially viable and only government support was able to keep it afloat. The Beetle factory was primarily converted to produce the Kübelwagen (the German equivalent of the jeep). The few Beetles that were produced went to the diplomatic corps and military officials.
After the war, the Volkswagen company would be founded to produce the car in the new democratic West Germany, where it would be a success.


From 1936 to 1955, Fiat in Italy produced the advanced and very compact FR layout Fiat 500 &quot;Topolino&quot; or &quot;little mouse&quot;, the precursor of the 1950s Fiat 500, it was designed by Dante Giacosa. The inline four cylinder 569 cc  hp engine was placed right at the front of the chassis with the radiator behind it. This allowed for a sloping front and good legroom when combined with lowered seating. This also allowed Fiat to lower the roofline. Although nominally a two-seater more were often squeezed in behind the seats. Initially it had quarter elliptic leaf spring rear suspension, but with an axle locating trailing arm, that was upgraded to stronger semi-elliptic to cope with overloading by customers. The front suspension was independent and was used as the basis of the suspension of the first English Cooper racing cars in the 1940s that became successful in the 1950s. It had a four speed gearbox (when three was common) and all hydraulic brakes. It was a similar size to the Austin Seven but much more advanced. It was exported all over the world and produced at the NSU factory in Germany, Steyr-Puch in Austria and Simca in France. It was facelifted with American influenced &#x27;full width styling&#x27; of the frontal panels after the war, with headlights integrated into the wings/fenders.

The Fiat 1100 was first introduced in 1937 as an updated version of the 508 &quot;Balilla&quot; (its real name was the 508C) with a look similar to the 1936 Fiat 500 &quot;Topolino&quot; and the larger 1500, with the typical late-thirties heart-shaped front grille, with styling by the emerging designer, Dante Giacosa. It was powered by a 1,089 cc four cylinder overhead-valve engine. Drive was to the rear wheels through a four-speed gearbox, and for the period, its comfort, handling, and performance were prodigious, making it &quot;the only people&#x27;s car that was also a driver&#x27;s car&quot;.

The Steyr 50 streamlined small car was introduced in 1936 by the Austrian manufacturer Steyr-Puch. The car had a water-cooled four-cylinder boxer engine driving the rear wheels through a four-speed transmission. It had a similar engine and radiator layout as the Fiat Topolino that was launched at about the same time. To save room and weight a dynastarter was used, which doubled as the axle of the radiator fan. It was regarded as the &quot;Austrian Peoples&#x27; Car&quot; and was affectionately referred to as the Steyr &quot;Baby&quot;. Professor Porsche had, despite rumors, not been involved in the design or production of the 50. Moreover, the little Steyr offered better seating and luggage space than Porsche&#x27;s Volkswagen with shorter overall length, a large sheet metal sliding roof and was available with hydraulic brakes (instead of the early Volkswagens&#x27; cable-operated ones). In early 1938, the car was revised. It got a more powerful engine and a longer wheelbase. The new model was called the Steyr 55 and went on sale in 1940. A total of 13,000 Steyr &quot;Babies&quot; were sold. The production of Steyr cars was discontinued during World War II, after bombing of the factory. After the war, the factory was rebuilt and specialized in Austrian versions of the Fiat 500 and Fiat 1500. Today the Steyr factory produces the BMW X models for Europe.


The pre-war European car market was not one market. Trade barriers fragmented it into national markets, apart from luxury cars where the extra cost of tariffs could actually make cars more exclusive and desirable. The only way for a car maker to enter another national market of a major European car making country, (and their colonial markets of the time), was to open factories there. For example, Citroën and Renault opened factories in England in this period. This situation only changed with the post-war growth of the EEC (European Community) and EFTA. The British RAC (Royal Automobile Club) horsepower taxation system had the secondary function of excluding foreign vehicles. It was specifically targeted at the Ford Model T, which the then government feared would wipe out the fledgling indigenous motor industry. It crippled car engine design in Britain in the inter-war period, causing British car makers to produce under-square, low revving, long stroke engines. It was abolished after World War II as part of the British export drive for desperately needed, hard foreign currency, because it made British cars uncompetitive internationally. The technologically conservative 1930s Morris Eight, Ford Eight (Ford Model Y which was related to the German Ford Köln), and Standard Eight (Standard, later became Triumph) were named after their RAC horsepower car tax rating. The Ford Model Y had replaced the Model A in Europe in 1932 and ran until 1937. It was a much smaller and lighter car, weighing one third less, with an engine two thirds smaller in capacity than the Model A. The basic Model Y &#x27;Popular&#x27; was an important milestone in British economy cars, being the first steel-bodied four-seater saloon to sell for £100; previously the only four-wheeled car to sell for that price had been the two-seater tourer model of the Morris Minor. The Model Y was reworked into the more streamlined Ford 7Y for 1938-1939. This was restyled again into the 1939 launched Ford Anglia. Initial sales in Britain actually began in early 1940. Production was suspended in early 1942, and resumed in mid-1945. Production ceased in 1948 after a total of 55,807 had been built. The Anglia was restyled again in 1948. Including all production, 108,878 were built. When production as an Anglia ceased in October 1953, it continued as the extremely basic Ford Popular entry-level car until 1959. The Ford Prefect was a differently styled and slightly more upmarket version of the Anglia launched in October 1938 and remained in production until 1941, returning to the market in 1945. The car was face lifted in 1953 from its original perpendicular or sit-up-and-beg style to a more modern three-box structure. It was sold until 1961. The Anglia, Popular and Prefect sold well for a long time despite their old fashioned technology using transverse leaf springs and beam axles for front and rear suspension, side valve engines and only partly synchromeshed three speed gearboxes. They sold on price because of limited car supply on the used car market due to the Second World War, and new car market because of the British government&#x27;s post war policy of exporting cars. The Morris Eight, introduced in 1935, was a deliberate close copy of the Ford and served as a lower cost, more profitable replacement for the 1928-vintage Morris Minor which had not achieved the hoped-for success. Prices for the Morris started at £112 and it offered more equipment than the Ford and a much more modern design than the ageing Austin Seven, which meant it became the UK&#x27;s bestselling car by 1939.

U.S. Industrialist Powel Crosley Jr. with a long track record in diverse car products and other consumer products such as phonograph cabinets, radios, and home appliances with his company Crosley, started production of cars from 1939 (switching to war production in 1942-45) until 1952. They produced small economy cars of a European rather than American scale. These featured a variety of innovative in-house designed engines of less than one litre capacity. They were popular in the 1940s due to their high fuel economy during fuel rationing because of the war. There were a wide variety of two-door body styles; Sedan, Convertible Sedan, Coupe, Convertible Coupe, Covered Wagon, and Station Wagon. Also, there was a successful sports car, the Crosley Hotshot. The styling of 1951 Crosley Super Sport is very similar to the 1958 Frogeye/Bugeye Austin-Healey Sprite. Production peaked at 24,871 cars in 1948. Sales began to slip in 1949, as the post war American economy took off, and even adding the Crosley Hotshot and a combination farm tractor-Jeep-like vehicle called the Farm-O-Road in 1950, could not stop the decline. In 1952, only 1522 Crosley vehicles were sold. Production was shut down and the plant was sold to the General Tire and Rubber Company.

=== 1945–1960 ===
In anticipation of a repeat of the post First World War economic recession, GM started the &quot;Chevrolet Cadet&quot; project (a compact car intended to sell for less than ), that ran from 1945 to 1947, to extend the Chevrolet range downwards in the U.S. new car market. Chevrolet head of engineering Earle S. MacPherson was in charge of development. It had a unibody structure, an over-square over head valve engine, a strut-type front suspension, small-diameter road wheels, a three-speed gearbox, brake and clutch pedals suspended from the bulkhead rather than floor-mounted, and integrated fender/body styling. It was light and technically advanced, but GM&#x27;s management cancelled it, stating that it was not economically viable - the anticipated post Second World War U.S. car market recession hadn&#x27;t materialised. The MacPherson strut, probably the world&#x27;s most common form of independent suspension, evolved in the GM Cadet project by combining long tubular shock absorbers with external coil springs, and locating them in tall towers that directed the vertical travel of the wheels and also formed the &quot;king pin&quot; or &quot;swivel pin axis&quot; around which the front wheels could turn. It was elegantly simple, with just three links holding the wheel in place - the strut itself, the single-piece transverse lower arm, and the anti-roll bar that doubled as a drag link for the wheel hub. MacPherson took his ideas to Ford instead. They were first used in the French 1948 Ford Vedette. Next in the 1950 British Ford Consul and Zephyr (British mid-size cars, the same size as the Cadet), which owed more to the Cadet than just the MacPherson strut suspension, and caused a sensation when they were launched. In 1953, a miniaturised economy car version, the Anglia 100E was launched in Britain. These early 1950s British Fords used styling elements from the U.S. 1949 Ford &#x27;Shoebox&#x27;.


As Europe and Japan rebuilt from the war, their growing economies led to a steady increase in demand for cheap cars to &#x27;motorise the masses&#x27;. Emerging technology allowed economy cars to become more sophisticated. Early post-war economy cars like the VW Beetle, Citroën 2CV, Renault 4CV, and Saab 92 looked extremely minimal; however, they were technologically more advanced than most conventional cars of the time.

The 4CV was designed covertly by Renault engineers during the World War II German occupation of France, when under strict orders to design and produce only commercial and military vehicles. Between 1941 and 1944, Renault was under the Technical Directorship of a francophile German installed former Daimler Benz engineer called Wilhelm von Urach who turned a blind eye to the small, economy car project suitable for the period of post war austerity. The design team went against the wishes of Louis Renault who in 1940 believed that post-war Renault should concentrate on mid-range cars. Only after a row in May 1941 did Louis Renault approve the project. In October 1944 after the liberation, Louis Renault who was imprisoned on charges of collaboration, died in suspicious circumstances. In January 1945, newly nationalised Renault had officially acquired a new boss, the former resistance hero Pierre Lefaucheux, (he had been acting administrator since September 1944). Lefaucheux had been arrested by the Gestapo in June 1944, and deported to Buchenwald concentration camp. The Gestapo transferred him to Metz for interrogation, but the city was deserted because of the advancing allied front, the Germans abandoned their prisoner. In November 1945 the French government invited Ferdinand Porsche to France looking to relocate the Volkswagen project as part of war reparations. On 15 December 1945, Porsche was invited to consult with Renault about the Renault 4CV. Lefaucheux was enraged that anyone should think the almost production-ready Renault 4CV was in any way inspired by the German Volkswagen, and that the politicians should presume to send Porsche to advise on it. The government insisted on nine meetings with Porsche which took place in rapid succession. Lefaucheux insisted that the meetings would have absolutely no influence on the design of the Renault 4CV, and Porsche cautiously went on record saying that the car would be ready for large scale production in a year. Lefaucheux was a man with contacts, as soon as the 4CV project meetings had taken place, Porsche was arrested in connection with war crimes allegations involving the use of forced labour including French in the Volkswagen plant in Germany. Ferdinand Porsche, despite never facing any sort of trial, spent the next twenty months in a Dijon jail. The 760 cc rear-mounted four-cylinder engine, three-speed manual transmission 4CV was launched at the 1946 Paris Motor Show and went on sale a year later. Volume production with the help of Marshall Plan aid money, was said to have commenced at the company&#x27;s Parisian Boulogne-Billancourt plant a few weeks before the Paris Motor Show of October 1947, although the cars were in very short supply for the next year or so. On the 4CV&#x27;s launch, it was nicknamed &quot;La motte de beurre&quot; (the lump of butter); this was due to the combination of its shape and the use of surplus paint from the German Army vehicles of Rommel&#x27;s &quot;Afrika Korps&quot;, which were a sand-yellow color.

The VW featured a 1.1-litre, rear engined air-cooled &#x27;boxer&#x27; flat four with rear-wheel drive, all round fully independent suspension, semi monocoque construction and the ability to cruise on the autobahn for long periods reliably. This cruising ability and engine durability was gained by high top gearing, and by restricting the engine breathing and performance to well below its maximum capability. Production was restarted after the war by the British Army Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, under Major Ivan Hirst after it was dismissed as valueless for war reparations by the Western Allies. In 1948 Hirst recruited Heinrich Nordhoff to run Volkswagen GmbH and in 1949 ownership was handed over to the West German government. The Volkswagen Type 1 &#x27;Beetle&#x27; was to become the most popular single design in history. Its production surpassed The Ford Model T on February 17, 1972. It was withdrawn from the European market in 1978. The Volkswagen Beetle was an icon of the post-war West German reconstruction known as the Wirtschaftswunder.

The 375 cc Citroën 2CV had interconnected all round fully independent suspension, rack and pinion steering, radial tyres and front-wheel drive with an air-cooled flat twin engine and four-speed gearbox. It was some 10 to 15 MPG (Imperial) more fuel efficient than any other economy car of its time – but with restricted performance to match. It was designed to motorise rural communities where speed was not a requirement. The original design brief had been issued before the Second World War in the mid-1930s. It had been completely redesigned three times, as its market and materials costs had changed drastically during its development period. Engine size increased over time; from 1970 it was a still tiny 602 cc. It was in production until 1990.

The Saab 92 had a transversely mounted, water-cooled two-cylinder, two-stroke based on a DKW design, driving the front wheels. It had aircraft derived monocoque construction, with an aerodynamic (drag coefficient) value of 0.30 – not bettered until the 1980s. It was later developed into the Saab 93, Saab 95, and Saab 96. It was produced until 1980, switching to a V4 four stroke engine in the 1960s. The mechanicals were used in the Saab Sonett sports cars.

Also in the immediate postwar period, the monocoque FR layout Morris Minor was launched in 1948. To reduce costs it initially reused the pre-war side-valve Morris 8 engine instead of an intended flat-four. Later, after the 1952 formation of British Motor Corporation it had the Austin designed 948cc and later 1098cc OHV BMC A-Series engine. It had a strong emphasis on good packaging and roadholding, with independent front suspension and rack and pinion steering, and American influenced styling. It was produced in different body styles including a 2-door and 4-door saloon, a 2-door convertible, a &#x27;woody&#x27; estate car / station wagon, a van with a rear box and a pick-up truck. 1.3 million had been built by the end of production in 1971. It was designed by Alec Issigonis.


The 1947 FR layout Toyota SA was Toyota&#x27;s first true post war design. Although permission to begin full production of passenger cars in Japan was not granted until 1949, limited numbers of cars were permitted to be built from 1947, and the Toyota SA was one such car. It had a 4-cylinder engine, 4-wheel independent suspension and a smaller, aerodynamic body. The project was driven by Kiichiro Toyoda, but most of the design work was done by Kazuo Kumabe. The two-door body was aerodynamic in a style similar to the Volkswagen Beetle. The doors were hinged at the rear (often called suicide doors). The front window was a single pane of flat glass with a single wiper mounted above the driver. Only right hand drive was offered. Toyota engineers (including Dr Kumabe) had visited Germany before World War II and had studied Porsche and Volkswagen designs (independent suspension, aerodynamic bodies, backbone chassis, rear-mounted air-cooled engines, economical production cost). Many Japanese companies had ties with Germany during the war years. But unlike other Japanese car firms Toyota did not partner with Western companies after the war, so it was free to use German designs. Many features of the prototype Beetle were subsequently put into the SA, although the Beetle&#x27;s rear-mounted air-cooled engine feature was not used. Later on, Toyota revisited the economic principles exemplified by the Beetle when designing the 1950s successors to the SA and the later Publica and Corolla.

In the post war austerity of the late 1940s, when most of the Japanese population could not afford a car, but could afford a motorcycle, the Japanese codified a legal standard for extremely economical small cars, known as the keicar. The aim was to promote the growth of the car industry, as well as to offer an alternative delivery method to small business and shop owners. Originally limited to a mere 150 cc (100 cc for two-strokes) in 1949, dimensions and engine size limitations were gradually increased (in 1950, 1951, and 1955) to tempt more manufacturers to produce kei cars. It wasn&#x27;t until the 1955 change to 360 cc as the upper limit for two-strokes as well as four-strokes that the class really began taking off, with cars from Suzuki Suzulight (front-wheel drive based on the German Lloyd with a DKW type engine) and then Subaru 360, finally able to fill people&#x27;s need for basic transportation without being too severely compromised. Early generation keicars on the market were mostly rear-engined, rear drive RR layout cars. From the end of the 1960s Keicars switched to front-engined, front-wheel-drive FF layout. This market has thrived ever since, with the cars increasing in size and engine capacity, including sports cars such as the Honda Beat and Suzuki Cappuccino, and even miniaturised MPVs.

In 1953, in Japan Hino entered the private car market, by manufacturing the Renault 4CV under licence.
Also, in 1953 the Fiat 1100 in Italy was completely redesigned as a compact four-door sedan, with a modern monocoque bodywork and integrated front lights.


While economy cars flourished in Europe and later Japan, the booming postwar American economy combined with the emergence of the suburban and interstate highways in that country led to slow acceptance of small cars. Brief economic recessions saw interest in economical cars wax and wane. During the early 1950s, the independent lower volume American auto manufacturers launched new &#x27;small&#x27; cars. They were designed to be smaller than contemporary American cars, but would still have mainstream appeal, because they could still accommodate five passengers comfortably with conventional engineering and FR layout, establishing the American sized &#x27;Compact car&#x27;. Nash Motors launched the Nash Rambler and Kaiser-Frazer introduced the Henry J in 1950. Willys-Overland (the designers of the Second World War Jeep MB) the Willys Aero in 1952, and Hudson the 1953 Hudson Jet. This niche market avoiding competition with the &#x27;Big Three&#x27; of GM, Ford and Chrysler was not large enough to sustain all these competing models. They were priced too near the cost of a base model full sized car from the big three, that in the 1950s had a price war. US Fuel prices during this period were very low and the maintenance costs of the compacts were almost as much as full sized cars, so total running cost were not that much cheaper. Only the Nash Rambler made it to a second generation. The losses caused to the other car makers initiated the succession of mergers that eventually resulted in the American Motors Corporation (AMC). Nash also contracted with British Motor Corporation to build the American designed Metropolitan using existing BMC mechanical components, (the 1.5 Liter engine is a BMC B-Series engine also used in larger sizes in the MG MGA and MG MGB). Imported cars began to appear on the U.S. market during this time to satisfy the demands for true economy cars. An initial late 1940s–early 1950s success in a small way, was the monocoque Morris Minor launched in 1948, with its miniaturized Chevrolet styling. It was underpowered for the long distance roads of the U.S. and especially the freeways that were starting to spread across the country in the 1950s. The first British Motorway did not open until 1959. BMC preferred to develop the higher profit margin MGs for the American market and also worked with Nash and so passed on the opportunity. From the mid-1950s the Volkswagen Beetle using clever and innovative advertising and capitalising on its very high build quality, durability and reliability, was a spectacular success. Having been designed for cruising the autobahns, freeways were no problem for it. It disproved the scepticism of American buyers as to the usefulness of, by their standards, such small cars. In 1955 VW launched the Beetle-based Italian styled Karmann Ghia coupé, that was developed from a 1953 concept car. Production doubled soon after its introduction, becoming the car most imported into the U.S, with more than 445,000 imported. Initially the stylish Renault Dauphine derived from the Renault 4CV, looked like it would follow the VWs footsteps, but then was a failure due to mechanical breakdowns and body corrosion. This failure on the U.S. market in the late 1950s, may have harmed the acceptance of small cars generally in America.

In 1955, the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry set a goal to all Japanese makers to create what was called a &quot;national car&quot; that was larger than the kei car. This influenced Japanese automobile manufacturers to focus their product development efforts for the smaller kei cars, or the larger &quot;national cars&quot;. The concept stipulated that the vehicle be able to maintain a maximum speed over 100 km/h (62 mph), weigh below 400 kg (882 lbs), fuel consumption at or more, at an average speed of 60 km/h (37 mph) on a level road, and not require maintenance or significant service for at least . This established a &quot;compact car&quot; class, that is by far the most popular in Japan due to tax benefits stipulated by Japanese government regulations. One of the first compact cars that met those requirements was the FR layout Toyota Publica with a flat twin engine, and the RR layout Mitsubishi 500. The Publica and the Mitsubishi 500 were essentially &quot;kei cars&quot; with engines larger than regulations permitted at the time.

In the late 1950s the DDR German Democratic Republic produced its &#x27;peoples&#x27; car&#x27;. The Trabant sold 3 million vehicles in thirty years due to its communist captive market. It had a transverse two-cylinder air-cooled two-stroke engine and front-wheel drive, using DKW technology.

In 1957, Fiat in Italy launched the 479 cc &#x27;Nuovo&#x27; Fiat 500 designed by Dante Giacosa with frontal styling by Claus Luthe. It was the first real city car. It had a rear-mounted air-cooled vertical twin engine, and all round independent suspension. Its target market was Italian scooter riders who had settled down and had a young family in the post war baby boom, and needed their first car. It was also produced in Austria as the Puch 500. Fiat had also launched the larger 1955 Fiat 600 with a similar layout but with a water-cooled in-line four-cylinder engine, it even had a six-seater people carrier / MPV / mini-van version called the &#x27;Multipla&#x27;, even though it was about the same size as a modern supermini.

Car body corrosion was a particular problem from the 1950s to the 1980s when cars moved to monocoque or uni-body construction (starting from the 1930s), from a separate Body-on-frame chassis made from thick steel. This relied on the shaped body panels and box sections, like sills/rockers, providing the integrity of the body-shell rather than a separate frame (vehicle) for strength. A light car was a fast and/or economical car. The introduction of newly available computers for structural analysis from the 1960s, with computers like the IBM 360, the thickness of sheet metal in bodyshells was reduced to the minimum needed for structural integrity. However, corrosion prevention / rustproofing, that had not previously been significant because of the thickness of metal and separate chassis, had not kept pace with this new construction technology. The lightest monocoque economy cars would be the most affected by structural corrosion.

===1960s===

The world&#x27;s first hatchback, the 1958 FR layout Austin A40 Farina Countryman model that was a co-development of BMC and the Italian design house Pininfarina at a time when this was unusual. It had a lift up rear window and drop down boot lid. It was also sold as a two-door saloon. It was built in Italy by Innocenti as well as in the UK. For 1965 Innocenti designed a new single-piece rear door for their Combinata version of the Countryman. This top-hinged door used struts to hold it up over a wide cargo opening and was a true hatchback – a model never developed in the home (United Kingdom) market. The Countryman name has &#x27;estate&#x27; type associations, and BMC successor company Rover used the name on estate cars / Station Wagons so it is largely forgotten.

The next major advance in small car design was the 1959 848 cc FF layout Austin Mini from the British Motor Corporation, designed by Alec Issigonis as a response to the first oil crisis, the 1956 Suez Crisis, and the boom in bubble cars and Microcars that followed. It was the first front-wheel-drive car with a water-cooled in-line four-cylinder engine mounted transversely - the BMC A-Series engine. This allowed eighty percent of the floor plan for the use of passengers and luggage. The majority of modern cars use this configuration. Its progressive rate rubber sprung independent suspension (Hydrolastic 1964–1971), low centre of gravity, and wheel at each corner with radial tyres, increased the car&#x27;s grip and handling over all but the most expensive automobiles on the market. The Mini was voted the second most important car of the 20th century after the Ford Model T. Badge engineered luxury versions with modified bodywork and wood and leather interiors were made under the names of Riley Elf and Wolesely Hornet. Customised versions were made by coach-builders like Harold Radford, and were very popular with the rich and famous of 1960s London. From 1964 a Jeep like version (that had been rejected by British Armed Forces), of the Mini, the Mini Moke was popular with the King&#x27;s Road / Carnaby Street, Swinging London set. An Estate car / station-wagon (with a non-structural wood frame &#x27;Countryman&#x27; version), a Van and Pick-up versions were also successful. In 1962, a slightly larger 1098cc (and later 1256cc) version of the Mini engineering design was launched, as the Austin/Morris 1100. It had front disc brakes as standard. It had Italian styling by Pininfarina and used front-to-rear interconnected independent Hydrolastic suspension. It was available in sporting MG versions, and luxury wood and leather interior Riley, Wolesely and Vanden Plas versions. It was for most of the 1960s, the top selling car in Britain, and was sold until the mid-1970s. It was sold as the Austin America in the U.S., Canada, and Switzerland between 1968 and 1972. It was also sold in South Africa - Austin Apache and Spain - Austin Victoria, with Triumph type Michelotti re-styling, built in local factories.
BMC had hedged their bets after the launch of the front wheel drive Mini and 1100 and to meet the demands of more conservative customers, by keeping their rear wheel drive Austin A40 Farina in production until 1967 and Morris Minor until 1971, while front wheel drive was being accepted by the UK and European markets. Demand from older customers in particular kept the Minor in production, despite it being very outdated.

Ford in the UK in 1959 launched the Anglia 105E. It had a new overhead valve engine and a four speed gearbox, which was a great improvement over the previous model Anglia 100E that had a side-valve engine and only three speeds. It was rear wheel drive using a rear beam axle and leaf springs, with front Macpherson struts used like its predecessor. It used much miniaturised late 1950s American-influenced styling that was very fashionable, including a sweeping nose line, and on deluxe versions, a full-width slanted chrome grille in between prominent &quot;eye&quot; headlamps. The car also sported a backward-slanted rear window and tailfins. This dated the car over its nine-year production life. The Anglia&#x27;s Ford Kent engine was in production in a developed form into the 21st century.

The launch in the 1960s of the Mini Cooper to exploit the exceptional grip and handling of the Austin Mini, along with its success in rallying, (Monte Carlo Rally in particular) and circuit racing, first showed that economy cars could be effective sports cars. It made traditional sports cars like the MG Midget look very old fashioned. The rear-wheel-drive Ford Lotus Cortina and Ford Escort 1300GT and RS1600, along with the Vauxhall Viva GT and Brabham SL/90 HB in the late 1960s opened up this market still further in Britain. Meanwhile, from the 1950s Abarth tuned Fiats and Gordini tuned Renaults did the same in Italy and France.

Also in 1959 the FR layout DAF 600, with a rear-mounted automatic gearbox, was launched in the Netherlands. The 600 was the first car to have a continuously variable transmission (CVT) system – the innovative DAF Variomatic. It was the first European economy car with an automatic gearbox. The CVT was continued through the 1960s and 1970s by DAF with the DAF Daffodil, DAF 33, DAF 44, DAF 46, DAF 66, and later by Volvo after they merged with the Volvo 340. The 1960s Austin Mini/Austin 1100 compact and innovative automatic gearbox, developed by Automotive Products (with a conventional epicyclic / torque converter coupling) was much less efficient at transmitting drive.

In the 1960s the semi-monocoque/platform chassis 750 cc Renault 4 (arguably the first small five-door hatchback, but viewed as a small estate car or station wagon at the time) was launched in France. It had a very soft but well controlled ride like the Citroën 2CV. In layout, it was essentially an economy car version of the 1930s designed Citroën Traction Avant, in particular the &#x27;Commerciale&#x27; derivative, but with fully independent rear suspension (the Commerciale used a flexible beam axle, similar to 1970s VW twist-beam rear suspension). The Commerciale had been smaller than an estate car with a horizontally split two-piece rear door before the second world war. When it was relaunched in 1954 it featured a one-piece top-hinged tailgate. Citroën responded with the 2CV-based 1960 602 cc Citroën Ami and hatchback 1967 Citroën Dyane. Also in France, in 1966 Renault launched the midrange Renault 16 - although it was not an economy car, it is widely recognised as the first non-commercial mass-market hatchback car. The hatchback was a leap forward in practicality. It was adopted as a standard feature on most European cars, with saloons declining in popularity apart from at the top of the market over the next twenty years. The hatchback improved the versatility of economy cars that were more limited in load carrying ability than larger cars.

In the 1960s the Japanese MITI &quot;national car&quot; class of vehicles, saw the launch of the Isuzu Bellett, Daihatsu Compagno and Mazda Familia in 1963, the Mitsubishi Colt in 1965, and the Nissan Sunny, Subaru 1000, and Toyota Corolla in 1966. Honda introduced their first four-door sedan in 1969, called the Honda 1300. In North America, these cars were classified as subcompact cars. The 1960s Toyota Corolla, Datsun Sunny refined the conventional small rear-wheel-drive economy cars were widely exported from Japan as postwar international competition and trade increased. Japan also instituted the &quot;Shaken&quot; road-worthiness testing regime, that required progressively more expensive maintenance, involving the replacement of entire vehicle systems, that was unnecessary for safety, year on year, to devalue older cars and promote new cars on their home market that were available for low prices. There are very few cars in Japan more than five years old.



In 1962 Fiat introduced the third generation FR layout Fiat 1100, called the 1100D. It was restyled into the 1100R from 1966. The Fiat 1100D was made in India from 1964 onwards. In 1973 (for that model year alone) it was named the Premier President. From 1974 onwards until it was finally discontinued in 2000, it was known as the Premier Padmini.

In 1964 Fiat under the engineering leadership of Dante Giacosa designed the first car with a transverse engine and an end on gearbox (using different length drive shafts) and a hatchback - the Autobianchi Primula, It had Pininfarina styling that bore a resemblance to the Austin 1100. It was put into limited production by Fiat under their Autobianchi brand. Fiat still produced the FR layout 1100 of about the same size, so that any potential technical teething problems would not damage their brand. Primula production ceased in 1970, by which time 74,858 had been built. It was replaced by the Autobianchi A112 and Autobianchi A111 with the same mechanical layout. They were only sold in mainland Europe, where they were popular into the 1980s (replaced by the Lancia Y10), but unknown in the UK. The French 1967 Simca 1100 (who had previously used Fiat technology under licence), the 1969 Fiat 128, and the 1971 Fiat 127 regarded as the first &#x27;super-mini&#x27; brought this development to a wider audience. The 128 was Dante Giacosa&#x27;s final project. This layout gradually superseded the gearbox in the engine&#x27;s sump of BMC Austin Morris and later Peugeot PSA X engine, until the only car in production with this transmission layout by the 1990s, was the then long obsolescent Austin (Rover) Mini.

The Simca 1100 was also the first small car, that was designed from the outset, with an angled single piece hatchback tailgate to enter large scale production. The earlier Renault 4 tailgate was near vertical like an estate car, and the Austin A40 originally had a split tailgate. The Simca was successful in France, but less so elsewhere due to &#x27;tappety&#x27; engines and body corrosion. A total of 2.2 million cars were produced by 1985. In 1972 Renault introduced the monocoque Renault 5 supermini hatchback, that used the proven and successful Renault 4 mechanicals and suspension. It was made until 1985, when it was replaced by the &#x27;Super Cinq&#x27;. American Motors (AMC) marketed a version with sealed-beam headlamps and reinforced bumpers as the &#x27;Le Car&#x27; in the U.S. from 1976 to 1983.

GM&#x27;s British and German subsidiaries re-entered the small car market with then conventional FR layout cars for the first time since the Second World War in the early 1960s. The Vauxhall Viva, launched in September 1963, and was replaced in September 1966. It was also the first new small car produced by Vauxhall since 1936. The HA Viva was powered by a , overhead valve, four cylinder, front-mounted engine driving the rear wheels. It was comparable in size and mechanical specifications with the new GM Germany Opel Kadett released in 1962 in continental Europe. The Opel featured a brand new OHV 993cc engine, that in a developed form lasted until the early 1990s. The Viva and Kadett were sold alongside each other in many markets. The HA Viva was just an inch longer than the Ford Anglia which dated back to 1959. It was offered only as a two-door saloon. The HB Viva, announced in September 1966 and sold by Vauxhall until 1970, was a larger car than the HA, featuring coke bottle styling, and was modelled after American General Motors (GM) models such as the Chevrolet Impala/Caprice of the period. It featured the same basic engine as the HA, but enlarged to 1,159 cc, but with the added weight of the larger body the final drive gearing was reduced to maintain performance. The Opel Kadett B was launched in 1965.

In 1968 Ford replaced the outmoded Anglia with the Ford Escort which was sold across Western Europe. It was longer and wider than its predecessor to fill the gap left by increasing the size of Ford&#x27;s next model up in the range the Ford Cortina. It had the same mechanical layout and suspension as the Cortina and Anglia, but with contemporary &#x27;Coke Bottle&#x27; styling. It struggled to compete with the larger and more comfortable second generation 1965 Opel Kadett in West Germany.



In the U.S. market, in 1959 Studebaker launched the Studebaker Lark, then 1960 brought the Chevrolet Corvair, Ford Falcon, and Plymouth Valiant into the market segment dominated by Rambler. These vehicles were lower priced and offered better fuel economy than the standard domestic full-size models, that had grown in size and price through the 1950s. The Corvair, Chevrolet&#x27;s rear-engined compact car, was originally brought to market to compete directly with the VW Beetle. Ford Falcon and Plymouth Valiant were conventional, compact six-cylinder sedans that competed directly with the Rambler American. In 1962 Chevrolet introduced the Chevy II / Nova line of conventional compacts first offered with 4- and six-cylinder engines. These American vehicles were still much larger than fuel-efficient economy cars popular in Europe and Japan. The Corvair is twenty inches longer, seven inches wider, eight hundred pounds heavier and includes an engine almost twice the size of the Beetle that inspired it. Corvair offered VW&#x27;s rear engine advantages of traction, light steering, and flat floor with Chevrolet&#x27;s six-passenger room and six-cylinder power American buyers were accustomed to. Later versions of the Corvair were considered sports cars rather than &#x27;economy&#x27; cars including Monza Spyder models, which featured one of the first production car turbocharged engines. The Corvair Monza was followed by the Falcon-based Ford Mustang, introduced in 1964, establishing the &quot;pony car&quot; class which included Corvair&#x27;s replacement, the Chevrolet Camaro in 1967, expanding the domestic pony car market segment started in mid-1960s.

The 1960s also saw the swan song of the rear-engined rear-wheel-drive car RR layout. The first models designed with this layout in Central Europe before the second world war, had better traction than any other two wheel drive car layout. They were very capable in the mountainous country there, that had many unsurfaced roads, just how capable was shown by the performance of the two wheel drive military Kübelwagen version of the VW Beetle. This layout also had better interior space utilisation than front engine rear-wheel-drive cars, and a better ride than those with a live rear beam axle. It was an affordable way to produce a car with all round independent suspension, without the need for expensive constant-velocity joints needed by front-wheel-drive cars, or axle arrangements of FR layout cars. They could have road-holding issues due to unfavorable weight distribution and wheel camber changes (rear wheel tuck under), of the lower-cost swing axle rear suspension design. These were highlighted and a little exaggerated by Ralph Nader. These problems were ameliorated on later Beetles and were eliminated on the second-generation Chevrolet Corvair with the switch to a four-link, fully independent rear suspension. The Hillman Imp, NSU Prinz 4 (styled by Claus Luthe) and Soviet Zaporozhets all had styling cues derived from the original Corvair. Connections to the Corvair are mentioned on their respective Wikipages. The only economy cars with this layout launched since the 1960s have been the turn of the millennium ultra compact two seater city car Smart Fortwo and Indian market Tata Nano.

RR layout cars launched in the 1960s include:
* The 874 cc Hillman Imp - UK.
* The 583 cc NSU Prinz, and the relatively unsuccessful attempt at diversification of the Volkswagen Type 3, Volkswagen Type 4 - West Germany.
* The 956–1289 cc Renault 8/10 and 777–1294 cc Simca 1000 - France.
* The 2296 cc Chevrolet Corvair - US.
* The first 1960s air-cooled two-stroke in-line twin-engined generation of the 360 cc Keicar class - the 1958 Subaru 360, Mitsubishi 360 1961, Mazda Carol 1962, Daihatsu Fellow 1966, Honda N360 and the Suzuki Fronte 1967 along with the non Keicar, Renault based Hino Motors 4CV was replaced by the 1961 Contessa - Japan.
*In Communist Eastern Europe there was the Škoda 1000MB/1100MB that was developed into the 1970s Škoda S100/110 and then the 1970s–1980s Škoda 105/120/125 Estelle - Czechoslovakia.
* Centrally planned as &quot;the&quot; small Soviet car, the Zaporozhets from the Ukrainian ZAZ factory (1960-1969 styled like a Fiat 600), (1966-1994 styled like NSU Prinz 4), was sold in the USSR and Warsaw Pact/COMECON countries of Eastern and Central Europe. It had a low price and good fuel economy and was designed to be DIY maintained by the customer, because of lack of maintenance facilities in communist countries. It was also issued to Soviet war amputees by the state through their social welfare system. In total, 3,422,444 air-cooled Zaporozhets made. - Soviet Union

=== 1970s ===

The 1973 oil crisis (and again in 1979), emphasised the importance of fuel economy worldwide, as an increasing proportion of the cost of vehicle operation. This had particular impact in the United States with its greater distances, which was arguably the nation hardest hit because of the prevalence of large, fuel-thirsty cars. At the same time, new emissions and safety regulations were being implemented requiring major and costly changes to vehicle design and construction for the U.S. market. The sales of imported economy cars had continued to rise from the 1960s. The first response by domestic American car makers included the U.S. produced, FR layout cars, the AMC Gremlin, Chevrolet Vega, and Ford Pinto, along with captive imports.

AMC was determined to have the first subcompact offering and 1970 AMC Gremlin sales began six months ahead of the all-new 1971 models from GM and Ford. The Gremlin used the AMC Hornet&#x27;s existing design with a shortened wheelbase and &quot;chopped&quot; tail, and had an important low-price advantage.

The Chevrolet Vega, featuring attractive miniaturised Camaro styling, introduced in September 1970, was GM&#x27;s first subcompact, economy car. Nearly two million were sold over its seven-year production run, due in part to its low price and fuel economy. By 1974, the Vega was among the top 10 best-selling American-made cars, but the aluminum-block engine developed a questionable reputation. Chevrolet increased the engine warranty to to all Vega owners, which proved costly for Chevrolet. The 1976 Vega had extensive engine and body durability improvements and a five-year/ engine warranty. After a three-year sales decline, the Vega and its aluminium engine were discontinued at the end of the 1977 model year.

Pontiac&#x27;s cheapest car was a re-badged Vega variant exclusively available in Canada for the 1973-74 model years, and introduced in the U.S. the following year. The final 1977 models featured the first use of Pontiac&#x27;s Iron Duke inline-4 engine. Lower priced versions of the Chevrolet Monza were introduced for 1978 and rebadged variants of the discontinued Vega were also added to the Monza line - the Monza wagon using the Vega Kammback body was sold for the 1978-79 model years, and the Monza S hatchback, a price leader model using the Vega Hatchback body, was also offered for the 1978 model year.

The Ford Pinto was introduced one day after the Vega. It was small, economical, and a top seller. Controversy over the design of the fuel system and a Ford cost benefit analysis presented to the public as specific to the Pinto destroyed the reputation of the car. The Ford Pinto engine though was successful in European Fords for twenty years, in successive mid and large European sized mainstay models of the; UK Ford Cortina, German Ford Taunus, the Ford Sierra, and the Ford Granada amongst others.


By 1970, Nissan released their first front-wheel-drive car that was originally developed by Prince Motor Company which had merged with Nissan in 1966. This was introduced in 1970 as the Datsun/Nissan Cherry. In 1973, the Energy Crisis started, which made small fuel efficient cars more desirable, and the North American driver began exchanging their large cars for the smaller, imported compacts that cost less to fill up and were inexpensive to maintain. The Toyota Corona, the Datsun 510, the Mitsubishi Galant (a captive import from Chrysler sold as the Dodge Colt), the Subaru DL, and later the Honda Accord gave buyers increased passenger space and some luxury amenities, such as air conditioning, power steering, AM-FM radios, and even power windows and central locking without increasing the price of the vehicle. In 1972, the Honda Civic was launched, the CVCC (Compound Vortex Controlled Combustion) Stratified charge engine debuted in 1975 and was offered alongside the standard Civic engine. The CVCC engine had a head design that promoted cleaner, more efficient combustion, eliminating the need to use a Catalytic converter for the new California emission standards - nearly every other U.S. market car for that year needed exhausts with catalytic converters. The Japanese, who had previously competed on price, equipment and reliability with conservative designs, were starting to make advanced, globally competitive cars.

The Audi 50 designed by Claus Luthe was a front wheel drive supermini three door hatchback car launched in 1974 and produced until 1978, and sold only in Europe, 180,812 were built. A re-badged cheaper, lower equipment version was marketed as the Volkswagen Polo Mk1 (1975-1981) sold more than 500,000. It impacted sales of the Audi, causing production to come to an end early compared to the Polo. The Volkswagen Derby was the booted two door saloon (three-box) version of its Volkswagen Polo Mk1 supermini, between 1977 and 1981 in Europe.

Ford had sold 2 million Escorts across Europe by 1974, the year the MK2 was launched with a squarer flatter panel body re-style. The most successful market was the UK. The Escort&#x27;s success was greatly helped by its numerous rallying successes in the 1970s, and the performance versions like the Escort Mexico and RS2000 that traded on that success, and provided a halo effect for the lesser models.

The Chevrolet Chevette was introduced in September 1975 and produced through to 1987. It was a successful and &#x27;Americanized&#x27; version of the GM T platform (1973) &#x27;world car&#x27; that was developed with Opel, GM&#x27;s German subsidiary and Isuzu of Japan.

Chrysler having taken control of Simca (and Hillman in the UK) in the 1960s, as part of expansion plans to match GM and Ford, turned to their French subsidiary, when they needed to launch an American made sub-compact, to comply with federal Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) regulations that were being introduced starting with the 1978 model year cars. The replacement for the Simca 1100, the C2 project, became the (Simca) Talbot Horizon that won European Car of the Year 1978, and more than 3 million were sold in the United States as the Dodge Omni and Plymouth Horizon from 1978 to 1990. It had been re-engineered with a federal emission VW Golf 1.7L engine and MacPherson strut suspension for the U.S. market. Chrysler Europe was sold to Peugeot in 1978, due to mounting operating losses in Europe and the U.S. that required a U.S. government bailout.

Captive imports were the other response by U.S. car makers to the increase in popularity of imported economy cars in the 1970s and 1980s. These were cars bought from overseas subsidiaries or from companies in which they held a significant shareholding. GM, Ford, and Chrysler sold imports for the U.S. market. The Buick Opel, Ford Cortina, Mercury Capri, Ford Festiva, and Dodge Colt are examples.

Technologies that developed during the post-war era, such as disc brakes, overhead-cam engines and radial tires, had become cheap enough to be used in economy cars at this time (radials began to be adopted in the 1950s and 1960s, and front disc brakes in the 1960s, towards the bottom of the market in Europe). This led to cars such as the 1974 Mk 1 Volkswagen Golf designed by Giorgetto Giugiaro, Fiat 128 and 1972 Honda Civic. Some previously exotic technology, electronic fuel injection, became affordable, which allowed the production of high-performance hot hatch sport compacts like the 1976 Volkswagen Golf GTI. This car combined economy of use and a practical hatchback body, with the performance and driving fun that kicked off the hot hatchback boom. Also introduced in 1976 was the 1.5 L VW Golf diesel—the first small diesel hatchback. It used new Bosch rotary mechanical diesel injection pump technology. Also in that year, Ford of Europe (produced by the merging of Ford national operations in Europe) launched their first front-wheel-drive small car, the Ford Fiesta, having gained experience from the Ford of Germany 1960s European midsized Ford Taunus P4 and Ford of Brazil Ford Corcel.

===1980s===
GM Europe (Vauxhall/Opel) introduced their first European market front-wheel-drive car, the Opel Kadett D/Vauxhall Astra, Golf-sized car in 1979 by Opel in Germany and 1980 by Vauxhall in the UK.

In 1980, Fiat introduced the Giugiaro designed Mk 1 Fiat Panda. It was originally designed to be produced in China at its 1970s level of industrialisation. It was a utilitarian front-wheel-drive supermini with Fiat standard transverse engine and end-on gearbox. It featured mostly flat body panels and flat glass.

Also in 1980, the all new hatchback and front wheel drive third generation Ford Escort Mark III (Europe) was launched. Previous Escorts were saloon/sedans with front engine and rear wheel drive. In 1981 Ford launched the American version of the Ford Escort.

In 1982 GM launched their first front-wheel-drive supermini, the Opel Corsa/Vauxhall Nova in Europe.

In 1983 Fiat launched the next step forward in small car design, the Fiat Uno. It was designed by Giorgetto Giugiaro&#x27;s ItalDesign. The tall, square body utilising a Kamm tail achieved a drag coefficient of 0.34, and it won much praise for an airy interior space and fuel economy. It incorporated many packaging lessons learnt from Giugiaro&#x27;s 1978 Lancia Megagamma concept car, (the first modern people carrier-MPV-mini-van)—but miniaturised. Its tall car, high-seating packaging is imitated by every small car today. It showed that not just low sleek cars could be aerodynamic, but small boxy well packaged cars could be too. It was voted Car of the Year in 1984.

Also in 1983 Peugeot launched the Pininfarina-styled Peugeot 205. While not as radical as the Uno in body design, it was also very aerodynamic. It was the first European supermini with a diesel engine - the XUD. It provided performance of a 1.4 L petrol with economy - - that was better than the base 1 L petrol version. It could, like most diesel engines, last for several hundred thousand miles with regular servicing. It was, along with the larger (also XUD powered) Citroën BX, the beginning of the start of the boom in diesel sales in Europe. The 205 GTI was as popular as the Golf GTI in Europe. The 205 was named &quot;Car of the Decade&quot; in the UK, by CAR magazine in 1990.

In the US Chevrolet offered three new small economy cars in the 1980s to replace the Chevette: the Chevrolet Sprint, a three-cylinder Suzuki-built hatchback, The Chevrolet Spectrum built by Isuzu and the Chevrolet Nova built by NUMMI in California, a GM-Toyota joint venture.

===1990s===
Chevrolet offered the Geo brand in the US in the 1990s featuring the Suzuki-built Geo Metro (marketed as the Suzuki Swift in Europe, Suzuki Cultus in Japan, and Holden Barina in Australia), the Isuzu-built Storm, and the NUMMI-built Prizm.

In Europe in 1993, Fiat launched the boxy and conservatively styled but very well packaged front wheel drive Fiat Cinquecento that could accommodate four adults that was only slightly larger than an Austin Mini. It eventually replaced the first Fiat Panda and also the aged rear engined rear wheel drive 1970s Fiat 126, as the smallest car in the Fiat range. But the real breakthrough in small car design was the 1993 Renault Twingo which was a revolution in styling by being the first &#x27;one box&#x27; small car to reach production. The early pre-production Citroën AX supermini launched in 1987 was a &#x27;monobox&#x27; design, but the production version was much more conservative after negative reactions in focus groups. Both had the interior space of a much larger car. The Twingo and Cinquecento relaunched the city car market in Europe - for decades the only competitors in this market were the Austin Mini and the Polish built Fiat 126 (developed from the 1950s Fiat 500).

=== Economy cars since 2000 ===



Today economy cars have specialised into market niches. The small city car, the inexpensive-to-run but not necessarily very small general economy car, and the performance derivatives that capitalise on light weight of the cars on which they are based. Some models that started as economy cars such as the Volkswagen Golf and Toyota Corolla, have increased in size and moved upmarket over several generations, and their makers have added smaller new models in their original market niches. The 2003 Volkswagen Golf Mk5 had put on so much weight, that some models weigh the same as a Volvo 200 Series. The supermini 2002 Volkswagen Polo Mk4 was longer and wider than the 1970s Volkswagen Golf Mk1. Gordon Murray the Formula 1 and Mclaren F1 designer, said when designing his new Murray T.25 city car:
&quot;Today with all the promises of hydrogen and hybrids and electric cars, if you could take ten percent out of the weight of every car, the effect in the next ten years would be more than that of all the hybrids and electric cars on the planet.&quot;

The City car market in Europe from the 1990s has seen increased competition, with the market split between standard and &#x27;designer&#x27; city cars that are sold for a premium. These cars are at the lower end of supermini size or smaller. Standard city cars include the Toyota Yaris, Citroën C1/Peugeot 107/Toyota Aygo (built in the same factory), Fiat Panda, Kia Picanto, Chevrolet Matiz, Volkswagen Fox, Mitsubishi Colt, Volkswagen Lupo, and 2011 Volkswagen Up. The &#x27;designer&#x27; city car became increasingly popular in Europe in the 1990s. The first car of this kind was a limited success, the 1985 Lancia Y10, because it had been hampered by its poor ride, from being based on the original utilitarian Fiat Panda. Also, Lancia was a dying brand in the UK at this time. The 1993 Renault Twingo and Ford Ka in 1996, marked an upsurge in sales for this niche. The Ka was to be launched along with the mid-1990s Fiesta with the innovative Australian two stroke Orbital engine,
 but tightening emissions laws meant that it was launched with an updated Ford Kent engine instead. This was followed by the innovative engineering designs; Mercedes-Benz A-Class with an under floor engine, the two seater rear engined Smart ForTwo, and the aluminium bodied Audi A2 which in its most aerodynamic form only achieved a . Sales really took off with the 2001 BMW Mini with its modern but conventional front wheel drive engineering and re-interpretation of the classic Austin Mini styling. This has sold well in other markets including North America. Other cars of this type include the Mitsubishi Colt-based Smart Forfour, VW Polo based Audi A1, Fiat Panda based Fiat Nuova 500, Citroën C3 based Citroën DS3, and Fiat Grande Punto based Alfa Romeo MiTo. The Toyota iQ, designed in France, went on sale in January 2009 in the UK. It is a competitor for the Smart ForTwo but with occasional rear seats. It follows the Issigonis philosophy of packaging, with innovations including a flat under floor fuel tank and specially located steering rack and final drive unit to maximise floor space for passengers. It seats four adults in a car long, wide, and tall, and achieves with a 99 g/km rating. It also achieved the top Euro NCAP 5/5 stars safety rating.

A development in recent years in Europe, has been the launch of small MPVs/people carriers. This is a development of the Giorgetto Giugiaro tall car, high-seating packaging innovation first used in the Fiat Uno. The niche first emerged in Japan with the 1993 Suzuki Wagon R Keicar class car. This was sold by GM in Europe from 2000 as the Vauxhall/Opel Agila. This was followed by the slightly larger supermini based cars like the Renault Modus, Citroën C3 Picasso, Fiat Idea, Nissan Note, and the Vauxhall/Opel Meriva that is also produced in Brazil. Their tall packaging designs offer the interior space of a larger car. The higher seating increases visibility for the driver that is useful in urban driving. They also make it easier to get in and out, which is useful for those with personal mobility problems, such as the elderly and the disabled.

The conflicting design goals for economy cars – small size with maximum usable interior space, low cost and light weight with acceptable safety performance (light cars have a higher ratio of unsprung suspension mass to sprung mass, which affects ride quality) and the need for light materials with acceptable durability – continue to stimulate innovative development. Technology improvements such as electronic engine management, adoption of four valves per cylinder, variable valve timing, direct injection of petrol/Gasoline and diesel, hybrid power, and smoother, more powerful diesel engines with very high pressure electronic injection, have dramatically improved fuel economy and performance and lowered emissions. The latest technologies to improve efficiency are engine downsizing and automatic engine stop-start. Automatic engine stop-start systems like VWs BlueMotion, shut the engine down when the car is stopped to reduce idling emissions and boost economy, and it is now mandatory not to idle unnecessarily in cities in Germany. It is an updated version of the 1980s VW &#x27;Formel E&#x27; system that was developed into the 1990s VW &#x27;Ecomatic&#x27; system. The application of turbo-charging to downsized engines is one way to achieve efficiency benefits into fuel economy and emission benefits instead of for performance. The recent Fiat &#x27;Multiair&#x27; system, is an electro-hydraulic development of variable valve timing that allows the engine management computer to control valve timing, improving engine efficiency, giving better torque, power, economy, and emissions. Safety design is a particular challenge in a small, lightweight car. This is an area where Renault has been particularly successful. Sport compacts and hot hatches have developed into their own competitive genre. Although their economy has been compromised, these models offer higher performance because of the lightness of the platforms that they are based upon.

As an alternative to manual synchromesh gearboxes, automatic continuously variable transmission (CVT) gearboxes are optional on some economy cars, such as Audi, Honda, and the MINI ONE and MINI Cooper. Tata Motors from India, recently announced that it too would use a variomatic transmission in its Nano. CVT application to economy cars was pioneered by Fiat, Ford, and Van Doorne in the 1980s. Rather than the pulled rubber drive belts as used in the past by DAF, the modern transmission is made much more durable by the use of electronic control and steel link belts pushed by their pulleys.

A difference between the North American car market and the markets of Europe and Japan is the price of fuel. Fuel is heavily taxed and therefore relatively costly in most first-world markets outside North America; fuel is about two and a half times the price in the UK than the U.S. Fuel costs are also a much higher proportion of income, due to generally higher wages and lower living costs in the U.S. Only during occasional fuel price spikes such as those of 1973, 1979–81, and 2008-9 have North American drivers been motivated to seek levels of fuel economy considered ordinary outside North America.

The growth of developing countries has also created a new market for inexpensive new cars. Unlike in the postwar period this demand has not been met by utilitarian models, but advanced &#x27;peoples&#x27; cars&#x27;. Adaptation of standard or obsolete models from the first world has been the norm. Production of car models superseded in first-world markets is often moved to cost-sensitive markets like South Africa and Brazil; the Citi Golf is an example.


Some mainstream European auto makers have developed models specifically for developing countries, such as the Fiat Palio, Volkswagen Gol and Dacia Logan. Renault has teamed up with India&#x27;s Mahindra and Mahindra to produce a low-cost car in the range of to . The Tata Nano launched in January 2008, in India by Tata Motors, was claimed by Tata to be the world&#x27;s cheapest car at . The Nano, like the 1950s Fiat 500, has a rear engine and was styled by Italians. It is designed to get whole families off scooters and onto four wheels. The Nano fell short of the sales projections of Tata. Like the US market rejection of the Austin 7 in the 1920s, many Indian consumers felt the car was too compromised to be acceptable, and it faced strong price competition from Indian motorcycle producers. Production ended in 2018. The Tata Indica that was formerly sold in Europe as the City Rover until the 2005 collapse of Rover, sold poorly in the UK as it was overpriced for a basic car.

The narrow profit margins of economy cars can cause financial instability for their manufacturers. Historically, Volkswagen in the 1970s and Ford in the 1920s almost collapsed because of their one model economy car business strategy. Ford was saved by the Model A and Volkswagen was saved by the Golf. Ford started the Mercury and Lincoln brands to diversify its product range. VW moved away from the narrow profit margins of economy cars, by expanding its range so that now it spans from very small city cars like the Volkswagen Up to Audis and Bentleys, and it also owns SEAT and Skoda.

China has become one of the fastest growing car markets, recently overtaking the U.S. as the largest producer of cars in the world. It is followed by India with a preference towards inexpensive, basic cars, but they are both moving upmarket in their tastes as their economic rise continues.

India is becoming a global outsourcing production centre for small cars. The Suzuki Alto and Hyundai i10 are already being exported to Europe from India. In March 2010 at Chennai formerly Madras, the Renault-Nissan Alliance opened a plant to produce 400,000 units per year at full production. The first vehicle to be produced at the plant will be the new Nissan Micra, for the Indian market as well as for export to over 100 countries in Europe, the Middle East and Africa. Production of the Micra has been re-located from the UK and other developed countries. In 2011, the plant will start production of the Renault Koleos and Fluence, for the Indian market based on the same platform. The Maruti version of the Suzuki Swift is also produced in India.

Gordon Murray the Formula 1 and Mclaren F1 designer, has pointed out the difficulty of making economy cars cost-efficient. His solution is a laser cut tubular steel space-frame chassis built with an automated tube mill, braced with bonded low-cost composite sheets that would be a cheaper and greener means of production. Murray&#x27;s &#x27;iStream&#x27; simplifies each process with an eighty percent smaller factory with lower cost production, making light weight efficient cars. There are no sheet metal presses, spot welders or paint plants. It would be built local to its market. Murray was reported to be negotiating production licences.
 The T25 and T27 were projected to be available in 2016.

==See also==
* Fuel economy in automobiles
* Automobile costs

==References==
==Bibliography==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2940332" start="0" end="11" title="Economy car" label="Economy car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365464" start="77" end="85" title="low-cost" label="low-cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q946808" start="142" end="149" title="compact car" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704381" start="153" end="163" title="subcompact car" label="subcompact"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="407" end="419" title="Ford Model T" label="Ford Model T"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="428" end="439" title="Austin Mini" label="Austin Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q774228" start="886" end="897" title="requirement" label="requirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="1835" end="1852" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2005" end="2010" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2236" end="2248" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q744996" start="2270" end="2281" title="Zaporozhets" label="Zaporozhets"/>
<link wikidata="Q135926" start="2315" end="2323" title="ZAZ-1102" label="ZAZ-1102"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517152" start="2329" end="2337" title="VAZ-1111" label="VAZ-1111"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="2382" end="2392" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21205906" start="2394" end="2407" title="Zastava Koral" label="Zastava Koral"/>
<link wikidata="Q55931" start="2494" end="2501" title="Hyundai Motor Company" label="Hyundai"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="2611" end="2630" title="automotive industry" label="automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="2654" end="2664" title="globalization" label="globalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="2701" end="2726" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704381" start="2992" end="3006" title="subcompact car" label="subcompact car"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767604" start="3008" end="3017" title="supermini" label="supermini"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267846" start="3030" end="3038" title="city car" label="city car"/>
<link wikidata="Q360369" start="3040" end="3048" title="microcar" label="microcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173435" start="3063" end="3076" title="Gordon Murray" label="Gordon Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="3082" end="3091" title="Formula 1" label="Formula 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q849607" start="3096" end="3106" title="McLaren F1" label="McLaren F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q10290680" start="3152" end="3156" title="T.25" label="T.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129377" start="3550" end="3575" title="history of the automobile" label="history of the automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q326248" start="3694" end="3707" title="Benz Tricycle" label="Benz Tricycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911677" start="3757" end="3766" title="Brass era" label="Brass era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129377" start="3865" end="3876" title="Veteran car" label="Veteran era"/>
<link wikidata="Q936276" start="4228" end="4251" title="The Wind in the Willows" label="The Wind in the Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826733" start="4304" end="4333" title="automotive industry in France" label="automotive industry in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q970308" start="4382" end="4402" title="Locomotives Act 1865" label="Locomotives Act 1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666017" start="4518" end="4550" title="Locomotives on Highways Act 1896" label="Locomotives on Highways Act 1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065173" start="4556" end="4568" title="high wheeler" label="high wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617795" start="4981" end="5003" title="Oldsmobile Curved Dash" label="Oldsmobile Curved Dash"/>
<link wikidata="Q204327" start="5315" end="5325" title="Oldsmobile" label="Oldsmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="5418" end="5423" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="5427" end="5434" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="5581" end="5593" title="Ford Model T" label="Ford Model T"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="5901" end="5910" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q731471" start="5946" end="5953" title="Panhard" label="Panhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="6496" end="6508" title="Ford Model T" label="Ford Model T"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="6527" end="6540" title="mass production" label="mass-produced"/>
<link wikidata="Q82412" start="6778" end="6795" title="epicyclic gearbox" label="epicyclic gearbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="6812" end="6829" title="automatic gearbox" label="automatic gearbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="6862" end="6876" title="manual gearbox" label="manual gearbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="7069" end="7077" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q203549" start="7140" end="7149" title="Taylorism" label="Taylorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q466969" start="7197" end="7204" title="Fordism" label="Fordism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758972" start="7251" end="7275" title="Highland Park Ford Plant" label="Highland Park Ford Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197543" start="7318" end="7339" title="Ford Piquette Avenue Plant" label="Piquette Avenue Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q302882" start="7345" end="7362" title="River Rouge Plant" label="River Rouge Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q455037" start="7541" end="7554" title="assembly line" label="assembly line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="7918" end="7936" title="economies of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343030" start="8734" end="8748" title="Edward G. Budd" label="Edward G. Budd"/>
<link wikidata="Q960308" start="8761" end="8773" title="Budd Company" label="Budd Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="8961" end="8969" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002710" start="8999" end="9014" title="Pullman Company" label="Pullman Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="9033" end="9054" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059898" start="9126" end="9160" title="Morris Oxford bullnose" label="&amp;quot;Bullnose&amp;quot; Morris Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q776997" start="9193" end="9206" title="Morris Motors" label="Morris Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469377" start="9455" end="9468" title="Morris Cowley" label="Morris Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9606" end="9621" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913651" start="9941" end="9959" title="Morris Commercial Cars" label="commercial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q530099" start="9981" end="9996" title="Wolseley Motors" label="Wolseley Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q36018" start="10058" end="10060" title="MG Cars" label="MG"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10118" end="10134" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q747594" start="10166" end="10171" title="Riley Motor" label="Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q781156" start="10189" end="10209" title="Austin Motor Company" label="Austin Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q386065" start="10231" end="10256" title="British Motor Corporation" label="British Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q842941" start="10279" end="10285" title="Trojan (automobile)" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152323" start="10343" end="10353" title="two-stroke" label="two-stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q909434" start="10430" end="10448" title="combustion chamber" label="combustion chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q115580" start="10512" end="10524" title="split-single" label="split-single"/>
<link wikidata="Q49718" start="10574" end="10584" title="crankshaft" label="crankshaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q221539" start="10635" end="10649" title="connecting rod" label="connecting rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q221539" start="10705" end="10719" title="connecting rod" label="connecting rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q45227" start="10850" end="10856" title="piston" label="piston"/>
<link wikidata="Q221539" start="10863" end="10877" title="connecting rod" label="connecting rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q82412" start="10931" end="10948" title="epicyclic gearbox" label="epicyclic gearbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q130386731" start="11643" end="11657" title="eight-hour day" label="eight-hour day"/>
<link wikidata="Q571943" start="12124" end="12131" title="Ford Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436915" start="12133" end="12142" title="Ford Motor Company of Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q381381" start="12257" end="12274" title="William C. Durant" label="William C. Durant"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="12287" end="12296" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071019" start="12331" end="12352" title="Chevrolet Series 490" label="Chevrolet Four-Ninety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343030" start="12786" end="12800" title="Edward G. Budd" label="Edward G. Budd"/>
<link wikidata="Q960308" start="12832" end="12844" title="Budd Company" label="Budd Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q27564" start="12858" end="12863" title="Dodge" label="Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343030" start="12995" end="13009" title="Edward G. Budd" label="Edward G. Budd"/>
<link wikidata="Q219842" start="13317" end="13330" title="André Citroën" label="André Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q867560" start="13364" end="13386" title="Citroën Traction Avant" label="Citroën Traction Avant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709419" start="13398" end="13405" title="unibody" label="unibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147341" start="13603" end="13611" title="cyclecar" label="cyclecar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="13731" end="13741" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q842941" start="13836" end="13842" title="Trojan (automobile)" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="13904" end="13911" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187372" start="13975" end="13992" title="British International Motor Show" label="London Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126617" start="14024" end="14038" title="Leyland Motors" label="Leyland Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321706" start="14068" end="14088" title="Kingston upon Thames" label="Kingston upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="14129" end="14132" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126617" start="14214" end="14221" title="Leyland Motors" label="Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="14459" end="14471" title="Model T Ford" label="Model T Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="14513" end="14520" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q572738" start="14535" end="14539" title="Punt (boat)" label="punt"/>
<link wikidata="Q951502" start="14693" end="14706" title="Lancia Lambda" label="Lancia Lambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071111" start="15809" end="15827" title="Chevrolet Series M" label="Chevrolet Series M"/>
<link wikidata="Q959123" start="15919" end="15936" title="Charles Kettering" label="Charles Kettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q314419" start="16443" end="16457" title="Ettore Bugatti" label="Ettore Bugatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="16483" end="16490" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539837" start="16501" end="16513" title="Peugeot Bébé" label="Peugeot Bébé"/>
<link wikidata="Q920837" start="16563" end="16577" title="Citroën Type A" label="Citroën Type A"/>
<link wikidata="Q219842" start="16887" end="16900" title="Andre Citroën" label="Andre Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="17108" end="17115" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="17116" end="17124" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695077" start="17343" end="17358" title="Opel Laubfrosch" label="Opel Laubfrosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549314" start="17519" end="17526" title="Torpedo (car)" label="Torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093708" start="17527" end="17539" title="Citroën Type C" label="Citroën 5 CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q781028" start="17610" end="17622" title="Austin 7" label="Austin Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147341" start="17636" end="17644" title="cyclecar" label="cyclecar"/>
<link wikidata="Q377180" start="18050" end="18064" title="Datsun Type 11" label="Datsun Type 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q695703" start="18166" end="18174" title="BMW Dixi" label="BMW Dixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q796379" start="18179" end="18187" title="BMW 3/15" label="BMW 3/15"/>
<link wikidata="Q333081" start="18200" end="18209" title="Lucien Rosengart" label="Rosengart"/>
<link wikidata="Q463449" start="18256" end="18283" title="American Austin Car Company" label="American Austin Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396914" start="18498" end="18514" title="Swallow Sidecar Company" label="Swallow Sidecars"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="18705" end="18711" title="Jaguar Cars" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q344045" start="19376" end="19391" title="Alfred P. Sloan" label="Alfred P. Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q512883" start="19393" end="19404" title="Harley Earl" label="Harley Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q344045" start="19509" end="19524" title="Alfred P. Sloan" label="Alfred P. Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967458" start="19537" end="19557" title="planned obsolescence" label="planned obsolescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="20153" end="20164" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q515001" start="20644" end="20651" title="Ford Model A (1927)" label="Model A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073222" start="20680" end="20698" title="Car of the Century" label="Car of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094401" start="20774" end="20791" title="Chevrolet Inline-4 engine" label="straight-4 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094431" start="20823" end="20843" title="Chevrolet Stovebolt engine" label="Stovebolt Six engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866345" start="20965" end="20976" title="Ford flathead V8" label="flathead V8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436966" start="21225" end="21235" title="Ford Pilot" label="Ford Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436903" start="21283" end="21306" title="Ford Model B (1932)" label="1932 Ford V8 (Model 18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630727" start="21351" end="21358" title="hot rod" label="hot rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998122" start="21597" end="21616" title="Morris Minor (1928)" label="Morris Minor (1928)"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="21684" end="21694" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="21885" end="21889" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="21933" end="21947" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q40966" start="21963" end="21967" title="Opel" label="Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q59187" start="21983" end="21991" title="Vauxhall Motors" label="Vauxhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="22131" end="22147" title="rear-wheel-drive" label="rear-wheel-drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758742" start="22272" end="22284" title="Opel Olympia" label="Opel Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068191" start="22294" end="22310" title="Macpherson strut" label="Macpherson strut"/>
<link wikidata="Q639268" start="22405" end="22411" title="DKW" label="DKW F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="22470" end="22487" title="front-wheel drive" label="front-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q26952" start="22546" end="22556" title="Alvis cars" label="Alvis cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q686178" start="22643" end="22646" title="Birmingham Small Arms Company" label="BSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165625" start="22679" end="22685" title="Morgan Motor Company" label="Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q869084" start="22783" end="22792" title="Cord L-29" label="Cord L-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q46540" start="22864" end="22870" title="Ruxton automobile" label="Ruxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9460131" start="22946" end="22984" title="front-engine, front-wheel-drive layout" label="front-engine, front-wheel-drive layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q152323" start="23047" end="23064" title="two-stroke engine" label="two-stroke engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192814" start="23394" end="23409" title="Harley-Davidson" label="Harley-Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q686178" start="23411" end="23414" title="Birmingham Small Arms Company" label="BSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q153681" start="23416" end="23423" title="Trabant" label="Trabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q59181" start="23425" end="23433" title="Wartburg (car)" label="Wartburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q48957" start="23435" end="23439" title="Saab Automobile" label="Saab"/>
<link wikidata="Q172741" start="23441" end="23447" title="Subaru" label="Subaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q841263" start="23449" end="23456" title="Piaggio" label="Piaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q259686" start="23458" end="23462" title="Puch" label="Puch"/>
<link wikidata="Q748148" start="23464" end="23472" title="Kawasaki Heavy Industries" label="Kawasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="23474" end="23484" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35996" start="23486" end="23491" title="Mazda" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q27511" start="23493" end="23501" title="Daihatsu" label="Daihatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="23503" end="23508" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q181642" start="23514" end="23520" title="Suzuki" label="Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="23670" end="23679" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q153681" start="23700" end="23707" title="Trabant" label="Trabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q59181" start="23712" end="23720" title="Wartburg (car)" label="Wartburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="23725" end="23734" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578308" start="23749" end="23759" title="FSO Syrena" label="FSO Syrena"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="23799" end="23806" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q76980" start="23808" end="23818" title="Josef Ganz" label="Josef Ganz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026928" start="23867" end="23879" title="Motor-Kritik" label="Motor-Kritik"/>
<link wikidata="Q53098" start="23984" end="23989" title="Adler (automobile)" label="Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309241" start="24165" end="24175" title="swing axle" label="swing axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310203" start="24176" end="24203" title="Independent suspension" label="independent rear suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q28175" start="24301" end="24311" title="cockchafer" label="cockchafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q796381" start="24410" end="24418" title="BMW 3/20" label="BMW 3/20"/>
<link wikidata="Q796379" start="24436" end="24444" title="BMW 3/15" label="BMW 3/15"/>
<link wikidata="Q267714" start="24533" end="24547" title="overhead-valve" label="overhead-valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q217312" start="24548" end="24561" title="cylinder head" label="cylinder head"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735659" start="24635" end="24643" title="Maikäfer" label="Maikäfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598311" start="24902" end="24919" title="Standard Superior" label="Standard Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310203" start="25000" end="25028" title="Independent suspension" label="independent wheel suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309241" start="25034" end="25045" title="Swing axle" label="swing-axles"/>
<link wikidata="Q57249" start="25146" end="25163" title="Ferdinand Porsche" label="Ferdinand Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="25221" end="25236" title="Porsche" label="Porsche company"/>
<link wikidata="Q59167" start="25307" end="25314" title="Zündapp" label="Zündapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343693" start="25344" end="25359" title="Porsche Type 12" label="Porsche Type 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q214098" start="25577" end="25590" title="radial engine" label="radial engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="25725" end="25734" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q391934" start="25836" end="25845" title="Škoda 932" label="Škoda 932"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026928" start="26347" end="26359" title="Motor-Kritik" label="Motor-Kritik"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="26908" end="26915" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q57249" start="27204" end="27221" title="Ferdinand Porsche" label="Ferdinand Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598311" start="27312" end="27329" title="Standard Superior" label="Standard Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="27443" end="27460" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="27514" end="27526" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="27565" end="27577" title="Ford Model T" label="Ford Model T"/>
<link wikidata="Q57249" start="27646" end="27663" title="Ferdinand Porsche" label="Ferdinand Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="27809" end="27817" title="Autobahn" label="Autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="27874" end="27889" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111964" start="27984" end="27997" title="Hans Ledwinka" label="Hans Ledwinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q745017" start="28003" end="28012" title="Tatra T97" label="Tatra T97"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477227" start="28017" end="28027" title="Tatra V570" label="Tatra V570"/>
<link wikidata="Q45464" start="28053" end="28064" title="Tatra (car)" label="Tatra (car)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="28230" end="28234" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q157329" start="28266" end="28286" title="Strength through Joy" label="Strength through Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312526" start="28861" end="28880" title="German Labour Front" label="German Labour Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="28933" end="28952" title="labour organization" label="labour organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="28960" end="28970" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520579" start="29011" end="29034" title="trade unions in Germany" label="trade unions in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q313768" start="29063" end="29078" title="Gleichschaltung" label="Gleichschaltung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014" start="29241" end="29250" title="Wolfsburg" label="Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="29742" end="29744" title="Deutsche Mark" label="DM"/>
<link wikidata="Q678949" start="29936" end="29946" title="Volkswagen Kübelwagen" label="Kübelwagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q495075" start="29977" end="29981" title="Willys MB" label="jeep"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="30091" end="30101" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="30168" end="30180" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="30232" end="30236" title="Fiat" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="30285" end="30294" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q636082" start="30295" end="30324" title="Fiat 500 &amp;quot;Topolino&amp;quot;" label="Fiat 500 &amp;quot;Topolino&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q467767" start="30381" end="30389" title="Fiat 500" label="Fiat 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164986" start="30410" end="30423" title="Dante Giacosa" label="Dante Giacosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q773544" start="30786" end="30797" title="leaf spring" label="leaf spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q272870" start="30798" end="30813" title="rear suspension" label="rear suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="30827" end="30831" title="axle" label="axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879237" start="30841" end="30853" title="trailing arm" label="trailing arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="31040" end="31046" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q781028" start="31216" end="31228" title="Austin 7" label="Austin Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q39898" start="31308" end="31311" title="NSU Motorenwerke" label="NSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q694450" start="31332" end="31342" title="Steyr-Puch" label="Steyr-Puch"/>
<link wikidata="Q173357" start="31358" end="31363" title="Simca" label="Simca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410426" start="31542" end="31551" title="Fiat 1100" label="Fiat 1100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045753" start="31610" end="31633" title="Fiat 508" label="508 &amp;quot;Balilla&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q636082" start="31695" end="31724" title="Fiat 500 &amp;quot;Topolino&amp;quot;" label="Fiat 500 &amp;quot;Topolino&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q976763" start="31740" end="31744" title="Fiat 1500 (1935)" label="1500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164986" start="31843" end="31856" title="Dante Giacosa" label="Dante Giacosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q267714" start="31901" end="31922" title="overhead-valve engine" label="overhead-valve engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q876548" start="32148" end="32156" title="Steyr 50" label="Steyr 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="32209" end="32216" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q694450" start="32231" end="32241" title="Steyr-Puch" label="Steyr-Puch"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="33306" end="33318" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q467767" start="33433" end="33441" title="Fiat 500" label="Fiat 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="33446" end="33450" title="Fiat" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="34050" end="34068" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="34074" end="34078" title="EFTA" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q518150" start="34714" end="34726" title="Morris Eight" label="Morris Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594044" start="34728" end="34738" title="Ford Model Y" label="Ford Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q748204" start="34785" end="34794" title="Ford Köln" label="Ford Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q942382" start="34801" end="34815" title="Standard Eight" label="Standard Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q515001" start="34937" end="34944" title="Ford Model A (1927–31)" label="Model A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436805" start="35436" end="35443" title="Ford 7Y" label="Ford 7Y"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35506" end="35517" title="Ford Anglia#Anglia E04A (1939–1948)" label="Ford Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35738" end="35742" title="Ford Anglia#Anglia E494A (1949–1953)" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436960" start="35879" end="35891" title="Ford Popular" label="Ford Popular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002837" start="35924" end="35936" title="Ford Prefect" label="Ford Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236048" start="37136" end="37153" title="Powel Crosley Jr." label="Powel Crosley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1141056" start="37305" end="37312" title="Crosley" label="Crosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q780868" start="37963" end="37983" title="Austin-Healey Sprite" label="Austin-Healey Sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q369128" start="38346" end="38377" title="General Tire and Rubber Company" label="General Tire and Rubber Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q563613" start="38700" end="38719" title="Earle S. MacPherson" label="Earle S. MacPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068191" start="39232" end="39248" title="MacPherson strut" label="MacPherson strut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437035" start="39902" end="39914" title="Ford Vedette" label="Ford Vedette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273342" start="39941" end="39952" title="Ford Consul" label="Ford Consul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40186" end="40197" title="Ford Anglia#100E" label="Anglia 100E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436707" start="40291" end="40300" title="1949 Ford" label="1949 Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="40584" end="40593" title="VW Beetle" label="VW Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q326015" start="40595" end="40606" title="Citroën 2CV" label="Citroën 2CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q917677" start="40608" end="40619" title="Renault 4CV" label="Renault 4CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q420942" start="40625" end="40632" title="Saab 92" label="Saab 92"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="40783" end="40790" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672037" start="40812" end="40852" title="Military history of France during World War II" label="World War II German occupation of France"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41078" end="41095" title=":de:Wilhelm (III.) von Urach" label="Wilhelm von Urach"/>
<link wikidata="Q298766" start="41243" end="41256" title="Louis Renault (industrialist)" label="Louis Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q833121" start="41647" end="41664" title="Pierre Lefaucheux" label="Pierre Lefaucheux"/>
<link wikidata="Q152802" start="41797" end="41807" title="Buchenwald" label="Buchenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="41832" end="41839" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="41859" end="41863" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="42007" end="42024" title="French government" label="French government"/>
<link wikidata="Q57249" start="42033" end="42050" title="Ferdinand Porsche" label="Ferdinand Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="42085" end="42095" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="42189" end="42196" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="42346" end="42356" title="Volkswagen Type 1" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57249" start="42981" end="42998" title="Ferdinand Porsche" label="Ferdinand Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="43074" end="43079" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="43144" end="43163" title="manual transmission" label="manual transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048801" start="43193" end="43209" title="Paris Motor Show" label="Paris Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="43276" end="43289" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="43350" end="43355" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q172455" start="43359" end="43379" title="Boulogne-Billancourt" label="Boulogne-Billancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048801" start="43409" end="43425" title="Paris Motor Show" label="Paris Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="43715" end="43728" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Rommel&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="43735" end="43747" title="Afrika Korps" label="Afrika Korps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161151" start="43937" end="43946" title="monocoque" label="monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="43993" end="44001" title="autobahn" label="autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="44245" end="44257" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374138" start="44258" end="44299" title="Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers" label="Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q878006" start="44313" end="44323" title="Ivan Hirst" label="Ivan Hirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q68625" start="44427" end="44444" title="Heinrich Nordhoff" label="Heinrich Nordhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="44840" end="44857" title="Wirtschaftswunder" label="Wirtschaftswunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q326015" start="44871" end="44882" title="Citroën 2CV" label="Citroën 2CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q420942" start="45616" end="45623" title="Saab 92" label="Saab 92"/>
<link wikidata="Q611714" start="45630" end="45650" title="Transverse engine" label="transversely mounted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667810" start="45652" end="45664" title="Watercooling" label="water-cooled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935842" start="45665" end="45677" title="Straight-twin engine" label="two-cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395533" start="45679" end="45689" title="Saab two-stroke" label="two-stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q639268" start="45701" end="45704" title="DKW" label="DKW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161151" start="45763" end="45772" title="monocoque" label="monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="45808" end="45824" title="drag coefficient" label="drag coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q420939" start="45904" end="45911" title="Saab 93" label="Saab 93"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613099" start="45913" end="45920" title="Saab 95" label="Saab 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q420796" start="45926" end="45933" title="Saab 96" label="Saab 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q420564" start="46047" end="46058" title="Saab Sonett" label="Saab Sonett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="46125" end="46134" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548674" start="46135" end="46147" title="Morris Minor" label="Morris Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928719" start="46218" end="46228" title="Flathead engine" label="side-valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q386065" start="46314" end="46339" title="British Motor Corporation" label="British Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q781156" start="46351" end="46357" title="Austin Motor Company" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835940" start="46394" end="46413" title="BMC A-Series engine" label="BMC A-Series engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q457634" start="46844" end="46858" title="Alec Issigonis" label="Alec Issigonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="46871" end="46880" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067158" start="46881" end="46890" title="Toyota SA" label="Toyota SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q358556" start="47253" end="47268" title="Kiichiro Toyoda" label="Kiichiro Toyoda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47310" end="47322" title="Kazuo Kumabe" label="Kazuo Kumabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="47384" end="47401" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693740" start="47451" end="47464" title="suicide doors" label="suicide doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="47567" end="47583" title="right hand drive" label="right hand drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="47648" end="47655" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="47663" end="47675" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="47692" end="47699" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="47704" end="47714" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q786708" start="48341" end="48348" title="Toyota Publica" label="Publica"/>
<link wikidata="Q243543" start="48353" end="48360" title="Toyota Corolla" label="Corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="48488" end="48498" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059437" start="48589" end="48595" title="keicar" label="keicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q994420" start="49115" end="49124" title="Suzulight" label="Suzulight"/>
<link wikidata="Q738269" start="49203" end="49213" title="Subaru 360" label="Subaru 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059437" start="49337" end="49343" title="keicar" label="keicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711283" start="49396" end="49405" title="RR layout" label="RR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q9460131" start="49491" end="49500" title="FF layout" label="FF layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q652712" start="49626" end="49636" title="Honda Beat" label="Honda Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140029" start="49641" end="49658" title="Suzuki Cappuccino" label="Suzuki Cappuccino"/>
<link wikidata="Q867667" start="49707" end="49711" title="Hino Motors" label="Hino"/>
<link wikidata="Q917677" start="49765" end="49776" title="Renault 4CV" label="Renault 4CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410426" start="49810" end="49819" title="Fiat 1100" label="Fiat 1100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="50560" end="50569" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081459" start="50628" end="50639" title="Nash Motors" label="Nash Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760611" start="50653" end="50665" title="Nash Rambler" label="Nash Rambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126231" start="50670" end="50683" title="Kaiser-Frazer Corporation" label="Kaiser-Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506787" start="50699" end="50706" title="Henry J" label="Henry J"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537825" start="50716" end="50731" title="Willys-Overland" label="Willys-Overland"/>
<link wikidata="Q495075" start="50771" end="50778" title="Jeep MB" label="Jeep MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294129" start="50784" end="50795" title="Willys Aero" label="Willys Aero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313428" start="50809" end="50815" title="Hudson Motor Car Company" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q942150" start="50825" end="50835" title="Hudson Jet" label="Hudson Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758705" start="50842" end="50854" title="niche market" label="niche market"/>
<link wikidata="Q202708" start="51457" end="51490" title="American Motors" label="American Motors Corporation (AMC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965741" start="51575" end="51587" title="Nash Metropolitan" label="Metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881419" start="51710" end="51716" title="MG MGA" label="MG MGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538551" start="51721" end="51727" title="MG MGB" label="MG MGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="52353" end="52370" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138262" start="52758" end="52770" title="Karmann Ghia" label="Karmann Ghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q676767" start="52970" end="52986" title="Renault Dauphine" label="Renault Dauphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q917677" start="53004" end="53015" title="Renault 4CV" label="Renault 4CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867297" start="53277" end="53321" title="Ministry of International Trade and Industry" label="Ministry of International Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53390" end="53402" title="Compact (car)#Japanese market" label="national car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059437" start="53434" end="53441" title="kei car" label="kei car"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54010" end="54041" title="Vehicle size class#Japan" label="Japanese government regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="54109" end="54118" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q786708" start="54119" end="54133" title="Toyota Publica" label="Toyota Publica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063504" start="54141" end="54150" title="flat twin" label="flat twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711283" start="54167" end="54176" title="RR layout" label="RR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418208" start="54177" end="54191" title="Mitsubishi 500" label="Mitsubishi 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="54353" end="54379" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q153681" start="54428" end="54435" title="Trabant" label="Trabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="54487" end="54496" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036953" start="54497" end="54511" title="captive market" label="captive market"/>
<link wikidata="Q152323" start="54557" end="54567" title="two-stroke" label="two-stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q639268" start="54604" end="54607" title="DKW" label="DKW"/>
<link wikidata="Q467767" start="54682" end="54690" title="Fiat 500" label="Fiat 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164986" start="54703" end="54716" title="Dante Giacosa" label="Dante Giacosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q39525" start="54741" end="54752" title="Claus Luthe" label="Claus Luthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q610548" start="54984" end="54993" title="baby boom" label="baby boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q368012" start="55062" end="55070" title="Puch 500" label="Puch 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125433" start="55111" end="55119" title="Fiat 600" label="Fiat 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161151" start="55448" end="55457" title="monocoque" label="monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512247" start="55526" end="55539" title="Body-on-frame" label="Body-on-frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709419" start="55712" end="55727" title="frame (vehicle)" label="frame (vehicle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762403" start="55838" end="55857" title="structural analysis" label="structural analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="55898" end="55905" title="IBM 360" label="IBM 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382552" start="56042" end="56054" title="rustproofing" label="rustproofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="56144" end="56151" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="56287" end="56296" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56335" end="56344" title="Hatchback#Early examples" label="hatchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="56355" end="56364" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q781033" start="56365" end="56375" title="Austin A40" label="Austin A40"/>
<link wikidata="Q386065" start="56429" end="56432" title="British Motor Corporation" label="BMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q40987" start="56462" end="56473" title="Pininfarina" label="Pininfarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142905" start="56550" end="56554" title="Trunk (automobile)" label="boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664128" start="56624" end="56633" title="Innocenti" label="Innocenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q12010087" start="57009" end="57014" title="MG Rover Group" label="Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q188886" start="57032" end="57042" title="estate car" label="estate car"/>
<link wikidata="Q9460131" start="57153" end="57162" title="FF layout" label="FF layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="57163" end="57174" title="Austin Mini" label="Austin Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q386065" start="57184" end="57209" title="British Motor Corporation" label="British Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q457634" start="57223" end="57237" title="Alec Issigonis" label="Alec Issigonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="57286" end="57297" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q360369" start="57315" end="57326" title="bubble cars" label="bubble cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q360369" start="57331" end="57339" title="Microcar" label="Microcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835940" start="57471" end="57490" title="BMC A-Series engine" label="BMC A-Series engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543468" start="57688" end="57699" title="Hydrolastic" label="Hydrolastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="57974" end="57990" title="Badge engineering" label="Badge engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="58090" end="58099" title="Riley Elf" label="Riley Elf"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="58104" end="58119" title="Wolseley Hornet (Mini)" label="Wolesely Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569351" start="58174" end="58188" title="Harold Radford" label="Harold Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q927952" start="58351" end="58360" title="Mini Moke" label="Mini Moke"/>
<link wikidata="Q373302" start="58382" end="58398" title="King&amp;#x27;s Road" label="King&amp;#x27;s Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q38778" start="58401" end="58415" title="Carnaby Street" label="Carnaby Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037910" start="58417" end="58432" title="Swinging London" label="Swinging London"/>
<link wikidata="Q796306" start="58697" end="58715" title="BMC ADO16" label="Austin/Morris 1100"/>
<link wikidata="Q40987" start="58781" end="58792" title="Pininfarina" label="Pininfarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543468" start="58843" end="58854" title="Hydrolastic" label="Hydrolastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q747594" start="58946" end="58951" title="Riley (motor-car)" label="Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q530099" start="58953" end="58961" title="Wolseley Motors" label="Wolesely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563878" start="58966" end="58977" title="Vanden Plas" label="Vanden Plas"/>
<link wikidata="Q662276" start="59213" end="59226" title="Austin Apache" label="Austin Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718696" start="59495" end="59512" title="Austin A40 Farina" label="Austin A40 Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548674" start="59542" end="59554" title="Morris Minor" label="Morris Minor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59783" end="59794" title="Ford Anglia#105E" label="Anglia 105E"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59911" end="59922" title="Ford Anglia#100E" label="Anglia 100E"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467825" start="60466" end="60482" title="Ford Kent engine" label="Ford Kent engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261760" start="60576" end="60587" title="Mini Cooper" label="Mini Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="60640" end="60651" title="Austin Mini" label="Austin Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q725531" start="60690" end="60707" title="Rallye Automobile Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881468" start="60847" end="60856" title="MG Midget" label="MG Midget"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077026" start="60908" end="60921" title="Lotus Cortina" label="Lotus Cortina"/>
<link wikidata="Q504644" start="60926" end="60937" title="Ford Escort (Europe)" label="Ford Escort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511551" start="60972" end="60985" title="Vauxhall Viva (1963–1979)" label="Vauxhall Viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q26823" start="61102" end="61108" title="Abarth" label="Abarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q173222" start="61125" end="61132" title="Gordini" label="Gordini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="61200" end="61209" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151620" start="61210" end="61217" title="DAF 600" label="DAF 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="61278" end="61289" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q863787" start="61327" end="61361" title="continuously variable transmission" label="continuously variable transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140959" start="61396" end="61406" title="Variomatic" label="Variomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41535540" start="61539" end="61551" title="DAF Daffodil" label="DAF Daffodil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151607" start="61553" end="61559" title="DAF 33" label="DAF 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151615" start="61561" end="61567" title="DAF 44" label="DAF 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011841" start="61569" end="61575" title="DAF 46" label="DAF 46"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151626" start="61577" end="61583" title="DAF 66" label="DAF 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475410" start="61631" end="61640" title="Volvo 340" label="Volvo 340"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826716" start="61731" end="61750" title="Automotive Products" label="Automotive Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q247716" start="61915" end="61924" title="Renault 4" label="Renault 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q326015" start="62112" end="62123" title="Citroën 2CV" label="Citroën 2CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q867560" start="62200" end="62222" title="Citroën Traction Avant" label="Citroën Traction Avant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461755" start="62385" end="62411" title="twist-beam rear suspension" label="twist-beam rear suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093535" start="62666" end="62677" title="Citroën Ami" label="Citroën Ami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093624" start="62697" end="62710" title="Citroën Dyane" label="Citroën Dyane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124536" start="62766" end="62776" title="Renault 16" label="Renault 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q216762" start="62879" end="62888" title="hatchback" label="hatchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867297" start="63253" end="63257" title="Ministry of International Trade and Industry" label="MITI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63264" end="63276" title="Compact (car)#Japanese market" label="national car"/>
<link wikidata="Q643608" start="63324" end="63337" title="Isuzu Bellett" label="Isuzu Bellett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157557" start="63339" end="63356" title="Daihatsu Compagno" label="Daihatsu Compagno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914618" start="63361" end="63374" title="Mazda Familia" label="Mazda Familia"/>
<link wikidata="Q934776" start="63388" end="63403" title="Mitsubishi Colt" label="Mitsubishi Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132451" start="63421" end="63433" title="Nissan Sunny" label="Nissan Sunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119289" start="63435" end="63446" title="Subaru 1000" label="Subaru 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q243543" start="63452" end="63466" title="Toyota Corolla" label="Toyota Corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626471" start="63541" end="63551" title="Honda 1300" label="Honda 1300"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704381" start="63601" end="63615" title="subcompact car" label="subcompact car"/>
<link wikidata="Q243543" start="63628" end="63642" title="Toyota Corolla" label="Toyota Corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132451" start="63644" end="63656" title="Datsun Sunny" label="Datsun Sunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539617" start="63834" end="63852" title="Motor-vehicle inspection (Japan)" label="&amp;quot;Shaken&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="64248" end="64257" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410426" start="64258" end="64267" title="Fiat 1100" label="Fiat 1100"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401649" start="64534" end="64549" title="Premier Padmini" label="Premier Padmini"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="64560" end="64564" title="Fiat" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164986" start="64601" end="64614" title="Dante Giacosa" label="Dante Giacosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q786136" start="64745" end="64764" title="Autobianchi Primula" label="Autobianchi Primula"/>
<link wikidata="Q27110" start="64892" end="64903" title="Autobianchi" label="Autobianchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="64935" end="64944" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q569210" start="65149" end="65165" title="Autobianchi A112" label="Autobianchi A112"/>
<link wikidata="Q786116" start="65170" end="65186" title="Autobianchi A111" label="Autobianchi A111"/>
<link wikidata="Q729322" start="65316" end="65326" title="Lancia Y10" label="Lancia Y10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433165" start="65368" end="65378" title="Simca 1100" label="Simca 1100"/>
<link wikidata="Q846139" start="65445" end="65453" title="Fiat 128" label="Fiat 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q915927" start="65468" end="65476" title="Fiat 127" label="Fiat 127"/>
<link wikidata="Q386065" start="65690" end="65707" title="British Motor Corporation" label="BMC Austin Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="65718" end="65725" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888210" start="65726" end="65738" title="PSA X engine" label="PSA X engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433165" start="65873" end="65883" title="Simca 1100" label="Simca 1100"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65977" end="65986" title="Hatchback#Early examples" label="hatchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q781033" start="66106" end="66116" title="Austin A40" label="Austin A40"/>
<link wikidata="Q504143" start="66355" end="66364" title="Renault 5" label="Renault 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q247716" start="66422" end="66431" title="Renault 4" label="Renault 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q202708" start="66536" end="66551" title="American Motors" label="American Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="66782" end="66791" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511551" start="66867" end="66880" title="Vauxhall Viva" label="Vauxhall Viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q267714" start="67046" end="67060" title="overhead valve" label="overhead valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716828" start="67203" end="67214" title="Opel Kadett A" label="Opel Kadett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882861" start="67285" end="67301" title="Opel OHV engine" label="OHV 993cc engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133667" start="67471" end="67482" title="Ford Anglia" label="Ford Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442609" start="67665" end="67684" title="coke bottle styling" label="coke bottle styling"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="67718" end="67732" title="General Motors Corporation" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q226062" start="67757" end="67773" title="Chevrolet Impala" label="Chevrolet Impala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508836" start="67978" end="67991" title="Opel Kadett B" label="Opel Kadett B"/>
<link wikidata="Q504644" start="68066" end="68077" title="Ford Escort (Europe)" label="Ford Escort"/>
<link wikidata="Q205423" start="68251" end="68263" title="Ford Cortina" label="Ford Cortina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68480" end="68491" title="Opel Kadett#Kadett B (1965–1973)" label="Opel Kadett"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="68495" end="68507" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q938876" start="68540" end="68550" title="Studebaker" label="Studebaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517124" start="68564" end="68579" title="Studebaker Lark" label="Studebaker Lark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023856" start="68622" end="68633" title="Ford Falcon (North America)" label="Ford Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q525947" start="68639" end="68655" title="Plymouth Valiant" label="Plymouth Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034074" start="68693" end="68700" title="Rambler (automobile)" label="Rambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q946808" start="68907" end="68918" title="compact car" label="compact car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507706" start="69105" end="69121" title="Rambler American" label="Rambler American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517511" start="69156" end="69164" title="Chevy II" label="Chevy II"/>
<link wikidata="Q183476" start="69961" end="69973" title="Ford Mustang" label="Ford Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q332448" start="70086" end="70102" title="Chevrolet Camaro" label="Chevrolet Camaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711283" start="70256" end="70265" title="RR layout" label="RR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q678949" start="70587" end="70597" title="Volkswagen Kübelwagen" label="Kübelwagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310203" start="70834" end="70856" title="independent suspension" label="independent suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q284526" start="70889" end="70912" title="constant-velocity joint" label="constant-velocity joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="70972" end="70981" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756174" start="71073" end="71079" title="camber angle" label="camber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309241" start="71131" end="71141" title="swing axle" label="swing axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193156" start="71217" end="71228" title="Ralph Nader" label="Ralph Nader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071151" start="71324" end="71341" title="Chevrolet Corvair" label="Chevrolet Corvair"/>
<link wikidata="Q39525" start="71449" end="71460" title="Claus Luthe" label="Claus Luthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q834494" start="71748" end="71760" title="Smart Fortwo" label="Smart Fortwo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152238" start="71779" end="71788" title="Tata Nano" label="Tata Nano"/>
<link wikidata="Q769139" start="71850" end="71861" title="Hillman Imp" label="Hillman Imp"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="71864" end="71866" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755807" start="71881" end="71890" title="NSU Prinz" label="NSU Prinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500251" start="71958" end="71975" title="Volkswagen Type 3" label="Volkswagen Type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q933636" start="71977" end="71994" title="Volkswagen Type 4" label="Volkswagen Type 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="71997" end="72009" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q578088" start="72029" end="72038" title="Renault 8" label="Renault 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476909" start="72058" end="72068" title="Simca 1000" label="Simca 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="72071" end="72077" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071151" start="72093" end="72110" title="Chevrolet Corvair" label="Chevrolet Corvair"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="72113" end="72115" title="US" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059437" start="72203" end="72209" title="Keicar" label="Keicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q738269" start="72227" end="72237" title="Subaru 360" label="Subaru 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756887" start="72239" end="72253" title="Mitsubishi 360" label="Mitsubishi 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914654" start="72260" end="72271" title="Mazda Carol" label="Mazda Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500744" start="72278" end="72293" title="Daihatsu Fellow" label="Daihatsu Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q655402" start="72300" end="72310" title="Honda N360" label="Honda N360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358750" start="72319" end="72332" title="Suzuki Fronte" label="Suzuki Fronte"/>
<link wikidata="Q867667" start="72379" end="72390" title="Hino Motors" label="Hino Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="72431" end="72436" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="72442" end="72451" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q391825" start="72481" end="72500" title="Škoda 1000MB/1100MB" label="Škoda 1000MB/1100MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q391822" start="72535" end="72549" title="Škoda S100/110" label="Škoda S100/110"/>
<link wikidata="Q391936" start="72575" end="72592" title="Škoda 105/120/125" label="Škoda 105/120/125"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="72603" end="72617" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="72664" end="72670" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q744996" start="72680" end="72691" title="ZAZ Zaporozhets" label="Zaporozhets"/>
<link wikidata="Q71233" start="72711" end="72714" title="ZAZ" label="ZAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755807" start="72782" end="72793" title="NSU Prinz" label="NSU Prinz 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="72821" end="72832" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="72833" end="72840" title="COMECON" label="COMECON"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="72854" end="72861" title="East Europe" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="72866" end="72880" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="73187" end="73199" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="73220" end="73235" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="73866" end="73875" title="FR layout" label="FR layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q294696" start="73886" end="73897" title="AMC Gremlin" label="AMC Gremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303236" start="73899" end="73913" title="Chevrolet Vega" label="Chevrolet Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059377" start="73919" end="73929" title="Ford Pinto" label="Ford Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036945" start="73942" end="73957" title="captive imports" label="captive imports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704381" start="73997" end="74007" title="subcompact" label="subcompact"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="74099" end="74101" title="General Motors" label="GM"/>
<link wikidata="Q294695" start="74133" end="74143" title="AMC Hornet" label="AMC Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128004" start="74184" end="74193" title="wheelbase" label="wheelbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303236" start="74271" end="74285" title="Chevrolet Vega" label="Chevrolet Vega"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74604" end="74618" title="Chevrolet Vega#Aluminum engine block" label="aluminum-block"/>
<link wikidata="Q40990" start="74985" end="74992" title="Pontiac (automobile)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="75019" end="75028" title="badge engineering" label="re-badged"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513867" start="75213" end="75222" title="GM Iron Duke engine" label="Iron Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q43977275" start="75269" end="75284" title="Chevrolet Monza" label="Chevrolet Monza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75397" end="75408" title="Chevrolet Vega#Chevy Monza &amp;#x27;S&amp;#x27; &amp;amp; Monza Wagon" label="Monza wagon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75484" end="75501" title="Chevrolet Vega#Chevy Monza &amp;#x27;S&amp;#x27; &amp;amp; Monza Wagon" label="Monza S hatchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059377" start="75602" end="75612" title="Ford Pinto" label="Ford Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436704" start="75866" end="75883" title="Ford Pinto engine" label="Ford Pinto engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q205423" start="76012" end="76024" title="Ford Cortina" label="Ford Cortina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146705" start="76033" end="76044" title="Ford Taunus" label="Ford Taunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q366912" start="76050" end="76061" title="Ford Sierra" label="Ford Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q494481" start="76071" end="76083" title="Ford Granada (Europe)" label="Ford Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110378" start="76194" end="76214" title="Prince Motor Company" label="Prince Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476157" start="76295" end="76308" title="Nissan Cherry" label="Nissan Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="76323" end="76336" title="1973 oil crisis" label="Energy Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150087" start="76562" end="76575" title="Toyota Corona" label="Toyota Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489002" start="76581" end="76591" title="Datsun 510" label="Datsun 510"/>
<link wikidata="Q826737" start="76597" end="76614" title="Mitsubishi Galant" label="Mitsubishi Galant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234168" start="76659" end="76669" title="Dodge Colt" label="Dodge Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q781628" start="76676" end="76685" title="Subaru Leone" label="Subaru DL"/>
<link wikidata="Q463632" start="76701" end="76713" title="Honda Accord" label="Honda Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q844777" start="76936" end="76947" title="Honda Civic (first generation)" label="Honda Civic"/>
<link wikidata="Q488037" start="76966" end="76970" title="CVCC" label="CVCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325048" start="77011" end="77035" title="Stratified charge engine" label="Stratified charge engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q653807" start="77219" end="77238" title="Catalytic converter" label="Catalytic converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892471" start="77251" end="77280" title="California emission standards" label="California emission standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q649636" start="77544" end="77551" title="Audi 50" label="Audi 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q39525" start="77564" end="77575" title="Claus Luthe" label="Claus Luthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767604" start="77600" end="77609" title="supermini" label="supermini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712614" start="77787" end="77806" title="Volkswagen Polo Mk1" label="Volkswagen Polo Mk1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752148" start="77943" end="77959" title="Volkswagen Derby" label="Volkswagen Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071100" start="78492" end="78510" title="Chevrolet Chevette" label="Chevrolet Chevette"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985253" start="78638" end="78658" title="GM T platform (1973)" label="GM T platform (1973)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40966" start="78705" end="78709" title="Opel" label="Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q29803" start="78743" end="78748" title="Isuzu" label="Isuzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="78760" end="78768" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q173357" start="78793" end="78798" title="Simca" label="Simca"/>
<link wikidata="Q744139" start="79001" end="79031" title="Corporate Average Fuel Economy" label="Corporate Average Fuel Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362801" start="79189" end="79203" title="Talbot Horizon" label="Talbot Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q748054" start="79213" end="79237" title="European Car of the Year" label="European Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234324" start="79306" end="79316" title="Dodge Omni" label="Dodge Omni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234324" start="79321" end="79337" title="Plymouth Horizon" label="Plymouth Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088671" start="79480" end="79495" title="Chrysler Europe" label="Chrysler Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="79508" end="79515" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036945" start="79623" end="79638" title="Captive imports" label="Captive imports"/>
<link wikidata="Q918043" start="79937" end="79947" title="Opel Manta" label="Buick Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205423" start="79949" end="79961" title="Ford Cortina" label="Ford Cortina"/>
<link wikidata="Q887416" start="79963" end="79976" title="Mercury Capri" label="Mercury Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q18749275" start="79978" end="79990" title="Ford Festiva" label="Ford Festiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234168" start="79996" end="80006" title="Dodge Colt" label="Dodge Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002603" start="80121" end="80132" title="radial tire" label="radial tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q247" start="80372" end="80387" title="Volkswagen Golf" label="Volkswagen Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q316565" start="80400" end="80418" title="Giorgetto Giugiaro" label="Giorgetto Giugiaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q846139" start="80420" end="80428" title="Fiat 128" label="Fiat 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q216747" start="80438" end="80449" title="Honda Civic" label="Honda Civic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="80486" end="80496" title="electronics" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="80497" end="80511" title="fuel injection" label="fuel injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780758" start="80581" end="80590" title="hot hatch" label="hot hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333841" start="80591" end="80604" title="sport compact" label="sport compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q247" start="80620" end="80635" title="Volkswagen Golf" label="Volkswagen Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q234021" start="80882" end="80887" title="Robert Bosch GmbH" label="Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q571934" start="80959" end="80973" title="Ford of Europe" label="Ford of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077171" start="81092" end="81103" title="Ford Fiesta" label="Ford Fiesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q571943" start="81139" end="81154" title="Ford of Germany" label="Ford of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436942" start="81179" end="81193" title="Ford Taunus P4" label="Ford Taunus P4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437020" start="81198" end="81212" title="Ford do Brasil" label="Ford of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q762938" start="81213" end="81224" title="Ford Corcel" label="Ford Corcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q622959" start="81331" end="81344" title="Opel Kadett D" label="Opel Kadett D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109155" start="81345" end="81359" title="Vauxhall Astra" label="Vauxhall Astra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744464" start="81488" end="81498" title="Fiat Panda" label="Fiat Panda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81826" end="81855" title="Ford Escort (Europe)#Third generation (1980–1986)" label="Ford Escort Mark III (Europe)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81972" end="82007" title="Ford Escort (North America)#First generation (1981–1990)" label="American version of the Ford Escort"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767604" start="82060" end="82069" title="supermini" label="supermini"/>
<link wikidata="Q376916" start="82075" end="82085" title="Opel Corsa" label="Opel Corsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q741949" start="82181" end="82189" title="Fiat Uno" label="Fiat Uno"/>
<link wikidata="Q316565" start="82210" end="82228" title="Giorgetto Giugiaro" label="Giorgetto Giugiaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q283754" start="82236" end="82246" title="ItalDesign" label="ItalDesign"/>
<link wikidata="Q676515" start="82282" end="82291" title="Kamm tail" label="Kamm tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="82303" end="82319" title="drag coefficient" label="drag coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q931507" start="82383" end="82395" title="Fuel economy in automobiles" label="fuel economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658775" start="82469" end="82485" title="Lancia Megagamma" label="Lancia Megagamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095456" start="82761" end="82776" title="Car of the Year" label="Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q215218" start="82840" end="82851" title="Peugeot 205" label="Peugeot 205"/>
<link wikidata="Q10507339" start="82994" end="82997" title="XUD" label="XUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q939640" start="83257" end="83267" title="Citroën BX" label="Citroën BX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937748" start="83451" end="83463" title="CAR magazine" label="CAR magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746511" start="83573" end="83589" title="Chevrolet Sprint" label="Chevrolet Sprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674962" start="83636" end="83654" title="Chevrolet Spectrum" label="Chevrolet Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29803" start="83664" end="83669" title="Isuzu" label="Isuzu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83678" end="83692" title="Chevrolet Nova#Fifth generation" label="Chevrolet Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274742" start="83702" end="83707" title="NUMMI" label="NUMMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502806" start="83785" end="83788" title="Geo (automobile)" label="Geo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533939" start="83845" end="83854" title="Geo Metro" label="Geo Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746511" start="83896" end="83909" title="Suzuki Cultus" label="Suzuki Cultus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533947" start="83969" end="83974" title="Geo Storm" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241863" start="83996" end="84002" title="Geo Prizm" label="Prizm."/>
<link wikidata="Q923456" start="84113" end="84129" title="Fiat Cinquecento" label="Fiat Cinquecento"/>
<link wikidata="Q720634" start="84422" end="84436" title="Renault Twingo" label="Renault Twingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093538" start="84566" end="84576" title="Citroën AX" label="Citroën AX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428988" start="85524" end="85543" title="Volkswagen Golf Mk5" label="Volkswagen Golf Mk5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341143" start="85608" end="85624" title="Volvo 200 Series" label="Volvo 200 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767604" start="85630" end="85639" title="supermini" label="supermini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468621" start="85645" end="85664" title="Volkswagen Polo Mk4" label="Volkswagen Polo Mk4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545536" start="85701" end="85720" title="Volkswagen Golf Mk1" label="Volkswagen Golf Mk1"/>
<link wikidata="Q173435" start="85722" end="85735" title="Gordon Murray" label="Gordon Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="85740" end="85749" title="Formula 1" label="Formula 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q849607" start="85754" end="85764" title="Mclaren F1" label="Mclaren F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q10290680" start="85810" end="85814" title="T.25" label="T.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267846" start="86084" end="86092" title="City car" label="City car"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902966" start="86353" end="86365" title="Toyota Yaris" label="Toyota Yaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q728076" start="86367" end="86377" title="Citroën C1" label="Citroën C1"/>
<link wikidata="Q214229" start="86378" end="86389" title="Peugeot 107" label="Peugeot 107"/>
<link wikidata="Q825358" start="86390" end="86401" title="Toyota Aygo" label="Toyota Aygo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744464" start="86431" end="86441" title="Fiat Panda" label="Fiat Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q494465" start="86443" end="86454" title="Kia Picanto" label="Kia Picanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q14515874" start="86456" end="86471" title="Chevrolet Matiz" label="Chevrolet Matiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q918047" start="86473" end="86487" title="Volkswagen Fox" label="Volkswagen Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q934776" start="86489" end="86504" title="Mitsubishi Colt" label="Mitsubishi Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q817309" start="86506" end="86521" title="Volkswagen Lupo" label="Volkswagen Lupo"/>
<link wikidata="Q748949" start="86532" end="86545" title="Volkswagen Up" label="Volkswagen Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q729322" start="86692" end="86702" title="Lancia Y10" label="Lancia Y10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744464" start="86796" end="86806" title="Fiat Panda" label="Fiat Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q35896" start="86814" end="86820" title="Lancia" label="Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q720634" start="86872" end="86886" title="Renault Twingo" label="Renault Twingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q842258" start="86891" end="86898" title="Ford Ka" label="Ford Ka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335726" start="87051" end="87065" title="Orbital engine" label="Orbital engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467825" start="87141" end="87157" title="Ford Kent engine" label="Ford Kent engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49384" start="87224" end="87245" title="Mercedes-Benz A-Class" label="Mercedes-Benz A-Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q834494" start="87302" end="87314" title="Smart ForTwo" label="Smart ForTwo"/>
<link wikidata="Q741656" start="87341" end="87348" title="Audi A2" label="Audi A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781425" start="87438" end="87446" title="Mini Hatch (2001–2006)" label="BMW Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="87547" end="87558" title="Austin Mini" label="Austin Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q934776" start="87665" end="87680" title="Mitsubishi Colt" label="Mitsubishi Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328950" start="87687" end="87700" title="Smart Forfour" label="Smart Forfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q247819" start="87702" end="87709" title="VW Polo" label="VW Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q758735" start="87716" end="87723" title="Audi A1" label="Audi A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744464" start="87725" end="87735" title="Fiat Panda" label="Fiat Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q927839" start="87742" end="87756" title="Fiat Nuova 500" label="Fiat Nuova 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q726411" start="87758" end="87768" title="Citroën C3" label="Citroën C3"/>
<link wikidata="Q748426" start="87775" end="87786" title="Citroën DS3" label="Citroën DS3"/>
<link wikidata="Q223864" start="87792" end="87809" title="Fiat Grande Punto" label="Fiat Grande Punto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137305" start="87816" end="87831" title="Alfa Romeo MiTo" label="Alfa Romeo MiTo"/>
<link wikidata="Q370674" start="87837" end="87846" title="Toyota iQ" label="Toyota iQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q834494" start="87935" end="87947" title="Smart ForTwo" label="Smart ForTwo"/>
<link wikidata="Q130157093" start="88108" end="88121" title="Rack and pinion steering" label="steering rack"/>
<link wikidata="Q223400" start="88296" end="88305" title="Euro NCAP" label="Euro NCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q316565" start="88453" end="88471" title="Giorgetto Giugiaro" label="Giorgetto Giugiaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q741949" start="88534" end="88542" title="Fiat Uno" label="Fiat Uno"/>
<link wikidata="Q153108" start="88591" end="88605" title="Suzuki Wagon R" label="Suzuki Wagon R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059437" start="88606" end="88612" title="Keicar" label="Keicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q774971" start="88680" end="88690" title="Opel Agila" label="Opel Agila"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767604" start="88733" end="88742" title="supermini" label="supermini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132584" start="88763" end="88776" title="Renault Modus" label="Renault Modus"/>
<link wikidata="Q726411" start="88778" end="88788" title="Citroën C3" label="Citroën C3"/>
<link wikidata="Q673533" start="88798" end="88807" title="Fiat Idea" label="Fiat Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q776328" start="88809" end="88820" title="Nissan Note" label="Nissan Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130093" start="88839" end="88850" title="Opel Meriva" label="Opel Meriva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405703" start="89376" end="89400" title="unsprung mass" label="unsprung suspension mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="89676" end="89692" title="Direct fuel injection" label="direct injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q193075" start="89724" end="89730" title="Hybrid car" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="89766" end="89779" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057114" start="89956" end="89973" title="engine downsizing" label="engine downsizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q885579" start="90052" end="90062" title="BlueMotion" label="BlueMotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="90538" end="90542" title="Fiat" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336965" start="90549" end="90557" title="Multiair" label="Multiair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077779" start="90611" end="90632" title="variable valve timing" label="variable valve timing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="90744" end="90750" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="90874" end="90881" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333841" start="90916" end="90929" title="Sport compact" label="Sport compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780758" start="90935" end="90944" title="hot hatch" label="hot hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="91176" end="91187" title="synchromesh" label="synchromesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q863787" start="91209" end="91243" title="continuously variable transmission" label="continuously variable transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="91303" end="91307" title="Audi" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="91309" end="91314" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q116232" start="91324" end="91332" title="BMW MINI" label="MINI ONE"/>
<link wikidata="Q116232" start="91337" end="91348" title="BMW MINI" label="MINI Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q188514" start="91350" end="91361" title="Tata Motors" label="Tata Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q152238" start="91448" end="91452" title="Tata Nano" label="Nano"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="92364" end="92384" title="developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="92754" end="92766" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752617" start="92783" end="92792" title="Volkswagen Citi" label="Citi Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q525756" start="92920" end="92930" title="Fiat Palio" label="Fiat Palio"/>
<link wikidata="Q275442" start="92932" end="92946" title="Volkswagen Gol" label="Volkswagen Gol"/>
<link wikidata="Q668565" start="92951" end="92962" title="Dacia Logan" label="Dacia Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="92964" end="92971" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q848059" start="93004" end="93025" title="Mahindra and Mahindra" label="Mahindra and Mahindra"/>
<link wikidata="Q152238" start="93077" end="93086" title="Tata Nano" label="Tata Nano"/>
<link wikidata="Q188514" start="93125" end="93136" title="Tata Motors" label="Tata Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q467767" start="93224" end="93232" title="Fiat 500" label="Fiat 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145323" start="93640" end="93651" title="Tata Indica" label="Tata Indica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094009" start="93692" end="93702" title="City Rover" label="City Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q376657" start="94013" end="94030" title="Strategic management" label="business strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q613883" start="94117" end="94124" title="Mercury (automobile)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q216796" start="94129" end="94136" title="Lincoln (automobile)" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q748949" start="94317" end="94330" title="Volkswagen Up" label="Volkswagen Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="94334" end="94338" title="Audi" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27224" start="94344" end="94351" title="Bentley" label="Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q188217" start="94371" end="94375" title="SEAT" label="SEAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q29637" start="94380" end="94385" title="Škoda Auto" label="Skoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q922201" start="94757" end="94768" title="Suzuki Alto" label="Suzuki Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q494384" start="94773" end="94784" title="Hyundai i10" label="Hyundai i10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="94851" end="94858" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477864" start="94880" end="94903" title="Renault-Nissan Alliance" label="Renault-Nissan Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95371" end="95405" title="Suzuki Swift#Maruti Suzuki Swift" label="Maruti version of the Suzuki Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q173435" start="95434" end="95447" title="Gordon Murray" label="Gordon Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="95452" end="95461" title="Formula 1" label="Formula 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q849607" start="95466" end="95476" title="Mclaren F1" label="Mclaren F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q931507" start="96152" end="96179" title="Fuel economy in automobiles" label="Fuel economy in automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15127916" start="96182" end="96198" title="Automobile costs" label="Automobile costs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816400" wikidata="Q1070558" url="?curid=816400" title="Rear-wheel drive">
<text>Rear-wheel drive (RWD) is a form of engine and transmission layout used in motor vehicles, in which the engine drives the rear wheels only. Until the late 20th century, rear-wheel drive was the most common configuration for cars. 
Most rear-wheel drive vehicles feature a longitudinally-mounted engine at the front of the car.

==Layout==

The most common layout for a rear-wheel drive car is with the engine and transmission at the front of the car, mounted longitudinally.

Other layouts of rear-wheel drive cars include front-mid engine, rear-mid engine, and rear-engine.

Some manufacturers, such as Alfa Romeo, Lancia, Porsche (944, 924, 928) and Chevrolet (C5, C6, and C7 Corvettes), place the engine at the front of the car and the transmission at the rear of the car, in order to provide a more balanced weight distribution. This configuration is often referred to as a transaxle since the transmission and axle are one unit.

==History==
===1890s to 1960s===
Many of the cars built in the 19th century were rear-wheel drive, often with the engine mounted at the rear of the car. The first rear-wheel drive car with the engine mounted at the front was an 1895 Panhard model, so this layout was known as the &quot;Système Panhard&quot; in the early years. The layout has the advantage of minimizing mechanical complexity, as it allows the transmission to be placed in-line with the engine output shaft, spreading weight under the vehicle. In comparison, a vehicle with the engine over the driven wheels eliminates the need for the drive shaft (replacing this with the transaxle of lighter combined weight), but has the disadvantage of concentrating all the weight in one location.

In order to reduce the relative weight of the drive shaft, the transmission was normally split into two parts: the gearbox and the final drive. The gearbox was normally produced with its highest gear being 1:1, which offers some mechanical advantages. The final drive, in the rear axle, would then reduce this to the most appropriate speed for the wheels. As power is the product of torque and angular velocity, spinning the shaft faster for any given power reduces the torque and allows a lighter shaft construction.

In an era when petrol was cheap and cars were heavy, the mechanical advantages of the front-engine, rear-wheel-drive (FR) drivetrain layout made up for any disadvantage in weight terms. It remained almost universal among car designs until the 1970s.

===1970s to present===
After the Arab oil embargo of 1973 and the 1979 fuel crises, a majority of American FR vehicles (station wagons and luxury sedans) were phased out for the front-engine, front-wheel drive (FF) layout – this trend would spawn the SUV-van conversion market. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, most American companies set as a priority the eventual removal of rear-wheel drive from their mainstream and luxury lineup. Chrysler went 100% FF by 1990 and GM&#x27;s American production went entirely FF by 1997 except the Corvette, Firebird and Camaro. Ford&#x27;s Mustang has stayed rear-wheel drive, as it must maintain a sporty presence, as were Ford&#x27;s full-size cars based on the Ford Panther platform (the Ford Crown Victoria, Mercury Grand Marquis, and Lincoln Town Car) until they were discontinued in 2011 in favour of the Ford Taurus, which Ford discontinued production in 2019, being formally available with either a transverse front-wheel drive or all-wheel drive layout.

In Australia, FR cars remained popular throughout this period, with the Holden Commodore and Ford Falcon having consistently strong sales until their discontinuation in the late 2010s. In Europe, front-wheel drive was popularized by small cars like the Mini, Renault 5 and Volkswagen Golf and adopted for all mainstream cars. Upscale marques like Mercedes-Benz, BMW, and Jaguar remained mostly independent of this trend and retained a lineup mostly or entirely made up of FR cars. Japanese mainstream marques such as Toyota were almost exclusively FR until the late 1970s and early 1980s. Toyota&#x27;s first FF vehicle was the Toyota Tercel, with the Corolla and Celica later becoming FF while the Camry was designed as an FF from the beginning. The Supra, Cressida, Crown, and Century remained FR. Luxury division Lexus has a mostly FR lineup. Subaru&#x27;s BRZ is an FR car. The fact that a driveshaft is needed to transfer power to the rear wheels means a large centre tunnel between the rear seats; therefore, cars such as the Mazda RX8 and the Porsche Panamera forgo a centre rear seat and divide both seats by a centre tunnel.

In the 21st century, most cars are FF, including all front-engined economy cars, though FR cars are making a return as an alternative to large sport-utility vehicles. In North America, GM returned to the production of FR-based luxury vehicles with the 2003 Cadillac CTS. As of 2012, all but the SRX and XTS are FR-based vehicles. Chevrolet reintroduced the FR-based Camaro in 2009, and the Caprice PPV in 2011. Pontiac also had a short run with the FR-based G8 and Pontiac Solstice. A Chevrolet replacement for the G8 called the Chevrolet SS was released in 2013 and uses the FR layout. Chrysler and Dodge reintroduced the 300 and Charger on a FR platform. They also maintain FR layout on the now unibody Grand Cherokee and Durango. Hyundai and Kia have also been working with new FR-based vehicles in the US, the Genesis Coupe and Sedan, the Equus and the new Kia Quoris. Ford, on the other hand, seems to be moving away from FR-based vehicles with the discontinuation of the Panther Platform in 2011 and the Australasia-only Falcon in 2016. Excluding trucks, vans, and SUVs, the Mustang is the only FR vehicle remaining in their lineup.

With the increasing popularity of electric vehicles, RWD layouts have become more common again, as the packaging advantages of FWD layouts do not apply to these vehicles, whereas the generally more powerful drivetrains benefit from the better traction during acceleration of the RWD layout. Modern electronic stability control largely negate the potentially more difficult handling during challenging circumstances. Some examples of electric models utilizing a RWD layout are the single motor variants of the Tesla Model 3, Volkswagen ID.4 and Kia EV6.

==See also==
* All-wheel drive
* Individual wheel drive
* Four-wheel drive
* Front-wheel drive
* Drive wheel
* Rear mid-engine, rear-wheel drive layout
* Rear-engine, rear-wheel drive layout

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="0" end="16" title="Rear-wheel drive" label="Rear-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="18" end="21" title="Rear-wheel drive" label="RWD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141173" start="878" end="887" title="transaxle" label="transaxle"/>
<link wikidata="Q731471" start="1168" end="1175" title="Panhard" label="Panhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259746" start="1346" end="1358" title="Transmission (mechanics)" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2048" end="2053" title="Torque#Relationship between torque, power, and energy" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="2492" end="2516" title="1973 oil crisis" label="Arab oil embargo of 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="2525" end="2541" title="1979 energy crisis" label="1979 fuel crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="2927" end="2929" title="General Motors" label="GM"/>
<link wikidata="Q56166" start="2993" end="3001" title="Chevrolet Corvette" label="Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q750254" start="3003" end="3011" title="Pontiac Firebird" label="Firebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q332448" start="3016" end="3022" title="Camaro" label="Camaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q183476" start="3036" end="3043" title="Ford Mustang" label="Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467890" start="3160" end="3181" title="Ford Panther platform" label="Ford Panther platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q842010" start="3187" end="3206" title="Ford Crown Victoria" label="Ford Crown Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360787" start="3208" end="3229" title="Mercury Grand Marquis" label="Mercury Grand Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q516413" start="3235" end="3251" title="Lincoln Town Car" label="Lincoln Town Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422924" start="3532" end="3548" title="Holden Commodore" label="Holden Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363870" start="3553" end="3564" title="Ford Falcon (Australia)" label="Ford Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="3656" end="3673" title="front-wheel drive" label="front-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="3713" end="3717" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q504143" start="3719" end="3728" title="Renault 5" label="Renault 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q247" start="3733" end="3748" title="Volkswagen Golf" label="Volkswagen Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="3807" end="3820" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="3822" end="3825" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="3831" end="3837" title="Jaguar Cars" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="3977" end="3983" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q573411" start="4228" end="4233" title="Toyota Crown" label="Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165401" start="4239" end="4246" title="Toyota Century" label="Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q35919" start="4276" end="4281" title="Lexus" label="Lexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q520673" start="4492" end="4501" title="Mazda RX8" label="Mazda RX8"/>
<link wikidata="Q501349" start="4510" end="4526" title="Porsche Panamera" label="Porsche Panamera"/>
<link wikidata="Q770733" start="4852" end="4864" title="Cadillac CTS" label="Cadillac CTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025220" start="4890" end="4893" title="Cadillac SRX" label="SRX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025269" start="4898" end="4901" title="Cadillac XTS" label="XTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q332448" start="4961" end="4967" title="Chevrolet Camaro" label="Camaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q740890" start="4985" end="4996" title="Chevrolet Caprice" label="Caprice PPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q251986" start="5053" end="5055" title="Pontiac G8" label="G8"/>
<link wikidata="Q276837" start="5060" end="5076" title="Pontiac Solstice" label="Pontiac Solstice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5124" end="5136" title="Chevrolet SS (2013)#North America" label="Chevrolet SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q390055" start="5218" end="5221" title="Chrysler 300" label="300"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370421" start="5226" end="5233" title="Dodge Charger (LX)" label="Charger"/>
<link wikidata="Q973654" start="5319" end="5326" title="Dodge Durango" label="Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q482641" start="5409" end="5416" title="Hyundai Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q482701" start="5438" end="5443" title="Hyundai Equus" label="Equus"/>
<link wikidata="Q497198" start="5456" end="5466" title="Kia K9" label="Kia Quoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467890" start="5572" end="5588" title="Ford Panther platform" label="Panther Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="5769" end="5786" title="Electric vehicle" label="electric vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q595839" start="6033" end="6061" title="electronic stability control" label="electronic stability control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705507" start="6244" end="6257" title="Tesla Model 3" label="Tesla Model 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q86668068" start="6259" end="6274" title="Volkswagen ID.4" label="Volkswagen ID.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q105975708" start="6279" end="6286" title="Kia EV6" label="Kia EV6"/>
<link wikidata="Q12211810" start="6304" end="6319" title="All-wheel drive" label="All-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025197" start="6322" end="6344" title="Individual wheel drive" label="Individual wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="6347" end="6363" title="Four-wheel drive" label="Four-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="6366" end="6383" title="Front-wheel drive" label="Front-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144600" start="6386" end="6397" title="Drive wheel" label="Drive wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093045" start="6400" end="6440" title="Rear mid-engine, rear-wheel drive layout" label="Rear mid-engine, rear-wheel drive layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711283" start="6443" end="6479" title="Rear-engine, rear-wheel drive layout" label="Rear-engine, rear-wheel drive layout"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816406" wikidata="Q4272261" url="?curid=816406" title="Natural Environment Research Council">
<text>The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) is a British research council that supports research, training and knowledge transfer activities in the environmental sciences.

==History==
NERC began in 1965 when several environmental (mainly geographic) research organisations (including Nature Conservancy which became the Nature Conservancy Council in 1973 and was divided up in 1991) were brought under the one umbrella organisation. When most research councils were re-organised in 1994, it had new responsibilities – Earth observation and science-developed archaeology. Collaboration between research councils increased in 2002 when Research Councils UK was formed.

===Chief executives===
* Sir Graham Sutton (1965–1970)
* Professor James William Longman Beament (succeeding V. C. Wynne-Edwards FRS; 1978–1981)
* Professor John Krebs, Baron Krebs (1994–1999)
* Sir John Lawton (1999–2005)
* Professor Alan Thorpe (2005–2011)
* Dr Steven Wilson (Acting; 2011–2012)
* Professor Duncan Wingham (2012–2024)
* Professor Louise Heathwaite (March 2024–Present) 

==Organisational structure==
The council&#x27;s head office is at Polaris House in Swindon, alongside the other six Research Councils. NERC&#x27;s research centres provide leadership to the UK environmental science community and play significant and influential roles in international science collaborations.

It also supports a number of collaborative centres of excellence and subject-based designated Environmental Data Centres for the storage and distribution of environmental data.

==Mission==
The Natural Environment Research Council delivers independent research, survey, training and knowledge transfer in the environmental sciences, to advance knowledge of planet Earth as a complex, interacting system. The council&#x27;s work covers the full range of atmospheric, Earth, biological, terrestrial and aquatic sciences, from the deep oceans to the upper atmosphere, and from the geographical poles to the equator.

NERC&#x27;s mission is to gather and apply knowledge, create understanding and predict the behaviour of the natural environment and its resources, and communicate all aspects of the council&#x27;s work. The British Meteorological Office is &quot;not&quot; part of NERC.

==NERC Airborne Research Facility==

The NERC Airborne Research Facility (ARF) collects and processes remotely sensed data for use by the scientific community. Data are collected from one of four Twin Otter research aircraft (or a Dash 7) operated by British Antarctic Survey, processed by a data analysis team at the Plymouth Marine Laboratory and archived at the National Earth Observation Data Centre (NEODC). Currently the NERC ARF provides radiometrically corrected hyperspectral data from the AISA Fenix and Owl instruments; ground height information from the Leica ALS50-II; and digital photography.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==

== Further reading ==


== External links ==
* Centre for Ecology and Hydrology (CEH)
* National Centre for Atmospheric Science (NCAS)
* National Centre for Earth Observation (NCEO)
* ARSF-DAN Wiki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4272261" start="4" end="40" title="Natural Environment Research Council" label="Natural Environment Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272261" start="42" end="46" title="Natural Environment Research Council" label="NERC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315077" start="61" end="77" title="Research Councils UK" label="research council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980898" start="289" end="307" title="Nature Conservancy (UK)" label="Nature Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980901" start="325" end="351" title="Nature Conservancy Council" label="Nature Conservancy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156831" start="415" end="436" title="Umbrella organization" label="umbrella organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="563" end="574" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315077" start="639" end="659" title="Research Councils UK" label="Research Councils UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593294" start="702" end="715" title="Graham Sutton" label="Graham Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q336513" start="830" end="840" title="John Krebs, Baron Krebs" label="John Krebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244237" start="872" end="883" title="John Lawton (scientist)" label="John Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314657" start="983" end="997" title="Duncan Wingham" label="Duncan Wingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21402745" start="1022" end="1039" title="Louise Heathwaite" label="Louise Heathwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q200942" start="1146" end="1153" title="Swindon" label="Swindon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953527" start="1467" end="1493" title="NERC Data Centres" label="Environmental Data Centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q188847" start="1682" end="1703" title="environmental science" label="environmental science"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="1730" end="1736" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="1737" end="1742" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="1826" end="1837" title="atmospheric" label="atmospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="1846" end="1856" title="biological" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782809" start="1874" end="1889" title="aquatic science" label="aquatic science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="1926" end="1936" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q183273" start="1951" end="1968" title="geographical pole" label="geographical pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="1977" end="1984" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="2095" end="2114" title="natural environment" label="natural environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554231" start="2123" end="2132" title="resources" label="resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851405" start="2202" end="2223" title="Meteorological Office" label="Meteorological Office"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816407" wikidata="Q433738" url="?curid=816407" title="ATC code A03">
<text>==A03A Drugs for functional gastrointestinal disorders==

===A03AA Synthetic anticholinergics, esters with tertiary amino group===
:A03AA01 Oxyphencyclimine
:A03AA03 Camylofin
:A03AA04 Mebeverine
:A03AA05 Trimebutine
:A03AA06 Rociverine
:A03AA07 Dicycloverine
:A03AA08 Dihexyverine
:A03AA09 Difemerine
:A03AA30 Piperidolate

===A03AB Synthetic anticholinergics, quaternary ammonium compounds===
:A03AB01 Benzilone
:A03AB02 Glycopyrronium bromide
:A03AB03 Oxyphenonium
:A03AB04 Penthienate
:A03AB05 Propantheline
:A03AB06 Otilonium bromide
:A03AB07 Methantheline
:A03AB08 Tridihexethyl
:A03AB09 Isopropamide
:A03AB10 Hexocyclium
:A03AB11 Poldine
:A03AB12 Mepenzolate
:A03AB13 Bevonium
:A03AB14 Pipenzolate
:A03AB15 Diphemanil
:A03AB16 (2-benzhydryloxyethyl)diethyl-methylammonium iodide
:A03AB17 Tiemonium iodide
:A03AB18 Prifinium bromide
:A03AB19 Timepidium bromide
:A03AB21 Fenpiverinium
:A03AB53 Oxyphenonium, combinations
:QA03AB90 Benzetimide
:QA03AB92 Carbachol
:QA03AB93 Neostigmin

===A03AC Synthetic antispasmodics, amides with tertiary amines===
:A03AC02 Dimethylaminopropionylphenothiazine
:A03AC04 Nicofetamide
:A03AC05 Tiropramide

===A03AD Papaverine and derivatives===
:A03AD01 Papaverine
:A03AD02 Drotaverine
:A03AD30 Moxaverine

===A03AE Serotonin receptor antagonists===
:A03AE01 Alosetron
:A03AE03 Cilansetron

===A03AX Other drugs for functional gastrointestinal disorders===
:A03AX01 Fenpiprane
:A03AX02 Diisopromine
:A03AX03 Chlorbenzoxamine
:A03AX04 Pinaverium
:A03AX05 Fenoverine
:A03AX06 Idanpramine
:A03AX07 Proxazole
:A03AX08 Alverine
:A03AX09 Trepibutone
:A03AX10 Isometheptene
:A03AX11 Caroverine
:A03AX12 Phloroglucinol
:A03AX13 Silicones
:A03AX14 Valethamate
:A03AX15 Menthae piperitae aetheroleum
:A03AX30 Trimethyldiphenylpropylamine
:A03AX58 Alverine, combinations
:QA03AX63 Silicones, combinations
:QA03AX90 Physiostigmin
:QA03AX91 Macrogol ricinoleat (NFN)

==A03B Belladonna and derivatives, plain==

===A03BA Belladonna alkaloids, tertiary amines===
:A03BA01 Atropine
:A03BA03 Hyoscyamine
:A03BA04 Belladonna total alkaloids

===A03BB Belladonna alkaloids, semisynthetic, quaternary ammonium compounds===
:A03BB01 Butylscopolamine
:A03BB02 Methylatropine
:A03BB03 Methylscopolamine
:A03BB04 Fentonium
:A03BB05 Cimetropium bromide
:A03BB06 Homatropine methylbromide

==A03C Antispasmodics in combination with psycholeptics==

===A03CA Synthetic anticholinergic agents in combination with psycholeptics===
:A03CA01 Isopropamide and psycholeptics
:A03CA02 Clidinium and psycholeptics
:A03CA03 Oxyphencyclimine and psycholeptics
:A03CA04 Otilonium bromide and psycholeptics
:A03CA05 Glycopyrronium and psycholeptics
:A03CA06 Bevonium and psycholeptics
:A03CA07 Ambutonium and psycholeptics
:A03CA08 Diphemanil and psycholeptics
:A03CA09 Pipenzolate and psycholeptics
:A03CA30 Emepronium and psycholeptics
:A03CA34 Propantheline and psycholeptics

===A03CB Belladonna and derivatives in combination with psycholeptics===
:A03CB01 Methylscopolamine and psycholeptics
:A03CB02 Belladonna total alkaloids and psycholeptics
:A03CB03 Atropine and psycholeptics
:A03CB04 Homatropine methylbromide and psycholeptics
:A03CB31 Hyoscyamine and psycholeptics

===A03CC Other antispasmodics in combination with psycholeptics===

==A03D Antispasmodics in combination with analgesics==

===A03DA Synthetic anticholinergic agents in combination with analgesics===
:A03DA01 Tropenzilone and analgesics
:A03DA02 Pitofenone and analgesics
:A03DA03 Bevonium and analgesics
:A03DA04 Ciclonium and analgesics
:A03DA05 Camylofin and analgesics
:A03DA06 Trospium and analgesics
:A03DA07 Tiemonium iodide and analgesics

===A03DB Belladonna and derivatives in combination with analgesics===
:A03DB04 Butylscopolamine and analgesics

===A03DC Other antispasmodics in combination with analgesics===

==A03E Antispasmodics and anticholinergics in combination with other drugs==

===A03EA Antispasmodics, psycholeptics and analgesics in combination===

===A03ED Antispasmodics in combination with other drugs===

==A03F Propulsives==

===A03FA Propulsives===
:A03FA01 Metoclopramide
:A03FA02 Cisapride
:A03FA03 Domperidone
:A03FA04 Bromopride
:A03FA05 Alizapride
:A03FA06 Clebopride
:A03FA07 Itopride
:A03FA08 Cinitapride
:A03FA09 Mosapride
:A03FA10 Acotiamide
:QA03FA90 Physiostigmine

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5508825" start="17" end="53" title="functional gastrointestinal disorder" label="functional gastrointestinal disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q273499" start="67" end="76" title="Chemical synthesis" label="Synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q113259" start="77" end="92" title="anticholinergic" label="anticholinergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="95" end="100" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="107" end="127" title="Tertiary amine" label="tertiary amino group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227228" start="140" end="156" title="Oxyphencyclimine" label="Oxyphencyclimine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725854" start="166" end="175" title="Camylofin" label="Camylofin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418167" start="185" end="195" title="Mebeverine" label="Mebeverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569888" start="205" end="216" title="Trimebutine" label="Trimebutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939643" start="226" end="236" title="Rociverine" label="Rociverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662662" start="246" end="259" title="Dicycloverine" label="Dicycloverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276403" start="269" end="281" title="Dihexyverine" label="Dihexyverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275247" start="291" end="301" title="Difemerine" label="Difemerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197354" start="311" end="323" title="Piperidolate" label="Piperidolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890770" start="404" end="413" title="Benzilone" label="Benzilone"/>
<link wikidata="Q27162963" start="423" end="445" title="Glycopyrronium bromide" label="Glycopyrronium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116109" start="455" end="467" title="Oxyphenonium" label="Oxyphenonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15409352" start="477" end="488" title="Penthienate" label="Penthienate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27291318" start="498" end="511" title="Propantheline" label="Propantheline"/>
<link wikidata="Q920900" start="521" end="538" title="Otilonium bromide" label="Otilonium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823610" start="548" end="561" title="Methantheline" label="Methantheline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841414" start="571" end="584" title="Tridihexethyl" label="Tridihexethyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803303" start="594" end="606" title="Isopropamide" label="Isopropamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749037" start="616" end="627" title="Hexocyclium" label="Hexocyclium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209234" start="637" end="644" title="Poldine" label="Poldine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817797" start="654" end="665" title="Mepenzolate" label="Mepenzolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899696" start="675" end="683" title="Bevonium" label="Bevonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q27281629" start="693" end="704" title="Pipenzolate" label="Pipenzolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279732" start="714" end="724" title="Diphemanil" label="Diphemanil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801007" start="795" end="811" title="Tiemonium iodide" label="Tiemonium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109656" start="821" end="838" title="Prifinium bromide" label="Prifinium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806492" start="848" end="866" title="Timepidium bromide" label="Timepidium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443572" start="876" end="889" title="Fenpiverinium" label="Fenpiverinium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="936" end="947" title="Benzetimide" label="Benzetimide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419401" start="958" end="967" title="Carbachol" label="Carbachol"/>
<link wikidata="Q410546" start="978" end="988" title="Neostigmin" label="Neostigmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q93978" start="1009" end="1022" title="antispasmodic" label="antispasmodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277331" start="1065" end="1100" title="Dimethylaminopropionylphenothiazine" label="Dimethylaminopropionylphenothiazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1110" end="1122" title="Nicofetamide" label="Nicofetamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809264" start="1132" end="1143" title="Tiropramide" label="Tiropramide"/>
<link wikidata="Q410374" start="1154" end="1164" title="Papaverine" label="Papaverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410374" start="1193" end="1203" title="Papaverine" label="Papaverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q831929" start="1213" end="1224" title="Drotaverine" label="Drotaverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q425881" start="1234" end="1244" title="Moxaverine" label="Moxaverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455047" start="1255" end="1284" title="Serotonin receptor antagonist" label="Serotonin receptor antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q416463" start="1298" end="1307" title="Alosetron" label="Alosetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119931" start="1317" end="1328" title="Cilansetron" label="Cilansetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443568" start="1405" end="1415" title="Fenpiprane" label="Fenpiprane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276477" start="1425" end="1437" title="Diisopromine" label="Diisopromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102917" start="1447" end="1463" title="Chlorbenzoxamine" label="Chlorbenzoxamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236146" start="1473" end="1483" title="Pinaverium" label="Pinaverium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742487" start="1493" end="1503" title="Fenoverine" label="Fenoverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987692" start="1513" end="1524" title="Idanpramine" label="Idanpramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252832" start="1534" end="1543" title="Proxazole" label="Proxazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116162" start="1553" end="1561" title="Alverine" label="Alverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838676" start="1571" end="1582" title="Trepibutone" label="Trepibutone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098951" start="1592" end="1605" title="Isometheptene" label="Isometheptene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045575" start="1615" end="1625" title="Caroverine" label="Caroverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q899008" start="1635" end="1649" title="Phloroglucinol" label="Phloroglucinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q146439" start="1659" end="1668" title="Silicones" label="Silicones"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1678" end="1689" title="Valethamate" label="Valethamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q156037" start="1699" end="1716" title="Mentha piperita" label="Menthae piperitae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842210" start="1738" end="1766" title="Trimethyldiphenylpropylamine" label="Trimethyldiphenylpropylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410595" start="1843" end="1856" title="Physiostigmin" label="Physiostigmin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1867" end="1886" title="Macrogol ricinoleat" label="Macrogol ricinoleat"/>
<link wikidata="Q156091" start="1901" end="1911" title="Atropa belladonna" label="Belladonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q26272" start="1997" end="2005" title="Atropine" label="Atropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413762" start="2015" end="2026" title="Hyoscyamine" label="Hyoscyamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q419361" start="2152" end="2168" title="Butylscopolamine" label="Butylscopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176323" start="2178" end="2192" title="Methylatropine" label="Methylatropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824053" start="2202" end="2219" title="Methylscopolamine" label="Methylscopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443648" start="2229" end="2238" title="Fentonium" label="Fentonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q963406" start="2248" end="2267" title="Cimetropium bromide" label="Cimetropium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605497" start="2277" end="2302" title="Homatropine methylbromide" label="Homatropine methylbromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q93978" start="2311" end="2324" title="Antispasmodic" label="Antispasmodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913901" start="2346" end="2358" title="psycholeptic" label="psycholeptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q113259" start="2382" end="2397" title="anticholinergic" label="anticholinergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913901" start="2425" end="2437" title="psycholeptic" label="psycholeptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803303" start="2451" end="2463" title="Isopropamide" label="Isopropamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132472" start="2491" end="2500" title="Clidinium" label="Clidinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227228" start="2528" end="2544" title="Oxyphencyclimine" label="Oxyphencyclimine"/>
<link wikidata="Q920900" start="2572" end="2589" title="Otilonium bromide" label="Otilonium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q27162963" start="2617" end="2631" title="Glycopyrronium" label="Glycopyrronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899696" start="2659" end="2667" title="Bevonium" label="Bevonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742018" start="2695" end="2705" title="Ambutonium" label="Ambutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279732" start="2733" end="2743" title="Diphemanil" label="Diphemanil"/>
<link wikidata="Q27281629" start="2771" end="2782" title="Pipenzolate" label="Pipenzolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370378" start="2810" end="2820" title="Emepronium" label="Emepronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q27291318" start="2848" end="2861" title="Propantheline" label="Propantheline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824053" start="2963" end="2980" title="Methylscopolamine" label="Methylscopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156091" start="3008" end="3018" title="Atropa belladonna" label="Belladonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q26272" start="3062" end="3070" title="Atropine" label="Atropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605497" start="3098" end="3123" title="Homatropine methylbromide" label="Homatropine methylbromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q413762" start="3151" end="3162" title="Hyoscyamine" label="Hyoscyamine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3391" end="3403" title="Tropenzilone" label="Tropenzilone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199015" start="3428" end="3438" title="Pitofenone" label="Pitofenone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899696" start="3463" end="3471" title="Bevonium" label="Bevonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859610" start="3496" end="3505" title="Ciclonium" label="Ciclonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725854" start="3530" end="3539" title="Camylofin" label="Camylofin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27252312" start="3564" end="3572" title="Trospium" label="Trospium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801007" start="3597" end="3613" title="Tiemonium iodide" label="Tiemonium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419361" start="3709" end="3725" title="Butylscopolamine" label="Butylscopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421095" start="4073" end="4087" title="Metoclopramide" label="Metoclopramide"/>
<link wikidata="Q425295" start="4097" end="4106" title="Cisapride" label="Cisapride"/>
<link wikidata="Q424238" start="4116" end="4127" title="Domperidone" label="Domperidone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958189" start="4137" end="4147" title="Bromopride" label="Bromopride"/>
<link wikidata="Q631829" start="4157" end="4167" title="Alizapride" label="Alizapride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131021" start="4177" end="4187" title="Clebopride" label="Clebopride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409774" start="4197" end="4205" title="Itopride" label="Itopride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121012" start="4215" end="4226" title="Cinitapride" label="Cinitapride"/>
<link wikidata="Q68566" start="4236" end="4245" title="Mosapride" label="Mosapride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674598" start="4255" end="4265" title="Acotiamide" label="Acotiamide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816410" wikidata="Q6368671" url="?curid=816410" title="Karat banana">
<text>Karat bananas are local cultivars of Fe&#x27;i banana found in Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia. The name originates from their bright orange flesh, unusually rich in β-carotene.

They are often treated as a single cultivar, i.e. a distinct cultivated variety, with a name written as &quot;Musa&quot; &#x27;Karat&#x27; in accordance with the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants. However, in Pohnpei there are at least three types, &#x27;Karat Kole&#x27;, &#x27;Karat Pwehu&#x27; and &#x27;Karat Pako&#x27;. The last has a larger fruit, up to 400–500 g in weight.

Traditionally, the Karat banana was used in Micronesia to wean infants onto solid food. It is much less often eaten there now that imported foods have grown in popularity. However, it is believed that because beta-carotenes are important metabolic precursors of vitamin A, essential for the proper functioning of the retina, giving Karat bananas to young children could help ward off certain kinds of blindness. A campaign to increase the consumption of Karat bananas (and of Fe&#x27;i bananas in general) has therefore taken place in Pohnpei.

==See also==
*&quot;Musa&quot;

==References==

*http://www.newscientist.com/article.ns?id=dn6120</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6368671" start="0" end="13" title="Karat banana" label="Karat bananas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="24" end="32" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067814" start="37" end="53" title="Fe&amp;#x27;i banana" label="Fe&amp;#x27;i banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q319836" start="63" end="70" title="Pohnpei" label="Pohnpei"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="72" end="102" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q306135" start="174" end="184" title="beta-carotene" label="β-carotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="222" end="230" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q941761" start="349" end="405" title="International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants" label="International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q18225" start="854" end="863" title="vitamin A" label="vitamin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="909" end="915" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="993" end="1002" title="blindness" label="blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q8666090" start="1151" end="1167" title="Musa (genus)" label="&amp;quot;Musa&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816411" wikidata="Q16452904" url="?curid=816411" title="Indraja (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Indraja]] is an Indian actress. 

Indraja may also refer to:
* Indraja, a daughter of Indra in Indian astrology
* Indraja, festival to Indra observed by Pawra subtribe among Bhils in India
* Indraja (इनद्राजा), ayurvedic medicine, seeds of &quot;Holarrhena pubescens&quot;
* Indraja, the god Jupiter in list of Lithuanian gods and mythological figures 
* Indraja, a daughter of Perun, a Marvel Comics character

==See also==
*Indra (disambiguation)
*Intharacha (disambiguation)
*Indrajala, Indian term for illusion
*Indrajal Comics, Indian comics publisher
*&quot;Indrajaalam&quot;, a 1990 Indian film</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16452904" start="0" end="11" title="Indraja (disambiguation)" label="[[Indraja]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q16452904" start="36" end="43" title="Indraja (disambiguation)" label="Indraja"/>
<link wikidata="Q128335" start="88" end="93" title="Indra" label="Indra"/>
<link wikidata="Q107039888" start="155" end="160" title="Pawra" label="Pawra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9096302" start="248" end="268" title="Holarrhena pubescens" label="Holarrhena pubescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633966" start="305" end="353" title="list of Lithuanian gods and mythological figures" label="list of Lithuanian gods and mythological figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589362" start="380" end="385" title="Perun (comics)" label="Perun"/>
<link wikidata="Q413398" start="428" end="450" title="Indra (disambiguation)" label="Indra (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30706657" start="452" end="479" title="Intharacha (disambiguation)" label="Intharacha (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056471" start="481" end="490" title="Indrajala" label="Indrajala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026881" start="518" end="533" title="Indrajal Comics" label="Indrajal Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q265746" start="566" end="577" title="Indrajaalam" label="Indrajaalam"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816414" wikidata="Q6165791" url="?curid=816414" title="Javine">
<text>Javine may refer to:

*Javine Hylton, a British singer
*Javinė, a household god in Lithuanian mythology who protects grain in barns</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q434114" start="23" end="36" title="Javine Hylton" label="Javine Hylton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633966" start="56" end="62" title="Javinė" label="Javinė"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816416" wikidata="Q4980019" url="?curid=816416" title="Bryan Clarke">
<text>Bryan Campbell Clarke (24 June 1932 – 27 February 2014) was a British Professor of genetics, latterly emeritus at the University of Nottingham. Clarke is particularly noted for his work on apostatic selection (which is a term he coined in 1962) and other forms of frequency-dependent selection, and work on polymorphism in snails, much of it done during the 1960s. Later, he studied molecular evolution. He made the case for natural selection as an important factor in the maintenance of molecular variation, and in driving evolutionary changes in molecules through time. In doing so, he questioned the over-riding importance of random genetic drift advocated by King, Jukes, and Kimura. With Professor James J Murray Jnr (University of Virginia), he carried out an extensive series of studies on speciation in land snails of the genus &quot;Partula&quot; inhabiting the volcanic islands of the Eastern Pacific. These studies helped illuminate the genetic changes that take place during the origin of species.

==Education==
Clarke was educated at Magdalen College, Oxford, receiving a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1956 followed by a Doctor of Philosophy degree in 1961 from the University of Oxford for research investigating factors affecting shell colour polymorphism in the land snails (&quot;Cepaea&quot;).

==Career and research==
Clarke was appointed a Lecturer at the University of Edinburgh in 1959 and was promoted to Reader by the time he left in 1971. In 1971 he became Foundation Professor at the new Department of Genetics at the University of Nottingham becoming Emeritus Professor in 1997. During this period he spent two spells (1971–76, 1981–93) as Head of Department.

Clarke mentored many scientists in evolutionary genetics, supervising more than thirty research students, many of which went gone on to successful research careers themselves such as Steve Jones. He was a co-founder of the Population Genetics Group (&quot;PopGroup&quot;) a scientific meeting for evolutionary and population genetics held annually in the UK since the 1960s.

Clarke was co-founder (with his wife Ann and Dame Anne McLaren) and trustee of the Frozen Ark project, launched in 2004 to preserve the DNA and living cells of endangered species worldwide.

Clarke acted as managing editor of the scientific journal &quot;Heredity&quot; from 1978 to 1985.

===Awards and achievements===
Clarke was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1982. In 2003 he was both awarded the Linnean Medal for Zoology and elected a Foreign member of the American Philosophical Society. In 2004 he was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He received one of the thirteen Darwin-Wallace Medals awarded by the Linnean Society of London in 2008; at that time the award was made only every 50 years. He was awarded the Darwin Medal of the Royal Society in 2010 &#x27;for his original and influential contributions to our understanding of the genetic basis of evolution&#x27;.

In 1959 he published &quot;Berber Village&quot;, an account of an Oxford University expedition to the High Atlas mountains of Morocco.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4980019" start="0" end="21" title="Bryan Clarke" label="Bryan Campbell Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="83" end="91" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q211830" start="102" end="110" title="emeritus" label="emeritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q472316" start="118" end="142" title="University of Nottingham" label="University of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780585" start="189" end="208" title="apostatic selection" label="apostatic selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="307" end="319" title="polymorphism (biology)" label="polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856529" start="383" end="402" title="molecular evolution" label="molecular evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="425" end="442" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q486420" start="636" end="649" title="genetic drift" label="genetic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296067" start="842" end="849" title="Partula (gastropod)" label="Partula"/>
<link wikidata="Q81162" start="1048" end="1072" title="Magdalen College, Oxford" label="Magdalen College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1086" end="1102" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1132" end="1152" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1177" end="1197" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="1256" end="1268" title="Polymorphism (biology)" label="polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747535" start="1295" end="1301" title="Cepaea" label="Cepaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569495" start="1358" end="1366" title="Lecturer" label="Lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="1374" end="1397" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445082" start="1426" end="1432" title="Reader (academic rank)" label="Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q472316" start="1542" end="1566" title="University of Nottingham" label="University of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391397" start="1869" end="1880" title="Steve Jones (biologist)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="1909" end="1928" title="Population Genetics" label="Population Genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q84758191" start="2099" end="2102" title="Ann Clarke (immunologist)" label="Ann"/>
<link wikidata="Q542428" start="2112" end="2124" title="Anne McLaren" label="Anne McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506273" start="2145" end="2155" title="Frozen Ark" label="Frozen Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261546" start="2317" end="2325" title="Heredity (journal)" label="Heredity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="2403" end="2430" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635542" start="2472" end="2485" title="Linnean Medal" label="Linnean Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="2534" end="2564" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="2622" end="2659" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166881" start="2693" end="2713" title="Darwin-Wallace Medal" label="Darwin-Wallace Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q867447" start="2730" end="2755" title="Linnean Society of London" label="Linnean Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q756994" start="2837" end="2849" title="Darwin Medal" label="Darwin Medal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816426" wikidata="Q214228" url="?curid=816426" title="Claus Spreckels">
<text>Adolph Claus J. Spreckels (July 9, 1828 – December 26, 1908) was a German-born major industrialist in both San Francisco, and Hawai&#x27;i during the kingdom, republican, and territorial periods of the islands&#x27; history. He also involved himself in several California enterprises, most notably the company that bears his name, Spreckels Sugar Company.

==Early life==
Spreckels was born in Lamstedt, Kingdom of Hanover, today Lower Saxony, Germany. Spreckels was the eldest of six children of the farmer John Diederich Spreckels (1802–1873) and his wife Gesche Baak (1804–1875) from Lamstedt near Cuxhaven. He grew up in Lamstedt and attended elementary school. After the bad harvests of 1845 and 1846, the resulting inflation and hunger crisis reached its peak in 1847; Spreckels emigrated to the USA in 1848 at the age of 19. He left his homeland to start a new life in the United States, with only one German &quot;Thaler&quot; in his pocket. In 1852, he married his childhood sweetheart, Anna Christina Mangels (September 4, 1830 in Ankelohe, Kingdom of Hanover, Germany – February 15, 1910, San Francisco, California), who had immigrated to New York City with her brother three years earlier. They had 13 children, five of whom lived to maturity: sons John Diedrich (1853–1926), Adolph Bernard (1857–1924), Claus August (&quot;Gus&quot;; 1858–1946), and Rudolph (1872–1958); and daughter, Emma Claudina (1870–1924), who married Watson Ferris Hutton. Other children included Edward (1874-1876).

==Developing California==
The family first settled in South Carolina, where Spreckels opened a grocery-store business. Within a short time, they moved to New York City, then in 1856 relocated to San Francisco, where Spreckels began a brewery. Spreckels entered the sugar business in the mid-1860s and came to dominate the Hawaiian sugar trade on the West Coast. His first refinery, built in 1867, was at Eighth and Brannan Streets in San Francisco, but by the late 1870s, the Brannan Street facilities were running at capacity, so Spreckels chose a site in Potrero Point to open a larger sugar refinery with water access. He called his concerns the California Sugar Refinery.

Spreckels used some of his wealth to purchase, beginning in 1872, the former Mexican land grant Rancho Aptos, a large tract of ranch and timber land in Aptos, California. He built a large resort hotel, and not far away, an extensive ranch complex. Spreckels was one of the original investors in the Santa Cruz Railroad, which began operation in 1875 and passed through his land on its run between Santa Cruz and Watsonville. On the Aptos ranch, Spreckels began to experiment with growing sugar beets. He induced others in the area to plant sugar beets, as well, and built a small refinery in nearby Capitola in 1874, where it operated for five years.

In 1888, Spreckels established the Western Beet Sugar Company in Watsonville, which was at that time the largest beet sugar factory in the U.S. By 1890, Spreckels&#x27; main growing operations had shifted to the Salinas Valley, so he built the 42-mile narrow-gauge Pajaro Valley Consolidated Railroad to ship his sugar beets from the fields near Salinas to Watsonville.

In 1899, Spreckels opened an even larger factory closer to the main sugar-beet fields. He named the new factory Spreckels Sugar Company. A company town grew up around the plant, and still exists as Spreckels, California. The town and the sugar factory were important in the early life of novelist John Steinbeck, and several scenes from his novels take place there.

In the 1890s, Spreckels helped found the national sugar trust and renamed his San Francisco property the Western Sugar Refinery, and continued to increase his control over the Hawaiian sugar trade. This control over the industry was irksome to Hawaiian planters not directly affiliated with Spreckels and his associates. At the end of the 1890s, they attempted to break free. In 1905, the planters established a cooperative refinery in Crockett, California, the California and Hawaiian Sugar Company (C&amp;H). The Spreckels dominance in sugar was broken, but the Western Sugar Refinery continued operation in San Francisco until 1951.

Spreckels was the president of the San Francisco and San Joaquin Valley Railroad¹ from 1895 until it was sold to the Santa Fe Railway in 1901. The railroad built a line that competed with the Southern Pacific through the San Joaquin Valley between Richmond and Bakersfield. The railroad was welcome competition for shippers who were strangled by Southern Pacific&#x27;s monopoly on shipping rates in the valley. Today, this route is BNSF&#x27;s main route to Northern California.

==In Hawaii==
Spreckels&#x27; interest in Hawaii&#x27;s sugar industry began in 1876. Prior to that time, Spreckels had opposed the Reciprocity Treaty of 1875, which increased the Kingdom of Hawaii&#x27;s access to the American sugar market, because he feared that the low tariffs on Hawaiian sugar would hurt his business. However, Spreckels eventually decided to establish his own plantations in Hawaii and traveled there one year later.

In 1878, Spreckels founded Spreckelsville, a company town along the northern shore of Maui. To do so, he purchased and leased of land. That same year, Spreckels incorporated the Hawaiian Commercial Company with Hermann Schussler, a San Francisco area engineer best known for overseeing construction of the Crystal Springs Reservoir. In 1882, the company was reincorporated as the Hawaiian Commercial and Sugar Company (HC&amp;S). By 1892, Spreckelsville was the largest sugarcane plantation in the world and employed thousands of immigrant farm laborers from Japan, Korea, China, and other countries.

Spreckels became friends with Walter M. Gibson, adviser to King Kalākaua. Together, they made arrangements where Spreckels would lend the king money and in return, Gibson and he would increase the Spreckels&#x27; land holdings and water rights. However, Spreckels fell out of Kalākaua&#x27;s favor in 1886.

He purchased the &quot;Pacific Commercial Advertiser&quot; in Hawaii in 1880 and became a publisher. This paper later became known as the &quot;Honolulu Advertiser&quot;, and prior to its demise in 2010, became one of the largest newspapers in circulation in the United States. Spreckels&#x27; conservative, pro-monarchy slant caused him to fall from favor in the business community, and he eventually sold the newspaper.

Claus Spreckels also lent his assistance to William Matson when he first founded Matson Navigation Company. Matson had been captain of a vessel, engaged chiefly in carrying coal to the Spreckels sugar refinery and later worked aboard the Spreckels family yacht. Spreckels financed many of Matson&#x27;s new ships, including Matson&#x27;s first ship, called &quot;Emma Claudina&quot; and named for Spreckels&#x27; daughter.

In 1893, following a bitter lawsuit that pitted him against his two youngest sons, Gus and Rudolph, as well as the overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom, which he opposed, Claus Spreckels handed off his Hawaii properties and businesses to his business partner William G. Irwin and his two eldest sons, John and Adolph, with the intention of focusing his resources on his beet sugar business in California. Viewed as an opponent of the newly-established Provisional Government of Hawaii, on July 9, 1893, Spreckels found a death threat graffitied on his house and went into self-exile from Hawaii on July 19. He left on the &quot;SS Australia&quot;, vowing to &quot;return to see grass growing in the streets of Honolulu.&quot; Spreckels returned only once to Hawaii, in 1905.

Infighting between his sons and their waning interests in their Hawaiian businesses led to the disolution of the Spreckels family businesses over the following decades and their takeover by Hawaii&#x27;s emerging Big Five sugar companies. Following a brief takeover by Gus and Rudolph, the Hawaiian Commercial and Sugar Company and Spreckelsville were taken over by Alexander &amp; Baldwin in 1898, and the remaining Irwin and Spreckels businesses merged into C. Brewer &amp; Co. in 1909.

== Controversies ==
Spreckels had an often-contentious relationship with other powerful business figures and interests, both in the United States and in the Kingdom of Hawaii. This was reflected in frequent negative publicity for Spreckels, particularly in the often yellow press that characterized much of American journalism of that era. One such rivalry would grow into a family enmity between Claus Spreckels and his sons and Charles and M. H. de Young, owners of the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot;, culminating in the attempted assassination of M. H. de Young by Adolph B. Spreckels in 1884. Allegations by the &quot;Chronicle&quot; and other critics included the claim that he practiced slavery on his Hawaiian plantations, that he acted as a pimp for King Kalākaua, and that he had defrauded stockholders in his company.

=== Allegations of slavery on Hawaii plantations ===

Like other owners of sugar plantations in Hawaii prior to American annexation, Spreckels employed laborers on the contract labor system, a system having some features of indentured servitude, in which an immigrant laborer contracted to work for a single employer for a set period (typically 3-5 years) for a low wage as repayment for the cost of passage to Hawaii. Spreckels was a strong advocate for continuation of this system, arguing that sugar could not be produced economically without a reliable supply of cheap labor. This led him to oppose the annexation of Hawaii by the United States, something that was supported by many powerful Americans in Hawaii, as the use of contract labor was illegal in the United States under the 1885 Alien Contract Labor Law and other laws.

In the 1880s, the &quot;Chronicle&quot; began running articles alleging that the laborers on Spreckels plantations were effectively enslaved, that his plantations engaged in unacceptable labor practices, and that the living conditions of the laborers were inhumane, with some of this coverage getting attention in the larger national press. The majority of San Francisco newspapers of the era, however, did not endorse the &quot;Chronicle&#x27;s&quot; reporting on the issue, claiming that the labor conditions on Spreckels plantations were acceptable and, in fact, much better than those on sugar plantations in the Caribbean, a position later supported by independent investigations by the Portuguese and Norwegian governments.

Negative publicity about Spreckels Hawaiian operations continued to follow him even after the divestment of his Hawaiian operations in 1893. In 1900, an incident took place in which 114 Puerto Rican migrant laborers were transported to Hawaii under coercive and inhumane conditions. News of the plight of these laborers as they were being transported to California for shipment to Hawaii became a cause célèbre in the American press, particularly in San Francisco. The laborers were recruited and trafficked by labor agents who, according to most accounts, were hired by the Hawaiian Sugar Planters&#x27; Association, though some stories linked the agents to Claus Spreckels. John D. Spreckels issued a statement via his newspaper, the &quot;San Francisco Call&quot;, claiming that neither he nor Claus Spreckels had anything to do with the recruitment of these laborers.

==Death==
Spreckels died on December 26, 1908, in San Francisco, and was buried at Cypress Lawn Memorial Park, Colma. With his death, his second son Adolph assumed the management of Spreckels Sugar Company.

==Legacy==
In 1899, Spreckels gave the city of San Francisco a classical-style outdoor music structure (known as &quot;the bandshell&quot;) to frame one end of the Music Concourse in Golden Gate Park. The official name of the structure is the Spreckels Temple of Music.

A number of streets in Aptos, California, are named either for Claus Spreckels or for parts of his once-extensive estate. In addition to Spreckels Drive and Claus Lane, Polo Drive runs along one side of what was once Spreckels&#x27; polo field, now a Santa Cruz County park named Polo Grounds Park. A shopping center called Deer Park Shopping Center sits at the edge of a formerly wooded Spreckels-owned area used by hotel guests and visitors.

Other naming tributes to the Spreckels family include:
* Spreckels, California, named for Claus Spreckels
* Spreckelsville, Hawaii on the island of Maui, named for Claus Spreckels
* Sprecks Beach, which is north of Spreckelsville
* The great Spreckels Organ, the Spreckels Organ Pavilion, and the Spreckels Theatre Building in San Diego, named for John Diedrich (John D.) Spreckels, son of Claus Spreckels
* Spreckels Lake on the northern side of Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, named for Claus Spreckels and his family
* The &quot;Claus-Spreckels-Straße&quot; (street) in Lamstedt (Germany) named for Claus Spreckels

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Jacob Adler: &quot;Claus Spreckels: The Sugar King in Hawaii&quot;, Honolulu: Univ. of Hawaii Pr., 1966

==External links==
* Claus Spreckels: Robber Baron and Sugar King by Uwe Spiekermann, &quot;Immigrant Entrepreneurship: 1720 to the Present&quot; (website).
* Claus Spreckels (1828-1908), &quot;Monterey County Historical Society&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214228" start="0" end="25" title="Claus Spreckels" label="Adolph Claus J. Spreckels"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="67" end="73" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="85" end="98" title="industrialist" label="industrialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="107" end="120" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="126" end="138" title="Hawaii" label="Hawai&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="150" end="157" title="Kingdom of Hawaii" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057542" start="159" end="169" title="Republic of Hawaii" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q547795" start="175" end="186" title="Territory of Hawaii" label="territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="261" end="271" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580304" start="331" end="354" title="Spreckels Sugar Company" label="Spreckels Sugar Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q489415" start="394" end="402" title="Börde Lamstedt" label="Lamstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q164079" start="404" end="422" title="Kingdom of Hanover" label="Kingdom of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="430" end="442" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q162528" start="922" end="928" title="Thaler" label="Thaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q164079" start="1051" end="1069" title="Kingdom of Hanover" label="Kingdom of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228322" start="1261" end="1274" title="John D. Spreckels" label="John Diedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684312" start="1288" end="1302" title="Adolph B. Spreckels" label="Adolph Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="1558" end="1572" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="1699" end="1712" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="1738" end="1745" title="brewery" label="brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="1835" end="1846" title="sugar trade" label="sugar trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235151" start="2061" end="2074" title="Potrero Point" label="Potrero Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290823" start="2277" end="2289" title="Rancho Aptos" label="Rancho Aptos"/>
<link wikidata="Q622269" start="2333" end="2350" title="Aptos, California" label="Aptos, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877691" start="2480" end="2499" title="Santa Cruz Railroad" label="Santa Cruz Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q159232" start="2578" end="2588" title="Santa Cruz, California" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q913543" start="2593" end="2604" title="Watsonville, California" label="Watsonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="2669" end="2679" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q986894" start="2780" end="2788" title="Capitola, California" label="Capitola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271307" start="3045" end="3059" title="Salinas Valley, California" label="Salinas Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="3085" end="3097" title="narrow gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q488125" start="3179" end="3186" title="Salinas, California" label="Salinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936715" start="3402" end="3423" title="Spreckels, California" label="Spreckels, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="3501" end="3515" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430009" start="4007" end="4027" title="Crockett, California" label="Crockett, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021197" start="4033" end="4070" title="California and Hawaiian Sugar Company" label="California and Hawaiian Sugar Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q97453025" start="4243" end="4288" title="San Francisco and San Joaquin Valley Railroad" label="San Francisco and San Joaquin Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="4325" end="4341" title="Santa Fe Railway" label="Santa Fe Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="4400" end="4416" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q964198" start="4429" end="4447" title="San Joaquin Valley" label="San Joaquin Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q495377" start="4456" end="4464" title="Richmond, California" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="4469" end="4480" title="Bakersfield" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="4641" end="4652" title="BNSF" label="BNSF&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="4667" end="4686" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q227870" start="4745" end="4759" title="sugar industry" label="sugar industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302489" start="4821" end="4847" title="Reciprocity Treaty of 1875" label="Reciprocity Treaty of 1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083160" start="5157" end="5171" title="Spreckelsville, Hawaii" label="Spreckelsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178478" start="5291" end="5303" title="incorporation (business)" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q102622" start="5341" end="5358" title="Hermann Schussler" label="Hermann Schussler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658190" start="5436" end="5461" title="Crystal Springs Reservoir" label="Crystal Springs Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="5600" end="5609" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634955" start="5610" end="5620" title="Sugar plantations in Hawaii" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965519" start="5762" end="5778" title="Walter M. Gibson" label="Walter M. Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q163080" start="5796" end="5804" title="Kalākaua" label="Kalākaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740166" start="6184" end="6203" title="Honolulu Advertiser" label="Honolulu Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015231" start="6507" end="6521" title="William Matson" label="William Matson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787989" start="6544" end="6569" title="Matson Navigation Company" label="Matson Navigation Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931943" start="7002" end="7035" title="overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q55852875" start="7143" end="7159" title="William G. Irwin" label="William G. Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593459" start="7336" end="7368" title="Provisional Government of Hawaii" label="Provisional Government of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905696" start="7873" end="7881" title="Big Five (Hawaii)" label="Big Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q135281" start="8026" end="8049" title="Alexander &amp;amp; Baldwin" label="Alexander &amp;amp; Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006311" start="8120" end="8139" title="C. Brewer &amp;amp; Co." label="C. Brewer &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="8307" end="8324" title="Kingdom of Hawaii" label="Kingdom of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q231443" start="8417" end="8429" title="yellow press" label="yellow press"/>
<link wikidata="Q22017189" start="8580" end="8587" title="Charles de Young" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712648" start="8592" end="8606" title="M. H. de Young" label="M. H. de Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="8628" end="8651" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684312" start="8723" end="8742" title="Adolph B. Spreckels" label="Adolph B. Spreckels"/>
<link wikidata="Q43437" start="8904" end="8908" title="pimp" label="pimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q163080" start="8918" end="8926" title="Kalākaua" label="Kalākaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634955" start="9059" end="9086" title="sugar plantations in Hawaii" label="sugar plantations in Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9152" end="9173" title="Credit-ticket_system#Differences_from_contract_labor" label="contract labor system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="9208" end="9228" title="indentured servitude" label="indentured servitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341456" start="9591" end="9611" title="annexation of Hawaii" label="annexation of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726416" start="9778" end="9802" title="Alien Contract Labor Law" label="Alien Contract Labor Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634956" start="10412" end="10446" title="sugar plantations in the Caribbean" label="sugar plantations in the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258644" start="10737" end="10757" title="Puerto Rican immigration to Hawaii" label="Puerto Rican migrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q880704" start="10772" end="10832" title="Blackbirding" label="transported to Hawaii under coercive and inhumane conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246417" start="10948" end="10961" title="cause célèbre" label="cause célèbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808464" start="11048" end="11058" title="Labor trafficking in the United States" label="trafficked"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149542" start="11126" end="11167" title="Hawaiian Sugar Planters&amp;#x27; Association" label="Hawaiian Sugar Planters&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228322" start="11227" end="11244" title="John D. Spreckels" label="John D. Spreckels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413963" start="11293" end="11311" title="San Francisco Call" label="San Francisco Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084115" start="11507" end="11533" title="Cypress Lawn Memorial Park" label="Cypress Lawn Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941496" start="11796" end="11811" title="Music Concourse" label="Music Concourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q635559" start="11815" end="11831" title="Golden Gate Park" label="Golden Gate Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q110559749" start="11875" end="11900" title="Spreckels Temple of Music" label="Spreckels Temple of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936715" start="12405" end="12426" title="Spreckels, California" label="Spreckels, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083160" start="12456" end="12478" title="Spreckelsville, Hawaii" label="Spreckelsville, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12530" end="12543" title="Spreckelsville, Hawaii#Beaches" label="Sprecks Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580302" start="12611" end="12635" title="Spreckels Organ Pavilion" label="Spreckels Organ Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="12675" end="12684" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580299" start="12756" end="12770" title="Spreckels Lake" label="Spreckels Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q635559" start="12795" end="12811" title="Golden Gate Park" label="Golden Gate Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q503261" start="12922" end="12930" title="Lamstedt" label="Lamstedt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816434" wikidata="Q914128" url="?curid=816434" title="Discworld Noir">
<text>Discworld Noir is a 1999 adventure game developed by Perfect Entertainment and published by GT Interactive. The game is set in Terry Pratchett&#x27;s satirical &quot;Discworld&quot; universe, and follows its first and only private investigator as he is given a case leading him into the deadly and occult underbelly of the Discworld&#x27;s largest city.

The game plays on film noir genre tropes, parodying noir classics such as &quot;Casablanca&quot; and &quot;The Maltese Falcon&quot;. Originally released for Microsoft Windows, it was later released for PlayStation by Teeny Weeny Games, the resurrected form of the already insolvent Perfect Entertainment. Pratchett consulted on the story and provided some of the dialogue, being credited for causing &quot;far too much interference.&quot;

==Gameplay==
&quot;Discworld Noir&quot; is an adventure game, in which players take control of the character of Lewton, visiting various locations in the city of Ankh-Morpork, finding items to help solve puzzles, and conversing with a wide variety of characters. the game&#x27;s story is divided into a set of acts, in which the player must complete various tasks to advance the story.

Much of the conversations in &quot;Discworld Noir&quot; focus on a more structured manner than in previous &quot;Discworld&quot; games. Alongside a greeting function, the player can converse with characters about simple conversation topics, as well as show them items collected during the game, and question them on leads noted down in Lewton&#x27;s notebook; once a lead is of no further use, its scratched out and unselectable.

The game uses a &quot;threaded&quot; structure, in which there are separate &quot;vignettes&quot; that the player may come to at different points. For example, missing a clue early on in the game will cause a character to give it to the player later in the game. In addition to traditional adventure mechanics, the player will later gain the ability for Lewton to transform between a human and a werewolf, allowing them to collect scents to help solve additional puzzles. Like the previous &quot;Discworld&quot; games, the PlayStation version of the game supports the PlayStation Mouse.

==Story==

===Characters and setting===
&quot;Discworld Noir&quot; contrasts deeply to the first two games set in the &quot;Discworld&quot; universe, adopting a &quot;grittier, darker and more realistic&quot; style in its story, while featuring an original story by Terry Pratchett not derived from any of his novels in the &quot;Discworld&quot; series.

Like with Pratchett&#x27;s work, the story parodies a mixture of traditional hardboiled fiction and film noir, as well as a combination of dark fantasy and Lovecraftian horror. The film noir elements feature significant references to the 1942 film &quot;Casablanca&quot;, as well as a heavy use of &quot;discordant&quot; strings and dissonance in its background music, matching to the style of jazz and blues pieces from the early 20th century; multiple references towards the horror elements are made of the works of H. P. Lovecraft.

The game&#x27;s lead protagonist that players control is Lewton, a former member of the Ankh-Morpork City Watch, who left to become the Discworld&#x27;s first and only private investigator within the city of Ankh-Morpork. The character is based on the classic private detective figure, with an appearance and jacket reminiscent of noir detectives; &quot;PC Zone&quot; compared him to Sam Spade and Philip Marlowe. Other new characters to the &quot;Discworld&quot; universe include: Carlotta Von Uberwald, a femme fatale figure, and one of the primary antagonists; the troll criminal Horst; Ilsa Verbay, a former love interest of Lewton; and Two-Conkers, an Agatean Empire citizen specialized in archeology. The game features some notable characters from the &quot;Discworld&quot; series, including Commander Vimes, Corporal Nobby, and Death.

While the story is an original piece by Pratchett, the writer viewed it like his previous games as in a &quot;parallel Discworld&quot; to that of the novels. Despite this, the game&#x27;s designer Chris Bateman devised &quot;Noir&quot;″s events to fit in between the stories &quot;Feet of Clay&quot; and &quot;Jingo&quot;.

===Plot===
Lewton, a former member of the Ankh-Morpork City Watch, seeks out work after becoming the Discworld&#x27;s first (and only) private investigator. He is hired by the mysterious Carlotta Von Uberwald to track down a man named Mundy. The only detail he receives is that Mundy was away in the nation of Tsort, and that he disappeared shortly after he returned to Ankh-Morpork two days ago previously. Accepting the case, Lewton&#x27;s search leads him to encounter the troll Malachite, who requests his help in tracking down a troll named Therma, and the father of Carlotta&#x27;s deceased husband, Count Von Uberwald, who hires him to track down his missing dwarven driver, Regin. 

While Regin turns up dead in the river Ankh after being murdered while driving fast in Count Von Uberwald&#x27;s carriage, the other two cases of Lewton&#x27;s see him knocked out as he closes in on his objectives: Mundy is murdered after he finds him; while Malachite is murdered when the PI takes him to an arranged meeting with Therma. Lewton&#x27;s former superior, Commander Vimes, strongly suspects him of the murders, but does not agree to his belief they are linked to a spate of recent, ritualistic murders, dubbed the Counterweight Killings, that the Watch are investigating. At the same time, Lewton learns a troll named Horst, an underworld criminal, is after a relic known as the &quot;Golden Sword&quot;, which Mundy was supposed to give to him, and which Carlotta is seeking to acquire herself.

Finding Horst believes he has it, and tailed by Horst&#x27;s associate Al-Khali, a shady dwarf, Lewton finds Mundy hid the relic in a crate that went to the Guild of Archaeologists. Needing help to access it in the Guild&#x27;s vaults, Lewton turns to help from Ilsa Verbay, a former lover of his who recently returned to Ankh-Morpork with her husband Two-Conkers, an archaeologist from the Agatean Empire. With her help, Lewton recovers the relic, but is hounded by an unknown pursuer when he leaves the Guild. Accidentally dropping the sword in his efforts to escape, Lewton is stabbed in the chest and presumed dead by the Watch. A few days after being buried, Lewton re-emerges alive, but discovers from a talking dog named Gaspode that he has become a werewolf.

Discovering his newfound abilities can be useful, Lewton decides to investigate the Counterweight Killings. His research on the relic leads him to a priest of the goddess Errata, who reveals that the Golden Sword is actually known as the Tsortese Falchion – an ancient blade forged for Errata, which was lost following a major war in Tsort many years ago. Lewton also learns the relic is incomplete – it is missing a jewel that empowers it, and which is believed to be hidden in Ankh-Morpork. Meanwhile, the investigation into the killings reveals they are part of a ritual to summon Nylonathatep, a being from the Dungeon Dimensions. Staking out the site where the final murder in the ritual is to take place, Lewton watches as a werewolf murders Al-Khali, who had been tailing him upon his return from &quot;death&quot;.

Before he can pursue the murderer, Carlotta approaches him, revealing she is the head of a guild devoted to Anu-Anu, a forgotten god worshipped by werewolves such as herself. She reveals he was behind the murders when she called on him – though she needed him to kill Mundy, Malachite and Regin because each threatened her and the cult&#x27;s plans – and that the god was the one who stabbed him; Carlotta revived him as a werewolf, because she believed he could help the cult. Lewton finds himself forced to witness Anu-Anu conduct the ritual to summon Nylonathatep with the Falchion, but the ritual backfires and causes the beast to emerge in Ankh-Morpork, killing Anu&#x27;s mortal form and several of the cultists.

Lewton discovers a second cult infiltrated Anu-Anu&#x27;s cult, intent on releasing Nylonathatep for their own purposes, and that the Falchion could not control the creature, let alone banish it, because the missing jewel prevented this. With Two-Conkers&#x27;s help, Lewton recovers the jewel, and searches for Carlotta, who disappeared with the Falchion. Tracking her down, he finds her in a heated argument with Horst, who threatens to kill her for the relic, forcing him to kill the troll; Carlotta reluctantly gives him the Falchion in return, and allows him to hand her to the Watch for her crimes. With the Falchion restored by the missing jewel, Lewton defeats Nylonathatep with the help of a flying machine created by inventor Leonard da Quirm, saving the city.

In the aftermath, Lewton advises Ilsa to leave with Two-Conkers, knowing her husband is not safe in Ankh-Morpork, and watches as the pair leave on the flying machine, while he remarks to Gaspode how the two of them make a &quot;beautiful friendship&quot;. The dog merely tells him not to push his luck with that idea.

==Development==
Perfect Entertainment had enjoyed a working relationship with Terry Pratchett and the &quot;Discworld&quot; licence from as early as 1993, collaborating closely to develop their first two &quot;Discworld&quot; games, &quot;Discworld&quot; (1995) and &quot;Discworld II: Missing Presumed...!?&quot; (1996). &quot;Discworld Noir&quot; was developed for Windows 95 and Windows 98. GT Interactive were chosen as publisher due to their strong US presence, as the first two &quot;Discworld&quot; games had done relatively poorly in America.

Chris Bateman, who had worked on &quot;Discworld II&quot; in a non-lead role, originally suggested using Teppic (the protagonist of &quot;Pyramids&quot;) as a lead character, though Pratchett disliked the idea. Pratchett sent the developers a story outline and the first draft of the script, wanting a detective story set in Ankh-Morpork. The idea for a film noir theme specifically came from the developers. Bateman wrote the ultimate script, which was then edited by Pratchett. The script was the first one Bateman had written for a video game. With each &quot;Discworld&quot; game Pratchett became less and less involved, in &quot;Noir&quot; mainly being involved during the beginning and end of development.

The game uses pre-rendered 3D models. Real-time 3D models were unfeasible for the period, as the developers needed the characters to have facial expressions and so likely few people would have computers powerful enough to run the game. A full 3D game would have required simplification of the characters. Utilising some 3D, however, allowed them to explore more with shadow and fog. The backgrounds in the game remained 2D.

Most of the voice acting was done by four actors: Rob Brydon, Kate Robbins, Robert Llewelyn, and Nigel Planer. There was one less voice actor in &quot;Noir&quot; than in &quot;Discworld II&quot;; however, the heavy amount of dialogue in the game led to more reuse of voice actors in comparison. Audio director Rob Lord also provided additional voices. Robbins, voice actress for every female character in the game, finished her lines in a one-day session. Brydon, who voiced the player character, took a &quot;grueling&quot; week to complete his lines, with the game&#x27;s main delivery of important information being Lewton&#x27;s hardboiled monologues. Paul Weir created the soundtrack for the game. Weir studied most of the noir films &quot;Discworld Noir&quot; drew on.

After the release of &quot;Discworld Noir&quot; for the PC, Perfect Entertainment folded, leaving them unable to patch the game. The company briefly resurfaced as &quot;Teeny Weeny Games&quot;, and under this name the game was ported to the PlayStation. The PlayStation version has a lower resolution to the PC game and, in order to fit the game onto one disc (as opposed to the three discs of the PC version), compresses the game&#x27;s sound and videos.

As a result of the closure of GT Interactive, the game was never released outside of Europe.

==Reception==
&quot;Discworld Noir&quot; received generally positive reviews upon its release. Marek Bronstring, writing for Adventure Gamer, rated &quot;Noir&quot; 4/5 stars and recommended buying the game. Gordon Barrick gave the game 8/10. &quot;PC Zone&quot; gave the game a positive review, at the time ranking it as their sixth top adventure game. Just Adventure&#x27;s Tom Houston rated the game A−. &quot;PC Gamer UK&quot;″s Jonathan Davies gave the game a 74% quality rating. Another reviewer for Just Adventure, Jenny Guenther, gave the game a C+, particularly criticising the game&#x27;s bugs.

The game&#x27;s atmosphere was praised. Barrick praised the graphics and music for their part in creating the atmosphere, calling the backgrounds &quot;detailed and beautifully rendered&quot; and the saying the music underscored the game with &quot;originality and style&quot;. This praise was echoed by &quot;PC Zone&quot;, drawing notice to the shadows, lighting and fog, and calling the visuals &quot;the perfect companions to an excellent soundtrack&quot;. David Wildgoose, writing for &quot;PC PowerPlay&quot;, noted the &quot;dark and seedy atmosphere&quot;, crediting &quot;enticing visuals and a very cool soundtrack&quot;. Guenther liked the music, giving the game&#x27;s sound an A, but criticised the &quot;broken-record-skipping&quot; effect that seemed to get worse as the game went on. The music and its effect on atmosphere was likewise praised by Houston. Reviewing the French translation of the game, JeuxVideo.com&#x27;s Kornifex praised the game&#x27;s effective use of rain and its cinematic quality. A second JeuxVideo.com review, however, criticised the scarcity of music and sound effects, though said what music there was brought &quot;a semblance of atmosphere&quot;.

The large amount of dialogue was criticised. &quot;PC Zone&quot; called the dialogue &quot;generally interesting enough&quot; to watch, but sometimes felt it could be too much. The length of the conversations were one reason Tom Houston lowered the grade for &quot;Noir&quot;″s gameplay to a C, a complaint similarly raised by Guenther, who gave the gameplay a D. Reaction to the humour of the game was similarly mixed. Wildgoose felt the developers &quot;tried too hard to make every character and every situation funny&quot;, resulting in jokes that fell flat and a level of humour &quot;only sporadically maintained&quot;. Bronstring called the game generally amusing, but felt it &quot;very tiresome&quot; at times where it lasted too long. Rose commented, &quot;the dialogue is suitably authentic and funny in that slightly irritating I-know-it&#x27;s-funny way that Pratchett writes&quot;, while Davies criticised the game for not living up to Pratchett&#x27;s humour.

Bronstring felt the voices sounded &quot;artificial&quot;, placing the blame on either poor editing of the various sound sources or a lack of variety in the four voice actors. Barrick, however, praised the voice actors, feeling that every line came across &quot;convincingly&quot;. Guenther found the British attempts to imitate foreign accents funny, but nonetheless praised the voice acting.

===Retrospective===
In a retrospective review in 2002, Bronstring maintained his original rating of 4/5 stars. A 2011 retrospective by Eurogamer&#x27;s John Walker called it &quot;surprisingly poorly structured&quot;, and noted a lack of puzzles. Walker still admitted a &quot;fondness&quot; for the game, however, comparing it favourably to the company&#x27;s first two &quot;Discworld&quot; adventure games, noting a lack of &quot;grating knowing tweeness&quot; and an ability to be genuinely funny. In 2011, Adventure Gamers would go on to place it at number 27 in their &quot;Top 100 All-time Adventure Games&quot; list, giving credit to its innovative notepad mechanism, which would become a common element in adventure games. Walker later listed it at number 20 in &quot;The 25 Best Adventure Games Ever Made&quot;, praising the voice cast. &quot;PC Gamer&quot;″s Richard Cobbett placed it as 25 in a similar list, commenting &quot;the third Discworld game finally shed its predecessors&#x27; fixation with being as much Python as Pratchett&quot;. Andy Kelly, also writing for &quot;PC Gamer&quot;, called it one of the 20 best detective games. Kelly commented: &quot;Its shadowy, rain-soaked setting, Ankh-Morpork, is brilliantly atmospheric, and it manages to both mock film noir and be a loving homage to it.&quot;

Dave Gilbert called &quot;Discworld Noir&quot; one of his favourite adventure games, and called it &quot;one of [his] biggest inspirations&quot;. Gilbert would eventually create the &quot;Oz noir&quot; adventure game &quot;Emerald City Confidential&quot; (2009). Kate Berens and Geoff Howard&#x27;s &quot;The Rough Guide to Videogaming&quot; includes &quot;Discworld Noir&quot; as one of its recommended games. Noting the heavy number of conversations, they felt the game played &quot;more like an interactive novel at times&quot; but praised the dialogue and called Ankh-Morpork &quot;beautifully rendered&quot;.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="25" end="39" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375309" start="53" end="74" title="Perfect Entertainment" label="Perfect Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q527336" start="92" end="106" title="GT Interactive" label="GT Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="127" end="142" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257270" start="166" end="175" title="Discworld" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="223" end="243" title="private investigator" label="private investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="373" end="382" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q132689" start="435" end="445" title="Casablanca (film)" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q221462" start="462" end="480" title="The Maltese Falcon (1941 film)" label="The Maltese Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="512" end="529" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="557" end="568" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="866" end="872" title="Player character" label="player"/>
<link wikidata="Q859965" start="1444" end="1449" title="Item (game terminology)" label="items"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="2009" end="2017" title="werewolf" label="werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202968" start="2181" end="2198" title="PlayStation Mouse" label="PlayStation Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="2467" end="2482" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328330" start="2633" end="2651" title="hardboiled fiction" label="hardboiled fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q794912" start="2695" end="2707" title="dark fantasy" label="dark fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448865" start="2712" end="2731" title="Lovecraftian horror" label="Lovecraftian horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q132689" start="2810" end="2820" title="Casablanca (film)" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="2889" end="2899" title="Dissonance (music)" label="dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="2950" end="2954" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="2959" end="2964" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="3074" end="3089" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320632" start="3180" end="3203" title="Ankh-Morpork City Watch" label="Ankh-Morpork City Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q253295" start="3228" end="3237" title="Discworld (world)" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="3260" end="3280" title="private investigator" label="private investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328564" start="3300" end="3312" title="Ankh-Morpork" label="Ankh-Morpork"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="3352" end="3376" title="Detective fiction" label="private detective figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359632" start="3446" end="3453" title="PC Zone" label="PC Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533737" start="3476" end="3485" title="Sam Spade" label="Sam Spade"/>
<link wikidata="Q623732" start="3490" end="3504" title="Philip Marlowe" label="Philip Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="3599" end="3611" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q514782" start="3890" end="3905" title="Sam Vimes" label="Commander Vimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089569" start="4216" end="4228" title="Feet of Clay (novel)" label="Feet of Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084358" start="4245" end="4250" title="Jingo (novel)" label="Jingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q253295" start="5850" end="5855" title="Dwarf (Discworld)" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228607" start="9403" end="9412" title="Discworld (video game)" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9436" end="9471" title="Discworld II: Missing Presumed...!?" label="Discworld II: Missing Presumed...!?"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="9531" end="9541" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q483132" start="9546" end="9556" title="Windows 98" label="Windows 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q527336" start="9558" end="9572" title="GT Interactive" label="GT Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996868" start="9854" end="9862" title="Pyramids (novel)" label="Pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="10070" end="10079" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239264" start="10443" end="10455" title="pre-rendered" label="pre-rendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="10456" end="10458" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816476" start="10467" end="10476" title="Real-time computer graphics" label="Real-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194763" start="10849" end="10851" title="2D computer graphics" label="2D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322261" start="10904" end="10914" title="Rob Brydon" label="Rob Brydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375748" start="10916" end="10928" title="Kate Robbins" label="Kate Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998648" start="10930" end="10945" title="Robert Llewelyn" label="Robert Llewelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232106" start="10951" end="10963" title="Nigel Planer" label="Nigel Planer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340318" start="11164" end="11172" title="Rob Lord (musician)" label="Rob Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="11743" end="11748" title="Patch (computing)" label="patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="11857" end="11863" title="ported" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="11871" end="11882" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12538706" start="11920" end="11930" title="Display resolution" label="resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="11985" end="11989" title="CD-ROM" label="disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q506391" start="12306" end="12321" title="Adventure Gamers" label="Adventure Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359632" start="12430" end="12437" title="PC Zone" label="PC Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315737" start="12535" end="12549" title="Just Adventure" label="Just Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283786" start="12594" end="12605" title="PC Gamer UK" label="PC Gamer UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118716" start="13283" end="13295" title="PC PowerPlay" label="PC PowerPlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q281243" start="15487" end="15496" title="Eurogamer" label="Eurogamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q773625" start="16677" end="16689" title="Dave Gilbert (game designer)" label="Dave Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918164" start="16865" end="16867" title="Land of Oz" label="Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370424" start="16900" end="16925" title="Emerald City Confidential" label="Emerald City Confidential"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816437" wikidata="Q7056656" url="?curid=816437" title="North Shore (Massachusetts)">
<text>The North Shore is a region in the U.S. state of Massachusetts, loosely defined as the sea coast between Boston and New Hampshire. Its counterpart is the South Shore region extending south and east of Boston. 

The North Shore is a significant historical, cultural, and economic region of Massachusetts. The southern North Shore includes historic towns that are now part of the Boston metropolis. The Salem witch trials took place here. At the northern end, the Merrimack Valley was an important center of the Industrial Revolution in the United States. The North Shore includes a number of places that are significant in the literary and cultural history of the United States.

The North Shore landscape includes seaports, fishing villages, and rocky coastline dotted with marshes and wetlands, as well as beaches and natural harbors. Cape Ann is the largest promontory.

==Definition==
The North Shore has no fixed definition as a region. It may include only those communities between Boston and Cape Ann, as defined by the Metropolitan Area Planning Council (whose purview does not go beyond Greater Boston); or the larger part of Essex County, including parts of the Merrimack Valley, as defined by the North Shore Chamber of Commerce. The Massachusetts Office of Coastal Zone Management, which defines regions in terms of watershed, refers to the North Shore as the coastal region of Massachusetts north of Boston stretching from Salisbury to Revere, including the inland city of Amesbury.

===Coastal===
North Shore of Massachusetts could be taken to mean the entire coast of Massachusetts from New Hampshire to Boston (listed in order, north-to-south):
* Salisbury
* Newburyport
* Newbury
* Rowley
* Ipswich
* Essex
* Rockport
* Gloucester
* Manchester-by-the-Sea
* Beverly
* Danvers
* Peabody
* Salem
* Marblehead
* Swampscott
* Nahant
* Lynn
* Saugus
* Revere
* Winthrop
===Economic===
The Boston Metropolitan Area Planning Council&#x27;s North Shore Task Force, a regional planning agency, defines the North Shore as also encompassing Cape Ann and several inland communities. When combined with the North Shore Chamber of Commerce&#x27;s definition of the region, the North Shore comprises the following cities and towns:
* Amesbury
* Beverly
* Boxford
* Danvers
* Essex
* Georgetown
* Gloucester
* Groveland
* Hamilton
* Haverhill
* Ipswich
* Lynn
* Lynnfield
* Manchester-by-the-Sea
* Marblehead
* Merrimac
* Middleton
* Nahant
* Newbury
* Newburyport
* Peabody
* Rockport
* Rowley
* Salem
* Salisbury
* Saugus
* Swampscott
* Topsfield
* Wakefield
* Wenham
* West Newbury
===Cultural===
The North Shore has historically been viewed as a wealthy, exclusive collection of towns and fishing villages, but also contains some working-class cities and suburbs of Boston. In 1893, &quot;The New York Times&quot; described the region as a notable summer destination for the socialites, politicians, and businessmen of New York and New England, dotted with hotels, cottages, and burgeoning gentlemen&#x27;s clubs. Salem, known worldwide as the location of the Salem witch trials; the working-class fishing city of Gloucester; and the region&#x27;s many beaches make it a popular tourist destination.

==History==
The North Shore communities have varied and rich histories: Gloucester was America&#x27;s first fishing community; Salem was the location of the infamous witch trials as well as one of the largest centers of shipping and sixth largest city in early America. The hysteria that led to the witch trials began in the part of Salem that is now Danvers. Lynn was once the center of the American shoe industry. Saugus is home to the first integrated ironworks in North America. Peabody had the largest concentration of tanneries in the world; and Beverly and Marblehead often dispute over which town was the birthplace of the American Navy. Newburyport was well known for producing clipper ships and for a brief time in history was the richest city in the Union; it is also the birthplace of the United States Coast Guard. Newburyport maintains the largest collection of Federal period commercial and residential architecture in the nation.

==Sites of interest==
* The Peabody Essex Museum: A museum with large collections of maritime artifacts and Asian art.
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Salem, Massachusetts
* The Salem Witch Museum
* Historic Downtown Salem
* The Salem Seaport
* The Saugus Iron Works
* The Swampscott Fish House: The oldest active fish house in the country.
* Newburyport&#x27;s historic district maintains the nation&#x27;s largest collection of Federal period architecture
* Historic Gloucester and Rockport Seaports
* North Shore Navigators collegiate-league baseball team
* The North Shore Music Theatre in Beverly, New England&#x27;s largest regional theater
* The Larcom Theatre in Beverly built in 1912 is the oldest, operating Vaudeville theatre in the region, also once home to Le Grand David.
* The Cabot Street Cinema Theatre in Beverly was home to Le Grand David, the world&#x27;s longest-running resident stage magic show, until 2013.
* Castle Hill in Ipswich
* Revere Beach, the first public beach in the United States, in Revere
* The Rebecca Nurse Homestead in Danvers, the only home of a victim of the Salem witch trials open to the public

==See also==
* Greater Boston
* Merrimack Valley
* South Shore (Massachusetts)

==References==
== Further reading ==
* Consolidates &quot;Boston&#x27;s North Shore&quot; (1978) and &quot;Boston&#x27;s Gold Coast&quot; (1981).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7056656" start="4" end="15" title="North Shore (Massachusetts)" label="North Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="35" end="45" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="49" end="62" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="105" end="111" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="116" end="129" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568432" start="154" end="165" title="South Shore (Massachusetts)" label="South Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="401" end="419" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242054" start="462" end="478" title="Merrimack Valley" label="Merrimack Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525708" start="510" end="552" title="Industrial Revolution in the United States" label="Industrial Revolution in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034267" start="836" end="844" title="Cape Ann" label="Cape Ann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034267" start="998" end="1006" title="Cape Ann" label="Cape Ann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190137" start="1095" end="1109" title="Greater Boston" label="Greater Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q54076" start="1134" end="1146" title="Essex County, Massachusetts" label="Essex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242054" start="1171" end="1187" title="Merrimack Valley" label="Merrimack Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="1327" end="1336" title="Drainage basin" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002947" start="1435" end="1444" title="Salisbury, Massachusetts" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q54154" start="1448" end="1454" title="Revere, Massachusetts" label="Revere"/>
<link wikidata="Q54176" start="1485" end="1493" title="Amesbury, Massachusetts" label="Amesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002947" start="1662" end="1671" title="Salisbury, Massachusetts" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q54134" start="1674" end="1685" title="Newburyport, Massachusetts" label="Newburyport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302285" start="1688" end="1695" title="Newbury, Massachusetts" label="Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302509" start="1698" end="1704" title="Rowley, Massachusetts" label="Rowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q376786" start="1707" end="1714" title="Ipswich, Massachusetts" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282019" start="1717" end="1722" title="Essex, Massachusetts" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079395" start="1725" end="1733" title="Rockport, Massachusetts" label="Rockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49156" start="1736" end="1746" title="Gloucester, Massachusetts" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q657748" start="1749" end="1770" title="Manchester-by-the-Sea, Massachusetts" label="Manchester-by-the-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q54138" start="1773" end="1780" title="Beverly, Massachusetts" label="Beverly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066487" start="1783" end="1790" title="Danvers, Massachusetts" label="Danvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q54136" start="1793" end="1800" title="Peabody, Massachusetts" label="Peabody"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="1803" end="1808" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q27416" start="1811" end="1821" title="Marblehead, Massachusetts" label="Marblehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086267" start="1824" end="1834" title="Swampscott, Massachusetts" label="Swampscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q665163" start="1837" end="1843" title="Nahant, Massachusetts" label="Nahant"/>
<link wikidata="Q49188" start="1846" end="1850" title="Lynn, Massachusetts" label="Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q257438" start="1853" end="1859" title="Saugus, Massachusetts" label="Saugus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54154" start="1862" end="1868" title="Revere, Massachusetts" label="Revere"/>
<link wikidata="Q54170" start="1871" end="1879" title="Winthrop, Massachusetts" label="Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034267" start="2045" end="2053" title="Cape Ann" label="Cape Ann"/>
<link wikidata="Q54176" start="2234" end="2242" title="Amesbury, Massachusetts" label="Amesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q54138" start="2245" end="2252" title="Beverly, Massachusetts" label="Beverly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418332" start="2255" end="2262" title="Boxford, Massachusetts" label="Boxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066487" start="2265" end="2272" title="Danvers, Massachusetts" label="Danvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282019" start="2275" end="2280" title="Essex, Massachusetts" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303624" start="2283" end="2293" title="Georgetown, Massachusetts" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q49156" start="2296" end="2306" title="Gloucester, Massachusetts" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547816" start="2309" end="2318" title="Groveland, Massachusetts" label="Groveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193968" start="2321" end="2329" title="Hamilton, Massachusetts" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q54132" start="2332" end="2341" title="Haverhill, Massachusetts" label="Haverhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q376786" start="2344" end="2351" title="Ipswich, Massachusetts" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q49188" start="2354" end="2358" title="Lynn, Massachusetts" label="Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q951779" start="2361" end="2370" title="Lynnfield, Massachusetts" label="Lynnfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q657748" start="2373" end="2394" title="Manchester, Massachusetts" label="Manchester-by-the-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27416" start="2397" end="2407" title="Marblehead, Massachusetts" label="Marblehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302316" start="2410" end="2418" title="Merrimac, Massachusetts" label="Merrimac"/>
<link wikidata="Q264512" start="2421" end="2430" title="Middleton, Massachusetts" label="Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q665163" start="2433" end="2439" title="Nahant, Massachusetts" label="Nahant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302285" start="2442" end="2449" title="Newbury, Massachusetts" label="Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q54134" start="2452" end="2463" title="Newburyport, Massachusetts" label="Newburyport"/>
<link wikidata="Q54136" start="2466" end="2473" title="Peabody, Massachusetts" label="Peabody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079395" start="2476" end="2484" title="Rockport, Massachusetts" label="Rockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302509" start="2487" end="2493" title="Rowley, Massachusetts" label="Rowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="2496" end="2501" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002947" start="2504" end="2513" title="Salisbury, Massachusetts" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q257438" start="2516" end="2522" title="Saugus, Massachusetts" label="Saugus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086267" start="2525" end="2535" title="Swampscott, Massachusetts" label="Swampscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302136" start="2538" end="2547" title="Topsfield, Massachusetts" label="Topsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426909" start="2550" end="2559" title="Wakefield, Massachusetts" label="Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418343" start="2562" end="2568" title="Wenham, Massachusetts" label="Wenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q576891" start="2571" end="2583" title="West Newbury, Massachusetts" label="West Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="3063" end="3081" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q49156" start="3276" end="3286" title="Gloucester, Massachusetts" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="3331" end="3336" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066487" start="3555" end="3562" title="Danvers, Massachusetts" label="Danvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49188" start="3564" end="3568" title="Lynn, Massachusetts" label="Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676" start="3605" end="3609" title="shoe" label="shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q257438" start="3620" end="3626" title="Saugus, Massachusetts" label="Saugus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427233" start="3642" end="3668" title="Saugus Iron Works National Historic Site" label="first integrated ironworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q54136" start="3687" end="3694" title="Peabody, Massachusetts" label="Peabody"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="3728" end="3737" title="Tanning (leather)" label="tanneries"/>
<link wikidata="Q54138" start="3756" end="3763" title="Beverly, Massachusetts" label="Beverly"/>
<link wikidata="Q27416" start="3768" end="3778" title="Marblehead, Massachusetts" label="Marblehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3835" end="3848" title="U.S. Navy" label="American Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54134" start="3850" end="3861" title="Newburyport, Massachusetts" label="Newburyport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="4005" end="4030" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373790" start="4179" end="4199" title="Peabody Essex Museum" label="Peabody Essex Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977372" start="4272" end="4341" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Salem, Massachusetts" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Salem, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4348" end="4366" title="Salem, Massachusetts#Witch-related tourism" label="Salem Witch Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303569" start="4378" end="4392" title="Downtown Salem District" label="Downtown Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404103" start="4399" end="4412" title="Salem Harbor" label="Salem Seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427233" start="4419" end="4436" title="Saugus Iron Works National Historic Site" label="Saugus Iron Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653392" start="4443" end="4464" title="Swampscott Fish House" label="Swampscott Fish House"/>
<link wikidata="Q54134" start="4513" end="4524" title="Newburyport" label="Newburyport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49156" start="4639" end="4649" title="Gloucester, Massachusetts" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079395" start="4654" end="4662" title="Rockport, Massachusetts" label="Rockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056699" start="4674" end="4696" title="North Shore Navigators" label="North Shore Navigators"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056698" start="4735" end="4760" title="North Shore Music Theatre" label="North Shore Music Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q54138" start="4764" end="4771" title="Beverly, Massachusetts" label="Beverly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309244" start="4800" end="4816" title="regional theater" label="regional theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488814" start="4823" end="4837" title="Larcom Theatre" label="Larcom Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506994" start="4940" end="4954" title="Le Grand David" label="Le Grand David"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015785" start="4962" end="4989" title="Cabot Street Cinema Theatre" label="Cabot Street Cinema Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q54138" start="4993" end="5000" title="Beverly, Massachusetts" label="Beverly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506994" start="5013" end="5027" title="Le Grand David" label="Le Grand David"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596819" start="5071" end="5082" title="stage magic" label="stage magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050132" start="5103" end="5114" title="Castle Hill (Ipswich, Massachusetts)" label="Castle Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301849" start="5199" end="5226" title="Rebecca Nurse Homestead" label="The Rebecca Nurse Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="5272" end="5290" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190137" start="5326" end="5340" title="Greater Boston" label="Greater Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242054" start="5343" end="5359" title="Merrimack Valley" label="Merrimack Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568432" start="5362" end="5389" title="South Shore (Massachusetts)" label="South Shore (Massachusetts)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816454" wikidata="Q356172" url="?curid=816454" title="Cap Anamur">
<text>Cap Anamur is a humanitarian organisation with the goal of helping refugees and displaced people worldwide.

In 1979, amidst the rising number of Vietnamese boat people fleeing Vietnam in unseaworthy crafts, Christel and Rupert Neudeck, along with a group of friends, formed the committee &quot;A ship for Vietnam&quot; to rescue the refugees. For the rescue mission, the group chartered the freighter &quot;Cap Anamur&quot;, named after the French designation for Cape Anamur, a cape on the Turkish Mediterranean coast near the city of Anamur that marks the southernmost point of Anatolia. The journeys of &quot;Cap Anamur&quot; (and her sister ships afterwards) were, against the predictions of many pundits a huge success: 10,375 boat people were rescued at sea and an additional 35,000 were medically treated.

==References==
==External links==
*Cap Anamur website 
*Cap Anamur website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q356172" start="0" end="10" title="Cap Anamur" label="Cap Anamur"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="29" end="41" title="organisation" label="organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="67" end="74" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="80" end="96" title="displaced people" label="displaced people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449297" start="146" end="168" title="Vietnamese boat people" label="Vietnamese boat people"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="177" end="184" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q96806" start="221" end="235" title="Rupert Neudeck" label="Rupert Neudeck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="295" end="313" title="A ship for Vietnam" label="A ship for Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030665" start="465" end="476" title="Cape Anamur" label="Cape Anamur"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="492" end="499" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="500" end="519" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q485575" start="537" end="543" title="Anamur" label="Anamur"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="581" end="589" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="702" end="708" title="Pundit (expert)" label="pundit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816457" wikidata="Q965475" url="?curid=816457" title="John Richardson (actor)">
<text>John Richardson (19 January 1934 – 5 January 2021) was an English actor who appeared in films from the late 1950s until the early 1990s. He was a male lead in Italian genre films, most notably Mario Bava&#x27;s &quot;Black Sunday&quot; (1960) with Barbara Steele, but he was best known for playing the love interest of Ursula Andress in &quot;She&quot; (1965) and then of Raquel Welch in &quot;One Million Years B.C.&quot; (1966).

==Career==
Richardson was born on 19 January 1934 in Worthing, West Sussex. He served in the British Merchant Navy during the Korean War. He initially had no desire to be an actor but when he left the service, his looks saw him receive an offer to appear in a play by a local amateur theatre group in his hometown. He enjoyed it and began to work for several repertory companies around Britain.

He was spotted by a talent scout from 20th Century Fox who put him under contract. This lasted for two years but he did little.

He had some small roles in film for the Rank Organisation, including &quot;A Night to Remember&quot; (1958), &quot;Sapphire&quot; (1959), and &quot;The 39 Steps&quot; (1959).

His first role of note was in the Italian gothic horror film, &quot;Black Sunday&quot; (1960), directed by Mario Bava, which starred fellow British actress Barbara Steele. Richardson stayed in Italy for a supporting role in the swashbuckler, &quot;Pirates of Tortuga&quot; (1961). Back in Britain, he had minor roles in &quot;Tender Is the Night&quot; (1962) and &quot;Lord Jim&quot; (1965).

===Leading man===

Richardson&#x27;s big breakthrough came when Ray Stark spotted him in the offices of Seven Arts Productions and cast him as the male lead in &quot;She&quot; (1965), which they were co-producing with Hammer Films. The film was a solid hit. Richardson was the only actor to reprise his role in the sequel, &quot;The Vengeance of She&quot; (1968), but that film was a flop.

Hammer and Seven Arts used Richardson again supporting another female star, this time Raquel Welch in &quot;One Million Years B.C.&quot; (1966). It was another big hit.

Returning to Italy, Richardson had the lead in the spaghetti Westerns, &quot;John the Bastard&quot; (1967) and &quot;Execution&quot; (1968), and a supporting role in &quot;On My Way to the Crusades, I Met a Girl Who...&quot; (1967).

In the late 1960s, he was considered for the role of James Bond in &quot;On Her Majesty&#x27;s Secret Service&quot; (1969) when Sean Connery first left the franchise, but he lost out to George Lazenby.

Richardson and his wife, English actress Martine Beswick, moved to Hollywood in 1968. Richardson had a supporting role in &quot;On a Clear Day You Can See Forever&quot; (1970) as a ne&#x27;er-do-well who is seduced by Barbra Streisand&#x27;s character Melinda but eventually abandons her.

Richardson and Beswick divorced in 1973. That year, Richardson based himself out of Italy once more and appeared in some &quot;giallo&quot; films: &quot;Torso&quot; (1973), &quot;Eyeball&quot; (1975), &quot;Reflections in Black&quot; (1975), &quot;Nine Guests for a Crime&quot; (1977), and &quot;Murder Obsession&quot; (1981). His other films of the period include; &quot;Duck in Orange Sauce&quot; (1975) a comedy and &quot;&quot; (1977) a science fiction movie.

==Death==
Richardson died from COVID-19 on 5 January 2021, at age 86, during the COVID-19 pandemic in England.

==Selected filmography==

*&quot;A Night to Remember&quot; (1958) - Valet (uncredited)
*&quot;Bachelor of Hearts&quot; (1958) - Robin
*&quot;Operation Amsterdam&quot; (1959) - Lt. Williams (uncredited)
*&quot;The 39 Steps&quot; (1959) - House Guest (uncredited)
*&quot;Sapphire&quot; (1959) - Student (uncredited)
*&quot;The Heart of a Man&quot; (1959) - Official (uncredited)
*&quot;Black Sunday&quot; (1960) - Dr. Andre Gorobec
*&quot;Pirates of Tortuga&quot; (1961) - Percy
*&quot;Tender is the Night&quot; (1962) - Young Man Being Photographed (uncredited)
*&quot;Lord Jim&quot; (1965) - The sailor (uncredited)
*&quot;She&quot; (1965) - Leo
*&quot;One Million Years B.C.&quot; (1966) - Tumak
*&quot;The Tough One&quot; (1966)
*&quot;On My Way to the Crusades, I Met a Girl Who...&quot; (1967) - Dragone
*&quot;John the Bastard&quot; (1967) - John Donald Tenorio
*&quot;A Nun at the Crossroads&quot; (1967) - Dr. Pierre Lemmon
*&quot;The Vengeance of She&quot; (1968) - Killikrates
*&quot;Execution&quot; (1968) - Bill Coler / John Coler
*&quot;A Candidate for a Killing&quot; (1969) - Nick Warfield / André Jarvis / Riquelli
*&quot;On a Clear Day You Can See Forever&quot; (1970) - Robert Tentrees
*&quot;Frankenstein &#x27;80&quot; (1972) - Karl Schein
*&quot;Torso&quot; (1973) - Franz
*&quot;Anna, quel particolare piacere&quot; (1973) - Lorenzo Viotto
*&quot;The Tree with Pink Leaves&quot; (1974) - Andrea (Marco&#x27;s father)
*&quot;La bellissima estate&quot; (1974) - Vittorio
*&quot;Eyeball&quot; (1975) - Mark Burton
*&quot;Reflections in Black&quot; (1975) - Inspector Lavina
*&quot;Duck in Orange Sauce&quot; (1975) - John Hardy
*&quot;Four Billion in Four Minutes&quot; (1976) - Francesco Vitale
*&quot;Nine Guests for a Crime&quot; (1977) - Lorenzo
*&quot;&quot; (1977) - Captain Fred Hamilton
*&quot;Canne mozze&quot; (1977) - Michele
*&quot;Battle of the Stars&quot; (1978) - Captain Mike Layton
*&quot;Happy Birthday, Harry&quot; (1980) - Harry Petersen
*&quot;Paradiso Blu&quot; (1980) - Kris
*&quot;Murder Syndrome&quot; (1981) - Oliver
*&quot;Scuola di ladri - Parte seconda&quot; (1987) - Il ricco gondoliere
*&quot;The Church&quot; (1989) - Architect
*&quot;Milner&quot; (1994, TV Movie) - Edward (final film role)
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q965475" start="0" end="15" title="John Richardson (actor)" label="John Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="167" end="177" title="Film genre" label="genre film"/>
<link wikidata="Q55438" start="193" end="203" title="Mario Bava" label="Mario Bava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216566" start="217" end="229" title="Black Sunday (1960 film)" label="Black Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q266240" start="248" end="262" title="Barbara Steele" label="Barbara Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q211111" start="319" end="333" title="Ursula Andress" label="Ursula Andress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614501" start="343" end="346" title="She (1965 film)" label="She"/>
<link wikidata="Q229545" start="372" end="384" title="Raquel Welch" label="Raquel Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q644149" start="394" end="416" title="One Million Years B.C." label="One Million Years B.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q671348" start="485" end="493" title="Worthing" label="Worthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23287" start="495" end="506" title="West Sussex" label="West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q14970920" start="525" end="546" title="Merchant Navy (United Kingdom)" label="British Merchant Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="558" end="568" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893282" start="791" end="800" title="repertory" label="repertory"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="866" end="882" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535788" start="997" end="1014" title="Rank Organisation" label="Rank Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q633614" start="1032" end="1051" title="A Night to Remember (1958 film)" label="A Night to Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354838" start="1072" end="1080" title="Sapphire (film)" label="Sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q288361" start="1105" end="1117" title="The 39 Steps (1959 film)" label="The 39 Steps"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="1175" end="1188" title="gothic horror" label="gothic horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216566" start="1201" end="1213" title="Black Sunday (1960 film)" label="Black Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595584" start="1338" end="1353" title="supporting role" label="supporting role"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194437" start="1361" end="1373" title="swashbuckler" label="swashbuckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q206080" start="1381" end="1399" title="Pirates of Tortuga" label="Pirates of Tortuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058934" start="1459" end="1478" title="Tender Is the Night (film)" label="Tender Is the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691958" start="1502" end="1510" title="Lord Jim (1965 film)" label="Lord Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q466254" start="1590" end="1599" title="Ray Stark" label="Ray Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298993" start="1630" end="1652" title="Seven Arts Productions" label="Seven Arts Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614501" start="1692" end="1695" title="She (1965 film)" label="She"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="1744" end="1756" title="Hammer Films" label="Hammer Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="1841" end="1847" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208439" start="1855" end="1875" title="The Vengeance of She" label="The Vengeance of She"/>
<link wikidata="Q212781" start="2138" end="2156" title="spaghetti Westerns" label="spaghetti Westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702250" start="2164" end="2180" title="John the Bastard (film)" label="John the Bastard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232059" start="2204" end="2213" title="Execution (1968 film)" label="Execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821761" start="2259" end="2305" title="On My Way to the Crusades, I Met a Girl Who..." label="On My Way to the Crusades, I Met a Girl Who..."/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="2374" end="2384" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q107894" start="2394" end="2430" title="On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service (film)" label="On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="2449" end="2461" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q205599" start="2507" end="2521" title="George Lazenby" label="George Lazenby"/>
<link wikidata="Q434602" start="2565" end="2580" title="Martine Beswick" label="Martine Beswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702903" start="2652" end="2686" title="On a Clear Day You Can See Forever (film)" label="On a Clear Day You Can See Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="2742" end="2758" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332055" start="2941" end="2947" title="giallo" label="giallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216651" start="2967" end="2972" title="Torso (1973 film)" label="Torso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532985" start="2993" end="3000" title="Eyeball (film)" label="Eyeball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796278" start="3021" end="3041" title="Reflections in Black" label="Reflections in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879030" start="3062" end="3085" title="Nine Guests for a Crime" label="Nine Guests for a Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747088" start="3110" end="3126" title="Murder Obsession" label="Murder Obsession"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283420" start="3186" end="3206" title="Duck in Orange Sauce" label="Duck in Orange Sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="3310" end="3318" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q87743855" start="3360" end="3388" title="COVID-19 pandemic in England" label="COVID-19 pandemic in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q633614" start="3424" end="3443" title="A Night to Remember (1958 film)" label="A Night to Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246984" start="3485" end="3503" title="Bachelor of Hearts" label="Bachelor of Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605525" start="3532" end="3551" title="Operation Amsterdam" label="Operation Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q288361" start="3600" end="3612" title="The 39 Steps (1959 film)" label="The 39 Steps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354838" start="3660" end="3668" title="Sapphire (film)" label="Sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739197" start="3712" end="3730" title="The Heart of a Man" label="The Heart of a Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216566" start="3775" end="3787" title="Black Sunday (1960 film)" label="Black Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q206080" start="3828" end="3846" title="Pirates of Tortuga" label="Pirates of Tortuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058934" start="3875" end="3894" title="Tender is the Night (1962 film)" label="Tender is the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691958" start="3959" end="3967" title="Lord Jim (1965 film)" label="Lord Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614501" start="4014" end="4017" title="She (1965 film)" label="She"/>
<link wikidata="Q644149" start="4044" end="4066" title="One Million Years B.C." label="One Million Years B.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q24263056" start="4095" end="4108" title="The Tough One" label="The Tough One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821761" start="4129" end="4175" title="On My Way to the Crusades, I Met a Girl Who..." label="On My Way to the Crusades, I Met a Girl Who..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1702250" start="4206" end="4222" title="John the Bastard (film)" label="John the Bastard"/>
<link wikidata="Q30694274" start="4265" end="4288" title="A Nun at the Crossroads" label="A Nun at the Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208439" start="4329" end="4349" title="The Vengeance of She" label="The Vengeance of She"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232059" start="4384" end="4393" title="Execution (1968 film)" label="Execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q26125718" start="4440" end="4465" title="A Candidate for a Killing" label="A Candidate for a Killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702903" start="4528" end="4562" title="On a Clear Day You Can See Forever (film)" label="On a Clear Day You Can See Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082882" start="4601" end="4622" title="Frankenstein &amp;#x27;80" label="Frankenstein &amp;#x27;80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216651" start="4657" end="4662" title="Torso (1973 film)" label="Torso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617642" start="4691" end="4721" title="Anna, quel particolare piacere" label="Anna, quel particolare piacere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821437" start="4836" end="4856" title="La bellissima estate" label="La bellissima estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532985" start="4888" end="4895" title="Eyeball (film)" label="Eyeball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796278" start="4930" end="4950" title="Reflections in Black" label="Reflections in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283420" start="4990" end="5010" title="Duck in Orange Sauce" label="Duck in Orange Sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q84338694" start="5044" end="5072" title="Four Billion in Four Minutes" label="Four Billion in Four Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879030" start="5112" end="5135" title="Nine Guests for a Crime" label="Nine Guests for a Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q17593311" start="5211" end="5222" title="Canne mozze" label="Canne mozze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747088" start="5414" end="5429" title="Murder Syndrome" label="Murder Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953303" start="5459" end="5490" title="Scuola di ladri - Parte seconda" label="Scuola di ladri - Parte seconda"/>
<link wikidata="Q378754" start="5533" end="5543" title="The Church (1989 film)" label="The Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816458" wikidata="Q6833522" url="?curid=816458" title="Michael Phelps (disambiguation)">
<text>Michael Phelps (born 1985) is an American retired Olympic swimmer.

Michael Phelps may also refer to:

*Michael E. Phelps (born 1939), American co-developer of positron emission tomography
*Mike Phelps (born 1961), American basketball player
*Michael Phelps (born 1988), racecar driver</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39562" start="0" end="14" title="Michael Phelps" label="Michael Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q353671" start="104" end="121" title="Michael E. Phelps" label="Michael E. Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636850" start="190" end="201" title="Mike Phelps" label="Mike Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q120493363" start="243" end="257" title="Michael Phelps (racing driver)" label="Michael Phelps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816492" wikidata="Q7727667" url="?curid=816492" title="The Correlation between Relatives on the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance">
<text>&quot;The Correlation between Relatives on the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance&quot; is a scientific paper by Ronald Fisher which was published in the &quot;Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh&quot; in 1918, (volume 52, pages 399–433). 

In it, Fisher puts forward the &quot;infinitesimal model&quot;, a genetics conceptual model showing that continuous variation amongst phenotypic traits could be the result of Mendelian inheritance. The paper also contains the first use of the statistical term &quot;variance&quot;. It is considered the foundation of quantitative genetics.

== Background ==

Mendelian inheritance was rediscovered in 1900. However, there were differences of opinion as to the variation that natural selection acted upon. The biometric school, led by Karl Pearson followed Charles Darwin&#x27;s idea that small differences were important for evolution. The Mendelian school, led by William Bateson, however thought that Gregor Mendel&#x27;s work gave an evolutionary mechanism with large differences. Joan Box, Fisher&#x27;s biographer and daughter states in her 1978 book, &quot;The Life of a Scientist&quot; that Fisher, then a student, had resolved this problem in 1911.

Fisher had originally submitted his paper (then entitled &quot;The correlation to be expected between relatives on the supposition of Mendelian inheritance&quot;) to the Royal Society of London, to be published in their Transactions. The two referees, the biologist R. C. Punnett and the statistician Karl Pearson, believed that the paper contained areas they were unable to judge, due to lack of expertise, and expressed some reservations. Though the paper was not rejected, Fisher carried on a feud with Pearson from 1917 onwards, and instead sent the paper via J. Arthur Thomson to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, which published it in its &quot;Transactions&quot;.

== Model ==

Fisher defined his new term variance, as the square of the standard deviation, because of the manner in which variances of independent random variables may be added. He noted the continuous variation in human characters.

== References ==

== Notes ==
* Box, Joan Fisher (1978) &quot;R. A. Fisher: The Life of a Scientist&quot;, New York: Wiley, .
* Fisher, R.A. &quot;Collected Papers of R.A. Fisher&quot; (1971–1974). Five Volumes. University of Adelaide.
* Moran, PAP and Smith, C.A.B. (1966) &quot;Commentary on R.A. Fisher&#x27;s paper &#x27;On the Correlation Between Relatives On the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance&#x27;&quot;. &quot;Eugenics Laboratory Memoirs&quot; XLI pp62 (Cambridge University Press)

== External links ==
*The University of Adelaide has made the original available in pdf format: </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7727667" start="0" end="89" title="The Correlation between Relatives on the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance" label="&amp;quot;The Correlation between Relatives on the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="95" end="105" title="science" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q216723" start="115" end="128" title="Ronald Fisher" label="Ronald Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467" start="182" end="208" title="Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="Royal Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793074" start="291" end="310" title="infinitesimal model" label="infinitesimal model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="320" end="328" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623243" start="329" end="345" title="conceptual model" label="conceptual model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211967" start="388" end="404" title="phenotypic trait" label="phenotypic trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="429" end="450" title="Mendelian inheritance" label="Mendelian inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="497" end="508" title="statistics" label="statistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="520" end="528" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q550479" start="571" end="592" title="quantitative genetics" label="quantitative genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="613" end="634" title="Mendelian inheritance" label="Mendelian inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="729" end="746" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q214746" start="763" end="772" title="biometry" label="biometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q310794" start="788" end="800" title="Karl Pearson" label="Karl Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="810" end="824" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="879" end="888" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q297302" start="919" end="934" title="William Bateson" label="William Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37970" start="957" end="970" title="Gregor Mendel" label="Gregor Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="1382" end="1405" title="Royal Society of London" label="Royal Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q339842" start="1478" end="1491" title="R. C. Punnett" label="R. C. Punnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q310794" start="1513" end="1525" title="Karl Pearson" label="Karl Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741203" start="1776" end="1793" title="J. Arthur Thomson" label="J. Arthur Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467" start="1801" end="1827" title="Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="Royal Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="1923" end="1931" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="1954" end="1972" title="standard deviation" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="2018" end="2029" title="Independence (probability theory)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="2030" end="2045" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="2098" end="2103" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057154" start="2370" end="2383" title="Cedric Smith (statistician)" label="Smith, C.A.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q15574" start="2641" end="2663" title="University of Adelaide" label="University of Adelaide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816495" wikidata="Q3815276" url="?curid=816495" title="Kim Ashfield">
<text>Kim Ashfield (born 5 January 1959) is a Welsh former model and beauty pageant titleholder who was awarded the title of Miss United Kingdom 1980. As Miss Wales, she competed in Miss Universe 1980. As Miss United Kingdom, she placed as the 4th runner-up in Miss World 1980.

==Pageants==
Ashfield won the Miss Wales title early in 1980 and went on to represent Wales at Miss Universe 1980 on 8 July in Seoul, where she was unplaced. She then won the Miss United Kingdom title. 1st runner-up was Nicky Poole and 2nd runner-up was that years Miss England, Julie Duckworth. Ashfield was only the fourth Welsh woman to win the Miss UK title, after Rosemarie Frankland in 1961, Helen Morgan in 1974, both of whom went on to win the Miss World title and Elizabeth Jones in 1978 (6th at Miss World). On 13 November at Miss World 1980 in London, Ashfield became the third Welsh woman to reach the top five of the Miss World contest. The following years Miss United Kingdom, Michelle Donnelly, was also Welsh and also placed fifth at Miss World 1981. It would be over thirty years until a Welsh contestant returned to the top five, when Sophie Moulds was 1st runner-up at Miss World 2012.

==Filmography==
*&quot;A View to a Kill&quot; (1985) – The Girl

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3815276" start="0" end="12" title="Kim Ashfield" label="Kim Ashfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275696" start="119" end="138" title="Miss United Kingdom" label="Miss United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859076" start="148" end="158" title="Miss Wales" label="Miss Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q276821" start="176" end="194" title="Miss Universe 1980" label="Miss Universe 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466738" start="255" end="270" title="Miss World 1980" label="Miss World 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q276821" start="368" end="386" title="Miss Universe 1980" label="Miss Universe 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="400" end="405" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859083" start="538" end="550" title="Miss England" label="Miss England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663895" start="642" end="661" title="Rosemarie Frankland" label="Rosemarie Frankland"/>
<link wikidata="Q773732" start="671" end="683" title="Helen Morgan (Miss World)" label="Helen Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466738" start="809" end="824" title="Miss World 1980" label="Miss World 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q932590" start="1023" end="1038" title="Miss World 1981" label="Miss World 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352891" start="1161" end="1176" title="Miss World 2012" label="Miss World 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q332368" start="1202" end="1218" title="A View to a Kill" label="A View to a Kill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816502" wikidata="Q7883124" url="?curid=816502" title="Under officer">
<text>Under officer is an appointment held by the most senior Officer cadets at some Commonwealth officer training establishments such as the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst and in University Officers&#x27; Training Corps in the United Kingdom.

It is also a cadet rank used in some Commonwealth youth cadet forces, where it is typically the most senior rank a cadet can hold. In cadet forces it is commonly styled cadet under officer.

==Australia==
The Royal Military College, Duntroon uses the appointments of senior under officer and under officer for senior staff cadets.

In the Australian Army Cadets and Australian Air Force Cadets, the rank of cadet under officer (CUO) is the highest cadet rank. They are saluted and addressed as &quot;Sir&quot; or &quot;Ma&#x27;am&quot; by their subordinates, but not by adult officers or instructors or members of the Australian Defence Force.

AAC cadet under officers may be assigned as national, regional, or battalion under officer, as quartermaster, or as the commander of a company or platoon. The rank badge is a lozenge, which contains 26 chevrons. The national cadet under officer has red in the centre of the lozenge. Regional cadet under officers have blue in the centre of the lozenge. AAFC cadet under officers can only be assigned as the squadron under officer.

To become a cadet under officer, a cadet must have completed the senior leaders course module two, otherwise known as the CUO/WO course, often held either at a mid or end of year session. The course runs for one week on a military base, and during this course a prospective cadet under officer will learn platoon and company level command. To gain entry to the course the cadet must have successfully completed the senior leaders course module one or the sergeant course, which entitles them to bear ranks up to staff sergeant.

The insignia for an Australian Air Force Cadets (AAFC) cadet under officer is a thick white stripe.

To achieve the rank of cadet under officer, an AAFC cadet sergeant, cadet flight sergeant or cadet warrant officer must complete the cadet under officer course, which typically takes three weeks at a Royal Australian Air Force base in their home state. Upon successful completion of the cadet under officer course, cadet under officers are given full officer privileges, which includes the right to use the officers&#x27; mess on military establishments.

==India==
The Indian National Cadet Corps appoints one senior under officer and three junior under officers in every company. The Indian Military Academy and Officers Training Academy gentlemen cadets have similar appointments.

==New Zealand==
Under officer (UO) was also a rank in the New Zealand Air Training Corps and the New Zealand Cadet Corps. In 2012, the rank was also introduced into the New Zealand Sea Cadet Corps, replacing master cadet. It ranked between cadet warrant officer and ensign NZCF, pilot officer NZCF or second lieutenant NZCF, thus making it the highest rank a cadet could reach, although not actually itself a cadet rank. Under officers were normally aged between 17 and 21, and to be eligible for a commission one had to be at least 20 years of age. Under officers were cadets who had received the necessary training and had the desire to become NZCF officers. Hence, under officers were treated as understudy officers. There were two under officers&#x27; courses run each year. They performed roles similar to commissioned officers, but did not have the same legal responsibilities and were not saluted, but were addressed as &quot;Sir&quot; or &quot;Ma&#x27;am&quot;. Cadet under officers wore insignia similar to that worn by officer cadets, except that the thin blue braid was replaced by a piece of NCO chevron cloth. This emphasised their official status as cadets rather than adult leaders.

To become an under officer, cadets were required to:
*Spend 6 months at the minimum rank of staff sergeant/flight sergeant
*Have completed at least three years of cadet Forces training
*Have successfully completed the senior NCO course
*Be at least 17 years of age
*Have the desire, commitment and potential to become an NZCF officer
*Be recommended by their unit commander and have the approval of AC CFTSU.

One of the more commonly used locations for the under officer course was the Royal New Zealand Police College, located in Porirua. This location presented the opportunity for NZCF students and staff to interact with the New Zealand Police and use their equipment. The last RNZPC course was held on 20–29 January 2017. The last under officer course was held at RNZAF Woodbourne on 6–15 July 2018.

Consultation for the potential removal of the rank began in 2018 with the area warrant officers talking to under officers and warrant officers around the country to seek opinions regarding how under officers were utilised on a local level. NZCF officers who had recently been UOs were also polled for an opinion. The result of that was that, in 2019, HQ NZCF announced their intention to remove the rank completely from service, to be replaced by the officer cadet rank. The officer cadet rank had traditionally been used solely on commissioning courses to give personnel a shared rank and equalise personnel from the two different methods of commissioned (serving cadets and direct entry personnel).

In 2020, the rank of under officer was disestablished and its responsibilities passed on to the rank of officer cadet, which changed the purpose of officer cadet from being an intermediate rank given to those on NZCF commissioning courses. In April 2021, the last under officer graduated from the NZCF Officer Commissioning Course. The rank of officer cadet is now given to all personnel who are intending to commission into the NZCF, giving direct entry candidates the opportunity to practise being in uniform before attending the course.

==Pakistan==
The Army Medical College uses the appointments of company senior under officer and company junior under officer for senior cadets of each of the six companies, and two appointments of battalion senior under officer and battalion junior under officer.

==United Kingdom==
Under officer is an appointment held by senior officer cadets at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst (RMAS) and in the University Officers&#x27; Training Corps (UOTC). There are two separate appointments: junior under officer (JUO) and senior under officer (SUO). They are usually addressed as &quot;JUO&quot; or &quot;SUO&quot; as appropriate, but are not saluted as they do not hold the King&#x27;s commission. RMAS typically appoints two JUOs per platoon in the final term of the commissioning course. At RMAS and in the UOTCs, JUOs wear an Austrian knot above a single bar on their rank slide and SUOs wear an Austrian knot above two bars.

Cadet under officer is the highest rank that can be held by cadets in the Combined Cadet Force and Army Cadet Force. Unlike in the British Army, cadet under officer is a rank in the cadet force rather than an appointment. The use of the term in CCF contingents is inconsistent, with some having JUOs and sometimes also SUOs, and others simply having under officers. The ACF has the single appointment of cadet under officer (CUO). The ACF has the single appointment of cadet under officer (CUO). The rank badge is a white bar on the rank slide.

==Gallery==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7883124" start="0" end="13" title="Under officer" label="Under officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497929" start="56" end="70" title="Officer cadet" label="Officer cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="79" end="91" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q575618" start="136" end="168" title="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst" label="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q10607900" start="176" end="216" title="University Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="University Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q124097592" start="291" end="309" title="Cadets (youth program)" label="youth cadet forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171074" start="450" end="482" title="Royal Military College, Duntroon" label="Royal Military College, Duntroon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="558" end="569" title="staff cadet" label="staff cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823829" start="580" end="602" title="Australian Army Cadets" label="Australian Army Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823800" start="607" end="634" title="Australian Air Force Cadets" label="Australian Air Force Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q625657" start="859" end="883" title="Australian Defence Force" label="Australian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q975834" start="981" end="994" title="quartermaster" label="quartermaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q26935196" start="1088" end="1095" title="chevron (insignia)" label="chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="1773" end="1781" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337825" start="1830" end="1844" title="staff sergeant" label="staff sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459333" start="2022" end="2037" title="flight sergeant" label="flight sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="2047" end="2062" title="warrant officer" label="warrant officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="2148" end="2174" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536466" start="2425" end="2445" title="National Cadet Corps (India)" label="National Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595639" start="2534" end="2557" title="Indian Military Academy" label="Indian Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079478" start="2562" end="2587" title="Officers Training Academy" label="Officers Training Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015196" start="2691" end="2721" title="New Zealand Air Training Corps" label="New Zealand Air Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259485" start="2730" end="2753" title="New Zealand Cadet Corps" label="New Zealand Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064028" start="2802" end="2829" title="New Zealand Sea Cadet Corps" label="New Zealand Sea Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="2879" end="2894" title="warrant officer" label="warrant officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="2899" end="2905" title="Ensign (rank)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194476" start="2912" end="2925" title="pilot officer" label="pilot officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="2934" end="2951" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="3737" end="3740" title="Non-commissioned officer" label="NCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337825" start="3924" end="3938" title="staff sergeant" label="staff sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459333" start="3939" end="3954" title="flight sergeant" label="flight sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374587" start="4319" end="4351" title="Royal New Zealand Police College" label="Royal New Zealand Police College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015773" start="4364" end="4371" title="Porirua" label="Porirua"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063956" start="4462" end="4480" title="New Zealand Police" label="New Zealand Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277289" start="4602" end="4618" title="RNZAF Base Woodbourne" label="RNZAF Woodbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794177" start="5899" end="5919" title="Army Medical College" label="Army Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497929" start="6213" end="6226" title="officer cadet" label="officer cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q575618" start="6235" end="6267" title="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst" label="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q10607900" start="6286" end="6326" title="University Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="University Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q60918" start="6556" end="6578" title="Commission (document)" label="King&amp;#x27;s commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619558" start="6711" end="6724" title="Austrian knot" label="Austrian knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q10423740" start="6753" end="6763" title="rank slide" label="rank slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q731977" start="6886" end="6906" title="Combined Cadet Force" label="Combined Cadet Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781646" start="6911" end="6927" title="Army Cadet Force" label="Army Cadet Force"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816511" wikidata="Q125914664" url="?curid=816511" title="Code (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[code]] is a rule for converting a piece of information into another object or action, not necessarily of the same sort.

Code may also refer to:
==Computing==

* Code (metadata), data elements whose allowable values can be represented as enumerated lists
* Code point, in numerical value used in character encoding
* Code.org, a non-profit organization and website that encourages U.S. school students to learn computer science
* Coding theory, branch of mathematics and computer science dealing with data transmission
* Machine code, a sequence of instructions to a processor unit
* Source code, a sequence of instructions written in some human-readable computer programming language
* Bytecode, a sequence of instructions interpreted by software
* , an HTML element

==Science and technology==
* Code (coding theory), a subset of cardinality at least two of a Hamming space
* Code (cryptography), device for hiding the meaning of a message
* Code (semiotics), device to carry information in a verbal and/or nonverbal form
* Code (set theory), set with a particular isomorphism to another set
* Barcode, an optical, machine-readable representation of a numeric code that identifies the object to which it is attached
* Baudot code, used in telegraphy
* Diagnosis code, used to translate medical conditions into statistical codes, also used for the purpose of health care planning and reimbursement
* Encoding (memory), storage and recalling of information by organisms
* Genetic code, a correspondence between the structures of messenger RNA and proteins
* Hospital emergency codes, used in hospitals worldwide to alert staff to various emergencies
* Morse code, a method with which humans can transmit letters using only short and long pulses
* Nomenclature codes, rulebooks of scientific naming convention
* Serial code or serial number

==Society and law==
* Code (law), body of law written and enforced by a sovereign state
** Legal code (municipal), a body of law written by a regional or local governmental entity
* Building code, set of rules that specify the minimum standards for constructed objects 
* Code name, a word or name used to refer to another name, word, project or person
* Ethical code, adopted by a profession, by a governmental or quasi-governmental organ, or by a trade group or other organization
* Code Parish in Latvia

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Films===
* &quot;The Code&quot; (2001 film), 2001 Linux documentary
* &quot;The Code&quot; (2002 film), French film
* &quot;Thick as Thieves&quot; (2009 film) or &quot;The Code&quot;, 2009 heist film

===Literature===
* &quot;Code&quot; (novel), a 2013 novel by Kathy Reichs
* &quot;&quot;, a 1999 book by Charles Petzold
* &quot;Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace&quot;, a 1999 book by Lawrence Lessig
** &quot;&quot;, a 2006 update to Lessig&#x27;s 1999 book 
* The Code (novel), a novel in the Nick Carter-Killmaster series

===Music===
* Code (band), English black metal band
* Codes (band), Irish indie electronic band
* The Code (band), ska punk band
* &quot;Code&quot; (album), a 1987 album by Cabaret Voltaire
* &quot;The Code&quot; (album), a 2016 album by Young Noble &amp; Deuce Deuce, or the title song
* &quot;The Code&quot; (EP), an EP by Monsta X
* &quot;U;Nee Code&quot; or &quot;Code&quot;, the 2003 debut album by Korean pop singer U;Nee
* &quot;The Code&quot; (King Von song), 2020
* &quot;Code&quot; (song), a 2022 song by Offset and Moneybagg Yo
* &quot;The Code&quot; (Nemo song), a 2024 song by Nemo

===Television===
* &quot;The Code&quot; (Australian TV series), a 2014–2016 Australian political drama
* &quot;The Code&quot; (British TV programme), a 2011 British mathematics documentary series from BBC2
* &quot;The Code&quot; (American TV series), a 2019 American military legal drama
* &quot;The Code&quot; (game show), British game show
* &quot;The Code&quot; (&quot;Smart Guy&quot;), a 1997 episode of &quot;Smart Guy&quot;
* &quot;The Code&quot; (&quot;The Amazing World of Gumball&quot;), a 2016 episode of &quot;The Amazing World of Gumball&quot;
* &quot;&quot;, 2016 South Korean TV series
* &quot;The Code: Crime and Justice&quot;, a 2007 Australian legal documentary program
* The Code (&quot;Fear the Walking Dead&quot;), an episode of &quot;Fear the Walking Dead&quot;

===Video games===
* &quot;Code&quot; (video game), a puzzle video game
* Konami Code, a cheat code which appears in mainly Konami video games

===Other uses in arts, entertainment, and media===
* Code (audio standard), or ΧΟΔΕ, high-fidelity audio disc brand developed by T-Bone Burnett
* Motion Picture Production Code or Hays Code, the voluntary US films censorship guidelines from 1930 to 1968

==Sports and hobbies==
* Code, any one of the distinct games known as football
* Code, a unit of scale in model railroading
* Rugby codes, distinguishing between rugby league and rugby union

==See also==
* CODE (disambiguation)
* Code mixing
* Code-switching (disambiguation)
* Code talker
* Codebook (disambiguation)
* Codec (disambiguation)
* Codex (disambiguation)
* Coding (disambiguation)
* Kode (disambiguation)
* Product code (disambiguation)
* Recode (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q125914664" start="2" end="10" title="Code (disambiguation)" label="[[code]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q125914664" start="125" end="129" title="Code (disambiguation)" label="Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q853614" start="166" end="181" title="Code (metadata)" label="Code (metadata)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105784" start="261" end="271" title="Code point" label="Code point"/>
<link wikidata="Q16539734" start="321" end="329" title="Code.org" label="Code.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q602136" start="434" end="447" title="Coding theory" label="Coding theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="525" end="537" title="Machine code" label="Machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="588" end="599" title="Source code" label="Source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q837330" start="691" end="699" title="Bytecode" label="Bytecode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="759" end="771" title="HTML element#code" label="HTML element"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645799" start="802" end="822" title="Code (coding theory)" label="Code (coding theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994879" start="882" end="901" title="Code (cryptography)" label="Code (cryptography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105566" start="948" end="964" title="Code (semiotics)" label="Code (semiotics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139990" start="1030" end="1047" title="Code (set theory)" label="Code (set theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q856" start="1100" end="1107" title="Barcode" label="Barcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="1224" end="1235" title="Baudot code" label="Baudot code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270338" start="1258" end="1272" title="Diagnosis code" label="Diagnosis code"/>
<link wikidata="Q18653" start="1405" end="1422" title="Encoding (memory)" label="Encoding (memory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="1476" end="1488" title="Genetic code" label="Genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820700" start="1562" end="1586" title="Hospital emergency codes" label="Hospital emergency codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="1656" end="1666" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673092" start="1751" end="1769" title="Nomenclature codes" label="Nomenclature codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198578" start="1815" end="1826" title="Serial code" label="Serial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q922203" start="1867" end="1877" title="Code (law)" label="Code (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096605" start="1936" end="1958" title="Legal code (municipal)" label="Legal code (municipal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="2027" end="2040" title="Building code" label="Building code"/>
<link wikidata="Q590490" start="2117" end="2126" title="Code name" label="Code name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264133" start="2200" end="2212" title="Ethical code" label="Ethical code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992756" start="2330" end="2341" title="Code Parish" label="Code Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q614479" start="2402" end="2434" title="The Code (2001 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (2001 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210664" start="2461" end="2493" title="The Code (2002 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (2002 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q702222" start="2509" end="2549" title="Thick as Thieves (2009 film)" label="&amp;quot;Thick as Thieves&amp;quot; (2009 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245743" start="2611" end="2635" title="Code (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Code&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q356761" start="2721" end="2754" title="Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace" label="Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858432" start="2854" end="2870" title="The Code (novel)" label="The Code (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127192" start="2932" end="2943" title="Code (band)" label="Code (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140164" start="2972" end="2984" title="Codes (band)" label="Codes (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726584" start="3016" end="3031" title="The Code (band)" label="The Code (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139984" start="3049" end="3073" title="Code (album)" label="&amp;quot;Code&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30605692" start="3110" end="3138" title="The Code (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q53673305" start="3207" end="3232" title="The Code (EP)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863614" start="3260" end="3270" title="U;Nee Code" label="U;Nee Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q102439899" start="3348" end="3384" title="The Code (King Von song)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (King Von song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116265613" start="3393" end="3416" title="Code (song)" label="&amp;quot;Code&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124694713" start="3459" end="3491" title="The Code (Nemo song)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (Nemo song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954197" start="3533" end="3576" title="The Code (Australian TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (Australian TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726583" start="3619" end="3662" title="The Code (British TV programme)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (British TV programme)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635127" start="3722" end="3763" title="The Code (American TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (American TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184133" start="3804" end="3836" title="The Code (game show)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (game show)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255685" start="3858" end="3902" title="The Code (Smart Guy)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Smart Guy&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27230552" start="3946" end="4009" title="The Code (The Amazing World of Gumball)" label="&amp;quot;The Code&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Amazing World of Gumball&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4122" end="4149" title="The Code: Crime and Justice" label="The Code: Crime and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741167" start="4203" end="4247" title="The Code (Fear the Walking Dead)" label="The Code (&amp;quot;Fear the Walking Dead&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139991" start="4318" end="4347" title="Code (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Code&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q909243" start="4371" end="4382" title="Konami Code" label="Konami Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139987" start="4494" end="4515" title="Code (audio standard)" label="Code (audio standard)"/>
<link wikidata="Q610292" start="4587" end="4617" title="Motion Picture Production Code" label="Motion Picture Production Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081491" start="4766" end="4774" title="football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q623272" start="4802" end="4819" title="rail transport modelling" label="model railroading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="4822" end="4833" title="Rugby codes" label="Rugby codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013277" start="4903" end="4924" title="CODE (disambiguation)" label="CODE (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201279" start="4927" end="4938" title="Code mixing" label="Code mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794956" start="4941" end="4972" title="Code-switching (disambiguation)" label="Code-switching (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q912310" start="4975" end="4986" title="Code talker" label="Code talker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140113" start="4989" end="5014" title="Codebook (disambiguation)" label="Codebook (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140121" start="5017" end="5039" title="Codec (disambiguation)" label="Codec (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q341597" start="5042" end="5064" title="Codex (disambiguation)" label="Codex (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226192" start="5067" end="5090" title="Coding (disambiguation)" label="Coding (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778208" start="5093" end="5114" title="Kode (disambiguation)" label="Kode (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247751" start="5117" end="5146" title="Product code (disambiguation)" label="Product code (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25193691" start="5149" end="5172" title="Recode (disambiguation)" label="Recode (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816514" wikidata="Q455332" url="?curid=816514" title="Lee Camp (footballer)">
<text>Lee Michael John Camp (born 22 August 1984) is a former professional footballer who played as a goalkeeper. After a spell as a youth coach at Blackpool, he became Professional Development Phase Coach at Accrington Stanley.

Camp started his professional career with Derby County in 2002, having progressed through the club&#x27;s youth ranks. During a five-year spell at the club, he made 89 league appearances for Derby, and also went on loan to three clubs: Burton Albion in 2003, Queens Park Rangers in 2004 and 2007, and Norwich City, in 2006. He switched to Queens Park Rangers in July 2007, and made 50 league appearances for the club in a two-season spell, taking his total number of QPR appearances to 73. Between October 2008 and January 2009, Camp was loaned to Nottingham Forest, signing permanently for the club in July 2009. In total, he made 182 league appearances for Nottingham Forest before returning to Norwich City in January 2013. He made three appearances in his second spell at the club, before being released on a free transfer in May 2013.

Camp joined West Bromwich Albion in September 2013 and spent two months on loan at AFC Bournemouth. He was released by West Brom in January 2014 and subsequently joined Bournemouth on a two-and-a-half-year deal, but left after one year for Rotherham United, where he was a regular for 18 months until an injured knee kept him out for the rest of his contract. He then joined Cardiff City, but never played, and spent time on loan at Sunderland before signing for Birmingham City, where he spent two seasons as first choice. He had a short non-playing spell at Coventry City as injury cover before spending the last two months of the 2020–21 season with Swindon Town. He had brief spells with non-league clubs Clitheroe and Wrexham in 2022.

Camp was born in England, and played for the England under-21 team; at senior international level, he made nine appearances for Northern Ireland, for which he was eligible through his Northern Ireland-born grandfather.

==Club career==
===Derby County===
He made his first appearance with Derby County during the 2002–03 season, and joined Burton Albion on loan in January 2003. At the end of the same season, he went to Queens Park Rangers for the last few games also on loan, where he helped the club reach promotion to Division One. In Derby&#x27;s end-of-season awards, he won both the Sammy Crooks Young Player of the Year award and the Brian Clough Player of the Year award.
Camp joined Norwich City on 7 September 2006, on a three-month loan with effect from 8 September, covering an injury to Joe Lewis. Camp made his first Norwich City full debut on 28 November 2006 against Leicester City. He kept his place for the following match against Sheffield Wednesday where he scored an own goal in a 2–1 defeat.

===Queens Park Rangers===
Camp joined Queens Park Rangers (&quot;QPR&quot;) on a three-month loan deal on 12 February 2007, having helped the club achieve promotion in 2004 in a similar loan deal. He returned to Derby early, on 25 April 2007, after a suspension to Stephen Bywater left the Rams short of goalkeepers.

Camp was transferred to QPR on 27 July 2007, after long negotiations, for a fee of £300,000. He agreed a three-year deal with the club. Camp was the only QPR player to start in every league fixture of the 2007–08 season.

===Nottingham Forest===

On 20 October 2008 Camp joined Nottingham Forest on a three-month loan. He played a pivotal role in helping the club climb out of the bottom three and also saved two penalties; one against his former club Derby, and one against Bristol City. Both were in the final minutes of the games. He returned to QPR when Colin Calderwood was sacked and replaced by Billy Davies, his former manager at Derby County.

On 2 July 2009 it was announced on Forest&#x27;s official website that a transfer had been agreed and, subject to a medical examination, Camp was to complete his signing by 4 July 2009. The fee was reported to be around £100,000 but with additional payments.

He made his first start as a permanent Forest player on 10 August 2009 in their league opener against Reading where they were unlucky to come away with only a 0–0 draw. Camp conceded only one goal in his first six games and kept a clean sheet for over 10.5 hours of football. He won the December Championship Player of the Month Award.

Camp was an ever-present in the Forest goal the following season, featuring in every match of the 2010–11 season and keeping a total of 12 clean sheets. When Club Captain Paul McKenna was injured, Camp stepped in as the Nottingham Forest Captain. Nottingham Forest manager Billy Davies spoke of his delight at having a goalkeeper with the class of Camp, saying &quot;You talk about positives and negatives in players, but his performances have been first-class – simply outstanding.&quot; Camp kept a clean sheet in the first leg of the 2010–11 EFL Championship playoff semi-final against Swansea City where he was forced to make numerous saves. Camp finished second in the club&#x27;s player of the season award to Luke Chambers.

In the summer 2011 transfer window, Forest rejected three bids from Swansea City – the highest of which was a £1.8 million bid – for the services of Camp.

Camp started the first game of season against Barnsley at the City Ground and kept his first clean sheet of the 2011–12 Championship season. Camp was able to keep his second clean sheet in the Reds&#x27; first league win of the season, against Doncaster Rovers. Camp&#x27;s outstanding performance which saw him make critical saves against Watford, was key to seeing Forest pick up their second win and third clean sheet of the campaign. In what was a disappointing campaign for Forest, Camp started all 46 league matches, keeping 12 clean sheets.

Following months of unsuccessful contract negotiations and with Camp&#x27;s contract set to expire, Alex McLeish confirmed that Camp was not part of his future plans, just weeks into his tenure as Reds manager, allowing Camp to move away from The City Ground. Camp was released from his contract on 23 January 2013.

===Norwich City===

Camp signed for Norwich City on 23 January 2013 following his release from Nottingham Forest and would wear the number 42 shirt. He made his second debut for Norwich on 17 March 2013 after goalkeeper Mark Bunn was sent off for handling a loose ball outside of the penalty box. Camp made his full Premier League debut the following week away at Wigan Athletic. Camp was again used as a substitute in a home game against Swansea City after Mark Bunn came off with a groin injury.

===West Bromwich Albion===
He signed for West Bromwich Albion on 1 September 2013, following Ben Foster&#x27;s stress fracture in his right foot ruling him out for up to 12 weeks, Camp was signed as cover on a rolling monthly contract. After not making a senior appearance throughout September and October Camp joined Championship side AFC Bournemouth on 31 October 2013 for a month&#x27;s loan until 27 November 2013. On 27 November 2013 his loan spell at Bournemouth was extended until 1 January 2014. He was released on his return to West Brom.

===AFC Bournemouth===
On 4 January 2014, after spending two months on loan at the club, Camp joined Bournemouth permanently on a two-and-a-half-year deal following his release from West Brom on 1 January 2014.

===Rotherham United===
On 1 September 2015, Camp was released by Bournemouth and signed for Rotherham United on a two-year deal. He quickly became a fans favourite and made crucial clean sheets against Birmingham City, Hull City and Bolton Wanderers. He made crucial saves against his old team Derby County as Rotherham came from 3–0 down to draw 3–3. He remained a regular until a knee injury sustained in November 2016 kept him out for the rest of his contract.

===Cardiff City===
Camp moved to Cardiff City in June 2017. On 31 January 2018, Camp made a deadline day switch to Sunderland, signing on loan for the remainder of the season. He never made an appearance for Cardiff.

===Birmingham City===
On 8 August 2018, Camp joined Championship side Birmingham City on a free transfer. Having been on the bench for the next league match, Camp replaced Connal Trueman for the visit to Reading in the EFL Cup first round, a 2–0 defeat. He kept his place for, and kept a clean sheet in, the goalless draw with Swansea City on 17 August.

Camp extended his contract to cover the last few matches of the COVID-19 pandemic-interrupted 2019–20 season and then left the club.

===Coventry City===
On 27 November 2020, Camp signed for Championship club Coventry City on a two-month contract as injury cover. He left when the deal expired without having been needed to play.

===Swindon Town===
Camp joined League One club Swindon Town on 12 March 2021 on a short-term contract. He played 11 matches in what remained of the season.

===Clitheroe===
Northern Premier League Division One West (eighth-tier) club Clitheroe signed Camp on a short-term basis in early February 2022 as cover for their injured first-choice goalkeeper.

===Wrexham===
On 24 March 2022, Camp signed for National League side Wrexham on a short-term contract.

==International career==
Camp played for the England under-21s five times, including the first (professional) match at the new Wembley Stadium. He stated that this honour was the highlight of his footballing career up to that time. Camp conceded a goal 25 seconds after the game had started, making him the first man to concede a goal at the new stadium.

Having not earned a call-up to the full England team, Camp stated that he would be keen on playing for Northern Ireland, for whom he qualifies through his Newtownards-born grandfather. Northern Ireland boss Nigel Worthington asked the Irish Football Association to start the process to make Camp available for the national side and FIFA confirmed Camp&#x27;s eligibility to play for Northern Ireland on 16 February 2011. He received his first call-up to the Northern Ireland squad on 14 March 2011, for the Euro 2012 qualifiers against Serbia and Slovenia, and made his Northern Ireland debut in the match against Serbia on 25 March 2011.

==Career statistics==


==Honours==
Queens Park Rangers
*Football League Second Division second-place promotion: 2003–04

AFC Bournemouth
*Football League Championship: 2014–15

Individual
*PFA Team of the Year: 2009–10 Championship
*Nottingham Forest Player of the Season: 2009–10
*Rotherham United Player of the Year: 2015–16

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q455332" start="0" end="21" title="Lee Camp (footballer)" label="Lee Michael John Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="69" end="79" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="96" end="106" title="goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q19449" start="142" end="151" title="Blackpool F.C." label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q48843" start="203" end="221" title="Accrington Stanley F.C." label="Accrington Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="266" end="278" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q48929" start="460" end="473" title="Burton Albion F.C." label="Burton Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="483" end="502" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="525" end="537" title="Norwich City F.C." label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="772" end="789" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="1077" end="1097" title="West Bromwich Albion F.C." label="West Bromwich Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19568" start="1148" end="1163" title="AFC Bournemouth" label="AFC Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q48950" start="1305" end="1321" title="Rotherham United" label="Rotherham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="1440" end="1452" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="1498" end="1508" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="1528" end="1543" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="1625" end="1638" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19634" start="1718" end="1730" title="Swindon Town F.C." label="Swindon Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18312" start="1774" end="1783" title="Clitheroe F.C." label="Clitheroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="1788" end="1795" title="Wrexham F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q204238" start="1851" end="1867" title="England national under-21 football team" label="England under-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="1934" end="1950" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="2095" end="2107" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181967" start="2119" end="2126" title="2002–03 in English football" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q48929" start="2146" end="2159" title="Burton Albion F.C." label="Burton Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="2227" end="2246" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="2328" end="2340" title="Football League Division One" label="Division One"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="2499" end="2511" title="Norwich City F.C." label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q942248" start="2607" end="2616" title="Joe Lewis (footballer, born 1987)" label="Joe Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="2690" end="2704" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="2756" end="2775" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="2860" end="2879" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544022" start="3087" end="3102" title="Stephen Bywater" label="Stephen Bywater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610194" start="3345" end="3359" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C. season 2007-08" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="3418" end="3435" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19456" start="3615" end="3627" title="Bristol City F.C." label="Bristol City"/>
<link wikidata="Q513921" start="3698" end="3714" title="Colin Calderwood" label="Colin Calderwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q863076" start="3742" end="3754" title="Billy Davies" label="Billy Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="3778" end="3790" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729" start="4155" end="4162" title="Reading F.C." label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q262031" start="4284" end="4295" title="clean sheet" label="clean sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q948015" start="4561" end="4573" title="Paul McKenna (footballer)" label="Paul McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="4935" end="4951" title="EFL Championship" label="EFL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="4979" end="4991" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q653228" start="5106" end="5119" title="Luke Chambers" label="Luke Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19442" start="5324" end="5332" title="Barnsley F.C." label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q593446" start="5340" end="5351" title="City Ground" label="City Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q19589" start="5522" end="5538" title="Doncaster Rovers F.C." label="Doncaster Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714" start="5618" end="5625" title="Watford F.C." label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q316701" start="5927" end="5939" title="Alex McLeish" label="Alex McLeish"/>
<link wikidata="Q593446" start="6074" end="6085" title="City Ground" label="City Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="6180" end="6192" title="Norwich City F.C." label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="6353" end="6363" title="goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q949198" start="6364" end="6373" title="Mark Bunn (English footballer)" label="Mark Bunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="6508" end="6522" title="Wigan Athletic F.C." label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="6583" end="6595" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q949198" start="6602" end="6611" title="Mark Bunn (English footballer)" label="Mark Bunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="6684" end="6704" title="West Bromwich Albion F.C." label="West Bromwich Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10585" start="6736" end="6746" title="Ben Foster (footballer)" label="Ben Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="6961" end="6973" title="EFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19568" start="6979" end="6994" title="AFC Bournemouth" label="AFC Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q48950" start="7495" end="7511" title="Rotherham United F.C." label="Rotherham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="7605" end="7620" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="7622" end="7631" title="Hull City A.F.C." label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="7636" end="7652" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="7983" end="7993" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="8156" end="8171" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q55965086" start="8258" end="8272" title="Connal Trueman" label="Connal Trueman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729" start="8290" end="8297" title="Reading F.C." label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="8305" end="8312" title="EFL Cup" label="EFL Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="8413" end="8425" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="8505" end="8522" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65071687" start="8535" end="8549" title="2019–20 Birmingham City F.C. season" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="8650" end="8663" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="8803" end="8813" title="EFL League One" label="League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q19634" start="8819" end="8831" title="Swindon Town F.C." label="Swindon Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18502" start="8945" end="8968" title="Northern Premier League" label="Northern Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18312" start="9006" end="9015" title="Clitheroe F.C." label="Clitheroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q58916" start="9174" end="9189" title="National League (division)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="9195" end="9202" title="Wrexham A.F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q204238" start="9275" end="9292" title="England national under-21 football team" label="England under-21s"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="9357" end="9372" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="9689" end="9705" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192709" start="9741" end="9752" title="Newtownards" label="Newtownards"/>
<link wikidata="Q979353" start="9793" end="9810" title="Nigel Worthington" label="Nigel Worthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q620280" start="9821" end="9847" title="Irish Football Association" label="Irish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q182740" start="10122" end="10128" title="Serbia national football team" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172221" start="10133" end="10141" title="Slovenia national football team" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="10283" end="10314" title="Football League Second Division" label="Football League Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451365" start="10339" end="10346" title="2003–04 Football League Second Division" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="10365" end="10393" title="Football League Championship" label="Football League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822206" start="10395" end="10402" title="2014–15 Football League Championship" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="10416" end="10436" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10438" end="10458" title="PFA Team of the Year (2010s)#Championship" label="2009–10 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10460" end="10498" title="Nottingham Forest F.C.#Player of the Season" label="Nottingham Forest Player of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878904" start="10500" end="10507" title="2009–10 Nottingham Forest F.C. season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q48950" start="10509" end="10525" title="Rotherham United F.C." label="Rotherham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q20127822" start="10546" end="10553" title="2015–16 Rotherham United F.C. season" label="2015–16"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816517" wikidata="Q6434843" url="?curid=816517" title="Kovas">
<text>Kovasciar Myvette (born August 1, 1985), known professionally as KOVAS, is an American songwriter, record producer, music composer, and recording artist of Spanish and French descent (Central America and Morocco).

== Career ==
He has produced and remixed records for Justin Timberlake, Chris Brown, Nick Cannon, De La Soul, Nicole Wray, Jeannie Ortega, Shakira, Lady Sovereign, Kelis, M.I.A., Freq Nasty and Billy Crawford. He has done ghost production and songwriting for many successful artists before branching out on his own. KOVAS&#x27; songs are represented by Downtown Music Publishing.

In 2017 he won a Clio Award for the Dunkin Donuts campaign he produced, wrote and starred in with New York Giants wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. Kovas is also the music composer for the Netflix series&#x27; On My Block and The Comedy Line Up.

He scored the music for the opening music sequence of Taylor Swift&#x27;s &quot;I Knew You Were Trouble&quot; MTV VMA Award-winning music video, five Covergirl commercials. One directed by Hype Williams starring Queen Latifah and another starring Drew Barrymore which air in America and French Canada. His single &quot;Ready&quot; has been featured in the Vibe Magazine Music Mixer iPad app, and has been featured in USA Networks TV show &quot;Royal Pains&quot; and &quot;Necessary Roughness&quot; as well as in MTV Rob Dyrdek&#x27;s &quot;Fantasy Factory&quot;. Kovas has also had his T.O.A.K featured on the season of Fox&#x27;s &quot;American Dad!&quot; from creator Seth MacFarlane who is also the creator of &quot;Family Guy&quot;. His song &quot;Up in Here&quot; is featured on the &quot;Chocolate Swim&quot;, Cartoon Network&#x27;s Adult Swim compilation as well as the Oscar nominated film &quot;Captain Phillips&quot;. Hot Girls appeared in the #1 film &quot;22 Jump Street&quot;.

He is featured on Jeannie Ortega&#x27;s &quot;No Place Like BKLYN&quot; album, on which, he wrote and produced three songs; &quot;Pay It&quot; featuring Kovas, &quot;Green I&#x27;z&quot; and &quot;Hear Me&quot;. He is also featured on the French recording artist&#x27;s Billy Crawford album, &quot;Big City&quot;. He produced and wrote four songs on it, including the single &quot;Steamy Nights&quot; and &quot;Steamy Nights Ghetto Beat Remix&quot;.

KOVAS has a production company &amp; indie record label called Ghetto Beat &amp; Art School Rebellion. He also runs a publishing company Infinite Rhythm Inc.

KOVAS has appeared on tour with De La Soul, Billy Crawford, Phife Dawg of A Tribe Called Quest, Wyclef Talib Kweli Mos Def and Jeannie Ortega. Kovas plays five instruments, sings, raps and engineers on most of his productions. He has done musical scores for film and TV, winning an Art Directors Award for the ad campaign he wrote and scored for Noggin television.

KOVAS produced, composed and appeared in Dunkin Donuts with New York Giants wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr.

==Discography==

==Production credits==
* 2001: &quot;Words &amp; Verbs&quot; (single)
* 2002: &quot;Brooklyn to Brixton&quot; (single)
* 2003: &quot;Attitude&quot; 
* 2004: &quot;Intro&quot; (Big City)
* 2004: &quot;Steamy Nights&quot; (Big City)
* 2004: &quot;Three Wishes&quot; (Big City)
* 2004: &quot;Hiccups&quot; (Big City)
* 2004: &quot;Cowboy&quot; (Big City)
* 2005: &quot;Bounce&quot; (Uh Oh)
* 2005: &quot;Mirage&quot; (Uh Oh)
* 2005: &quot;Delirious Ghetto Beat Remix&quot; (Uh Oh)
* 2005: &quot;I Owe&quot; (Uh Oh)
* 2006: &quot;Pay It&quot; (No Place Like Brooklyn)
* 2006: &quot;Green I&#x27;z&quot; (No Place Like Brooklyn)
* 2006: &quot;Hear Me&quot; (No Place Like Brooklyn)
* 2008: &quot;Say What&quot; (The Arrogance of Youth)
* 2008: &quot;Up in Here&quot; (The Arrogance of Youth)
* 2008: &quot;Love &amp; Touch&quot; (The Arrogance of Youth)
* 2008: &quot;Popsicle&quot; (The Arrogance of Youth)
* 2008: &quot;Popcorn&quot; (The Arrogance of Youth)
* 2008: &quot;T.O.A.K&quot; (The Arrogance of Youth)
* 2008: &quot;So Hot&quot; (Prom Night)
* 2008: &quot;Love &amp; Touch&quot; (Prom Night)
* 2008: &quot;Hasta La Vista&quot; (Camp Rock)
* 2009: &quot;Wax on Wax Off&quot; (Reagan Babies)
* 2009: &quot;Reagan Babies&quot; (Reagan Babies)
* 2009: &quot;Grape Drank&quot; (Reagan Babies)
* 2009: &quot;Can&#x27;t Get Enough&quot; (Reagan Babies)
* 2010: &quot;It&#x27;s On&quot; (Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam)
* 2010: &quot;Tear It Down&quot; (Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam)
* 2010: &quot;Been Doing My Thang&quot; 
* 2010: &quot;Overdrive&quot; 
* 2010: &quot;UpperCut&quot; 
* 2010: &quot;Full Time Lover&quot; 
* 2010: &quot;Roll The Credits&quot; 
* 2010: &quot;Ready&quot; 
* 2013: &quot;Ice Cream&quot; 
* 2013: &quot;Hello Bright Lights&quot; 
* 2013: &quot;Student to the Game Mixtape&quot; 
* 2014: &quot;Hot Girls&quot; 22 Jump Street
* 2015: &quot;Hello Bright Lights&quot; Hello, My Name Is Doris
* 2016: &quot;Like They Do&quot; 
* 2018: &quot;Bottle rocket&quot; from Netflix Original Series On My Block
* 2019: &quot;Ratata&quot; from Netflix Original Series On My Block
* 2020: &quot;Lunch Money&quot; from Netflix Original Series On My Block
* 2020: &quot;Tricky Ricky&quot; from Netflix Original Series On My Block
* 2020: &quot;Beat On The Street&quot; from Netflix Original Series On My Block

===Remixes===
* 2005 Billy Crawford f. Kovas – &quot;Steamy Nights (Kovas Ghetto Beat Remix)&quot; V2 Records
* 2006 Shakira f. Wyclef &amp; Kovas – &quot;Hips Don&#x27;t Lie (Kovas Ghetto Beat Remix)&quot;
* 2006 Lady Sovereign – &quot;Fiddle with the Volume (Kovas Ghetto Beat Remix)&quot; Chocolate Industries
* 2007 Justin Timberlake – &quot;Summer Love (Kovas Ghetto Beat Remix)&quot; Jive Records
* 2008 Chris Brown – &quot;With You (Kovas Ghetto Beat Remix)&quot; Jive Records / Ultra Records
* 2008 T-Pain f Lil Wayne – &quot;Can&#x27;t Believe It (Kovas Ghetto Beat Remix)&quot; Jive Records
* 2008 T-Pain f Ludacris – &quot;Chopped &amp; Skrewed (Kovas Ghetto Beat Remix)&quot; Jive Records
* 2009 Ciara f Young Jeezy – &quot;Chopped &amp; Skrewed (Kovas Ghetto Beat Remix)&quot; Jive Records
* 2009 Michelle Williams – &quot;Hello Heartbreak (Kovas Ghetto Beat Remix)&quot; Sony Records
* 2010 Usher f will.i.am – &quot;OMG (Kovas Ghetto Beat Remix)&quot; Jive Records




==Other albums and songs produced by Kovas==

==References==
==External links==
*Kovas official website
*[ AllMusic Guide]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6434843" start="0" end="17" title="Kovas" label="Kovasciar Myvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434843" start="65" end="70" title="Kovas" label="KOVAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="268" end="285" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q155700" start="287" end="298" title="Chris Brown (American singer)" label="Chris Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q348533" start="300" end="311" title="Nick Cannon" label="Nick Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q685595" start="313" end="323" title="De La Soul" label="De La Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396413" start="325" end="336" title="Nicole Wray" label="Nicole Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q919245" start="338" end="352" title="Jeannie Ortega" label="Jeannie Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="354" end="361" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q230754" start="363" end="377" title="Lady Sovereign" label="Lady Sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q294979" start="379" end="384" title="Kelis" label="Kelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q204019" start="386" end="392" title="M.I.A. (artist)" label="M.I.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q5502833" start="394" end="404" title="Freq Nasty" label="Freq Nasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q863061" start="409" end="423" title="Billy Crawford" label="Billy Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303516" start="568" end="593" title="Downtown Music Publishing" label="Downtown Music Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101743" start="613" end="623" title="Clio Award" label="Clio Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212482" start="724" end="741" title="Odell Beckham Jr." label="Odell Beckham Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="783" end="790" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804410" start="804" end="815" title="On My Block (TV series)" label="On My Block"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="820" end="838" title="The Comedy Line Up" label="The Comedy Line Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="895" end="907" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q276585" start="921" end="944" title="I Knew You Were Trouble" label="I Knew You Were Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="951" end="954" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="955" end="958" title="MTV Video Music Award" label="VMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629990" start="991" end="1000" title="CoverGirl" label="Covergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q572533" start="1030" end="1043" title="Hype Williams" label="Hype Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112005" start="1053" end="1066" title="Queen Latifah" label="Queen Latifah"/>
<link wikidata="Q676094" start="1088" end="1102" title="Drew Barrymore" label="Drew Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1116" end="1123" title="America" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="1128" end="1141" title="French Canada" label="French Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1160" end="1165" title="Ready (Kovas song)" label="Ready"/>
<link wikidata="Q266786" start="1197" end="1210" title="Vibe Magazine" label="Vibe Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q974846" start="1258" end="1270" title="USA Networks" label="USA Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138359" start="1285" end="1296" title="Royal Pains" label="Royal Pains"/>
<link wikidata="Q276849" start="1313" end="1332" title="Necessary Roughness (TV series)" label="Necessary Roughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="1353" end="1356" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q723496" start="1357" end="1367" title="Rob Dyrdek" label="Rob Dyrdek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340095" start="1381" end="1396" title="Fantasy Factory" label="Fantasy Factory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1427" end="1434" title="T.O.A.K" label="T.O.A.K"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="1461" end="1464" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q210311" start="1478" end="1491" title="American Dad!" label="American Dad!"/>
<link wikidata="Q188492" start="1511" end="1526" title="Seth MacFarlane" label="Seth MacFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="1560" end="1570" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053148" start="1635" end="1649" title="Chocolate Swim" label="Chocolate Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="1657" end="1672" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="1680" end="1690" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1718" end="1723" title="Academy Award" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937646" start="1745" end="1761" title="Captain Phillips (film)" label="Captain Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040917" start="1809" end="1823" title="22 Jump Street" label="22 Jump Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q919245" start="1850" end="1864" title="Jeannie Ortega" label="Jeannie Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q11792603" start="1878" end="1897" title="No Place Like BKLYN" label="No Place Like BKLYN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1998" end="2012" title="Green I&amp;#x27;z" label="Green I&amp;#x27;z"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2029" end="2036" title="Hear Me (Jeannie Ortega song)" label="Hear Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q863061" start="2102" end="2116" title="Billy Crawford" label="Billy Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905451" start="2130" end="2138" title="Big City (Billy Crawford album)" label="Big City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434843" start="2346" end="2384" title="Ghetto Beat &amp;amp; Art School Rebellion" label="Ghetto Beat &amp;amp; Art School Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q685595" start="2474" end="2484" title="De La Soul" label="De La Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q863061" start="2486" end="2500" title="Billy Crawford" label="Billy Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370892" start="2502" end="2512" title="Phife Dawg" label="Phife Dawg"/>
<link wikidata="Q300602" start="2516" end="2536" title="A Tribe Called Quest" label="A Tribe Called Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q202663" start="2538" end="2544" title="Wyclef" label="Wyclef"/>
<link wikidata="Q318755" start="2545" end="2556" title="Talib Kweli" label="Talib Kweli"/>
<link wikidata="Q38875" start="2557" end="2564" title="Mos Def" label="Mos Def"/>
<link wikidata="Q919245" start="2569" end="2583" title="Jeannie Ortega" label="Jeannie Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047483" start="2788" end="2794" title="Noggin (TV channel)" label="Noggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q847743" start="2849" end="2862" title="Dunkin Donuts" label="Dunkin Donuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212482" start="2898" end="2915" title="Odell Beckham Jr." label="Odell Beckham Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4905451" start="3110" end="3118" title="Big City (Billy Crawford album)" label="Big City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905451" start="3155" end="3163" title="Big City (Billy Crawford album)" label="Big City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905451" start="3199" end="3207" title="Big City (Billy Crawford album)" label="Big City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905451" start="3238" end="3246" title="Big City (Billy Crawford album)" label="Big City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905451" start="3276" end="3284" title="Big City (Billy Crawford album)" label="Big City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11792603" start="3474" end="3496" title="No Place Like Brooklyn" label="No Place Like Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11792603" start="3534" end="3556" title="No Place Like Brooklyn" label="No Place Like Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11792603" start="3587" end="3609" title="No Place Like Brooklyn" label="No Place Like Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3641" end="3663" title="The Arrogance of Youth" label="The Arrogance of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3697" end="3719" title="The Arrogance of Youth" label="The Arrogance of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3759" end="3781" title="The Arrogance of Youth" label="The Arrogance of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3813" end="3835" title="The Arrogance of Youth" label="The Arrogance of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3866" end="3888" title="The Arrogance of Youth" label="The Arrogance of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3919" end="3941" title="The Arrogance of Youth" label="The Arrogance of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301177" start="3971" end="3981" title="Prom Night (2008 film)" label="Prom Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301177" start="4021" end="4031" title="Prom Night (2008 film)" label="Prom Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q217250" start="4069" end="4078" title="Camp Rock" label="Camp Rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4116" end="4129" title="Reagan Babies" label="Reagan Babies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4166" end="4179" title="Reagan Babies" label="Reagan Babies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4214" end="4227" title="Reagan Babies" label="Reagan Babies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4272" end="4285" title="Reagan Babies" label="Reagan Babies"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4321" end="4347" title="Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam" label="Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4383" end="4409" title="Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam" label="Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040917" start="4766" end="4780" title="22 Jump Street" label="22 Jump Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q18152484" start="4821" end="4844" title="Hello, My Name Is Doris" label="Hello, My Name Is Doris"/>
<link wikidata="Q863061" start="5271" end="5285" title="Billy Crawford" label="Billy Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="5367" end="5374" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q202663" start="5378" end="5384" title="Wyclef" label="Wyclef"/>
<link wikidata="Q230754" start="5464" end="5478" title="Lady Sovereign" label="Lady Sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="5570" end="5587" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q155700" start="5660" end="5671" title="Chris Brown (American singer)" label="Chris Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q221155" start="5757" end="5763" title="T-Pain" label="T-Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615" start="5766" end="5775" title="Lil Wayne" label="Lil Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q221155" start="5858" end="5864" title="T-Pain" label="T-Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193676" start="5867" end="5875" title="Ludacris" label="Ludacris"/>
<link wikidata="Q203223" start="5958" end="5963" title="Ciara" label="Ciara"/>
<link wikidata="Q342447" start="5966" end="5977" title="Young Jeezy" label="Young Jeezy"/>
<link wikidata="Q229153" start="6060" end="6077" title="Michelle Williams (singer)" label="Michelle Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q165911" start="6155" end="6160" title="Usher (entertainer)" label="Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q185610" start="6163" end="6172" title="will.i.am" label="will.i.am"/>
<link wikidata="Q27184" start="6217" end="6229" title="Jive Records" label="Jive Records"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816527" wikidata="Q3134257" url="?curid=816527" title="Time Stops for No Mouse">
<text>Time Stops for No Mouse is a children&#x27;s mystery novel written by Michael Hoeye. The novel was originally self-published, then published by Speak, a division of Penguin Putnam in 1999. It was a finalist for the Book Sense &quot;Book of the Year&quot; award and was reprinted in 2000 and 2002. &quot;Time Stops for No Mouse&quot; is the first in the Hermux Tantamoq series, and it currently has three sequels, &quot;The Sands of Time&quot;, &quot;No Time Like Show Time&quot; and &quot;Time to Smell the Roses&quot;.

==Plot summary==
At the beginning of the story, the mouse Hermux Tantamoq is a watchmaker in Pinchester, a Manhattan-like metropolis inhabited by rodents, birds, and mustelids. He is hired by aircraft-pilot Linka Perflinger (another mouse) to mend her wristwatch. When the watch is requested, without Linka&#x27;s permission, by a criminal rat, Hermux refuses to hand it over, and later witnesses Linka&#x27;s capture by similar rats, who are working on behalf of antagonist Dr. Hiril Mennus. Investigating this, Hermux learns that Mennus, in partnership with sub-antagonist Tucka Mertslin, seeks to patent a rejuvenation formula obtained by Linka&#x27;s client, Dr. Turfip Dandiffer. Assisted by the mole journalist Pup Schoonagliffen (Mennus in disguise), Hermux infiltrates Mennus&#x27; clinic, but is himself captured; whereupon Mennus places Hermux and Linka in a mousetrap to die. To maintain control of Tucka Mertslin, Mennus memorizes and destroys the formula; but by an inept use thereof, reduces himself to infancy. Hermux and Linka are thereafter rescued by Dr. Dandiffer&#x27;s sponsor, Ortolina Perriflot. Some days later, Hermux approaches Linka, intending to propose marriage, but finds her already engaged to Dandiffer. Later, he uses the remnant formula to restore the eyesight of his friend Mirrin Sentrill.

==Editions==
The story was first published by the author as a two-volume set, spiral-bound card, in a limited edition of 1000. It was then taken up by Penguin Putnam, who for world-wide rights paid Hoeye what at the time was &quot;the record sum received for a children&#x27;s book&quot;.

* (Hardcover)
* (Trade paper)

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="29" end="44" title="children&amp;#x27;s fiction" label="children&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585139" start="45" end="52" title="Mystery fiction" label="mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361230" start="70" end="83" title="Michael Hoeye" label="Michael Hoeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093062" start="165" end="179" title="G. P. Putnam&amp;#x27;s Sons" label="Penguin Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743232" start="215" end="225" title="Book Sense" label="Book Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739477" start="353" end="368" title="The Hermux Tantamoq Adventures" label="Hermux Tantamoq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762240" start="419" end="436" title="The Sands of Time (Hoeye novel)" label="The Sands of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045092" start="450" end="472" title="No Time Like Show Time" label="No Time Like Show Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805476" start="489" end="512" title="Time to Smell the Roses" label="Time to Smell the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="628" end="637" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200250" start="643" end="653" title="metropolis" label="metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="667" end="673" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="676" end="680" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="687" end="695" title="mustelid" label="mustelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="773" end="783" title="wristwatch" label="wristwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="861" end="864" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189180" start="1222" end="1226" title="Mole (animal)" label="mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497468" start="1268" end="1276" title="disguise" label="disguise"/>
<link wikidata="Q658353" start="1390" end="1399" title="mousetrap" label="mousetrap"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816532" wikidata="Q1619558" url="?curid=816532" title="Austrian knot">
<text>An Austrian knot (or Hungarian knot), alternatively warrior&#x27;s knot or , is an elaborate design of twisted cord or lace worn as part of a dress uniform, usually on the lower sleeve. It is usually a distinction worn by officers; the major exception is the hussars, in which Austrian knots are worn by all ranks. British cadet under officers wear Austrian knots as part of their rank insignia.

==History==
Of Hungarian origin, the (in English &quot;warrior&#x27;s knot&quot;) evolved as an indicator of rank among hussars of the Hungarian army, and became part of the Hungarian noble attire since the 16th century. Later, as other nations added hussars to their armies, they started to use the knot as well. The reason for this was that hussar regiments were often established by Hungarian nobles and some retained the name of their founder; for example the Ladislas Ignace de Bercheny.

In the Austrian (later Austro-Hungarian) army of the 18th century epaulettes were widely perceived as foreign (due to their French origin) and thus unacceptable. In the hussar regiments ranks came to be denoted by braided gold cords on the sleeve, with the number of gold cords representing the seniority of the officer. Other branches of the Austrian Army used a system of waist-sashes and collar stars to distinguish commissioned rank.

Austrian knots soon appeared as part of the distinctive uniform of hussar regiments in the armies of other European nations but did not gain wider popularity until the last decades of the nineteenth century. First the French army, then the Dutch, Rumanian, Japanese, Turkish and several Latin American armies adopted this insignia to distinguish officer ranks. British officers of most regiments wore Austrian knots of a simplified pattern in gold braid on the cuffs of their full-dress tunics until this order of uniform ceased to be generally worn after 1914.

Along with most other elaborate and conspicuous indicators of rank, Austrian knots fell into disuse during the First World War and were not revived in everyday wear. An exception was the French Army where the kepis still worn by most officers have Austrian knots in cruciform pattern on the top crown. French officers of North African regiments such as the zouaves and the Algerian tirailleurs continued to wear Austrian knots in gold braid on the sleeves of their colourful full-dress uniforms until 1939. They are still worn on some parade uniforms in France, where they are called (&quot;Hungarian knots&quot;).

==United States usage==

During the American Civil War, Confederate officers often wore gold Austrian knots on their uniforms. More elaborate braiding indicated higher rank. This type of insignia was worn by officers of the US Army on the sleeves of the blue full-dress uniforms authorised until 1917. It is a feature of the blue mess-dress uniform adopted as optional wear for officers in 1937 and still worn for formal social or evening functions.

== See also ==

* Frog (fastening) – decorative fastener which originated from China and was adopted in the military clothing of Western countries.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1619558" start="3" end="16" title="Austrian knot" label="Austrian knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619558" start="21" end="35" title="Austrian knot" label="Hungarian knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619558" start="52" end="71" title="Austrian knot" label="warrior&amp;#x27;s knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619558" start="75" end="75" title="Austrian knot" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q231250" start="119" end="123" title="lace" label="lace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434" start="148" end="155" title="uniform" label="uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="222" end="230" title="commissioned officer" label="officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191713" start="259" end="265" title="hussar" label="hussar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883124" start="329" end="342" title="under officer" label="under officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191713" start="517" end="523" title="hussar" label="hussar"/>
<link wikidata="Q746897" start="861" end="888" title="Ladislas Ignace de Bercheny" label="Ladislas Ignace de Bercheny"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="914" end="930" title="Austro-Hungarian" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q616200" start="957" end="966" title="epaulette" label="epaulette"/>
<link wikidata="Q317931" start="1806" end="1816" title="full-dress" label="full-dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2004" end="2019" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135551" start="2102" end="2106" title="kepi" label="kepi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13638325" start="2250" end="2257" title="zouaves" label="zouaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084700" start="2275" end="2286" title="tirailleurs" label="tirailleurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2545" end="2563" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="2565" end="2576" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="2733" end="2740" title="US Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278236" start="2839" end="2849" title="mess-dress" label="mess-dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923720" start="2978" end="2994" title="Frog (fastening)" label="Frog (fastening)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816539" wikidata="Q312901" url="?curid=816539" title="Josep Borrell">
<text>Josep Borrell Fontelles (; born 24 April 1947) is a Spanish politician who served as High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission from 2019 to 2024. A member of the Spanish Socialist Workers&#x27; Party (PSOE), he served as President of the European Parliament from 2004 to 2007 and as Spain&#x27;s Minister of Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation from 2018 to 2019.

Born and raised in the Catalan village of La Pobla de Segur, Borrell is an aeronautical engineer and economist by training as well as professor of mathematics. He entered politics in the 1970s as a member of the PSOE during Spain&#x27;s transition to democracy, and went on to serve in several positions during the governments of Felipe González, first within the Ministry of Economy and Finance as General Secretary for the Budget and Public Spending (1982–1984) and Secretary of State for Finance (1984–1991), then joining the Council of Ministers as Minister of Public Works and Transport (1991–1996). In the opposition after the 1996 election, Borrell unexpectedly won the PSOE primary in 1998 and became Leader of the Opposition and the designated prime ministerial candidate of the party until he resigned in 1999. He then switched to European politics, becoming a Member of the European Parliament (MEP) during the 2004–2009 legislative period and serving as President of the European Parliament for the first half of the term.

He returned to the Council of Ministers in June 2018, when he was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs, the European Union and Cooperation in the Sánchez government. In July 2019, Borrell was announced as the European Council&#x27;s nominee to be appointed High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. He took office in December 2019.

==Early life and career==
Josep (or José) Borrell Fontelles was born on 24 April 1947 in the Catalan village of La Pobla de Segur, province of Lleida, near the Pyrenees, son of Joan Borrell (father) and Luisa Fontelles Doll (mother). He grew up in the village, where his father owned a small bakery. His paternal grandparents were Spanish immigrants in Argentina, where they ran a bakery in the city of Mendoza, close to the General San Martín Park. They returned to Spain when Joan Borrell, Josep&#x27;s father, was eight years old. Borrell&#x27;s father arrived in Spain just before the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War and afterwards he would never leave his village of La Pobla de Segur.

After completing primary education, the remote location of his village led Josep Borrell to be home-schooled with aid from his mother and a retired teacher, taking the official Baccalaureate exams at the Lleida high school. He continued his higher education thanks to several scholarships, including from the Juan March Foundation and the Fulbright Program. In 1964 he moved to Barcelona to study industrial engineering, but left after a year in 1965 to study aeronautical engineering at the Technical University of Madrid (UPM), graduating in 1969. In the summer of 1969 Borrell worked as volunteer at the Gal On kibbutz in Israel, where he met his future French wife Caroline Mayeur, from whom he is now divorced. 

During this time he also began to study for a bachelor&#x27;s degree and later a PhD in economics at the Complutense University of Madrid (UCM). Borrell also holds a master&#x27;s degree in applied mathematics (operations research) from Stanford University in Palo Alto (California, US), and a postgraduate in energy economics from the French Institute of Petroleum in Paris (France). In May 1976 Borrell defended his PhD thesis in economics at the UCM.

From 1972 to 1982 he lectured in mathematics at the Higher Technical School of Aeronautical Engineering of the UPM. In 1982 he was appointed associate professor of Business Mathematics at the University of Valladolid. From 1975 to 1982 he also worked for Cepsa, employed at the company&#x27;s Department of Systems and Information Engineering; he combined this activity with the teaching of university classes and involvement in local politics.

==Political career==
=== Involvement in local politics ===
Borrell joined the Spanish Socialist Workers&#x27; Party (PSOE) in 1975 and started his political activity during Spain&#x27;s transition to democracy in the Socialist Grouping of Madrid along with Luis Solana and Luis Carlos Croissier. He ran for office as the number 5 in the PSOE list for the 1979 municipal election in Majadahonda, becoming city councillor. Borrell also became a member of the 1979–1983 corporation of the Provincial Deputation of Madrid and managed the Financial Department of the provincial government body in the pre-autonomic period.

=== Role during the González&#x27;s governments ===

In the 1982 general election the PSOE won a landslide victory, returning the socialists to power for the first time since the years of the Second Republic. Under Prime Minister Felipe González, Borrell was appointed to several prominent positions within the Ministry of Economy and Finance, first as General Secretary for the Budget and Public Spending (1982–1984), and then as Secretary of State for Finance (1984–1991). During his tenure as Secretary of State for Finance, Spain joined the European Economic Community in 1986. He became known for his actions seeking to combat fraud and tax evasion, going after the rich and famous, including celebrities such as Lola Flores, Marujita Díaz or Pedro Ruiz. In the 1986 general election he was for the first time elected to the Congress of Deputies, remaining as an MP representing Barcelona until 2004.

In 1991 he joined the Council of Ministers as Minister of Public Works and Transport.

He took a role in the process of liberalization of telecommunications in Spain, promoting the 1991–2001 National Plan of Telecommunications (PNT); in 1993, Borrell threatened nonetheless the European Commission with blocking the liberalization unless the concession of a moratory Spain was given, as Borrell deemed imperative to achieve first the universalization of service before the complete liberalization.

Following the 1993 general election, Borrell continued with a seat at the Council of Ministers, assuming the portfolio of Minister of Public Works, Transports and Environment in the last government presided by Felipe González. He left the office after the arrival to power of the People&#x27;s Party in 1996, remaining as an MP for Barcelona in the Spanish Congress.

=== Brief spell as leader of the opposition ===
In 1998 Borrell decided to run against the PSOE&#x27;s then party leader Joaquín Almunia in the first national primary election ever held in the PSOE since the Second Republic, intended to determine who the party would nominate as its prime ministerial candidate vis-à-vis the 2000 general election. Borrell ran as the underdog, campaigning as the candidate of the socialist base against the party establishment, and surprisingly won the voting, commanding 114,254 of the member&#x27;s votes (54.99%), versus the 92,860 (44.67%) obtained by Almunia. Thus began an uneasy relationship and power-sharing—the &quot;bicefalia&quot; (&quot;duumvirate&quot;)—between the official party leader, Almunia, and the prime ministerial candidate elected by the members in the primaries, Borrell. 

However, in May 1999, a fraud investigation was launched into two officials whom, several years earlier, Borrell had appointed to senior posts in the finance ministry. Though not involved in the inquiry into property purchases, Borrell resigned from the role of Prime Ministerial candidate, stating that he did not want the affair to damage his party&#x27;s chances in the upcoming local and general elections. 

=== Involvement in European politics ===

Amid the sixth term of the Cortes Generales, Borrell was elected to chair the Joint Congress-Senate Committee for the European Union in October 1999, replacing Pedro Solbes. Reelected as MP for Barcelona in the 2000 general election, Borrell repeated as president of the Joint Committee for the European Union for the full 7th parliamentary term. Then, in 2001, Borrell was also appointed the Spanish parliament&#x27;s representative on the Convention on the Future of Europe. In 2011 he was awarded Spain&#x27;s medal of the Order of Constitutional Merit in recognition of his participation in this convention, which drafted the European Constitution that eventually led to the Treaty of Lisbon. During his time at the convention, he unsuccessfully pushed for a mention to a &quot;federal model&quot; in the draft, as well as he advocated for the explicit mention of the equality between women and men. A laicist, he also opposed then the inclusion of the notion of a &quot;Christian heritage&quot; in the text.

In 2004, prime minister and PSOE&#x27;s leader José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero proposed Borrell to lead the Socialist Ticket in the 2004 European elections. The PSOE won the elections with 6,6 million votes (43,30%), obtaining 25 MEP seats, although turnout was relatively low at 46%. Borrell sat with the Party of European Socialists (PES) group, and served as leader of the Spanish delegation.

In July 2004 Borrell was elected President of the European Parliament, as a result of an agreement between the EPP and the Socialists, becoming the third Spaniard to hold this position after Enrique Barón and José María Gil-Robles. In the presidential vote, out of 700 Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) he received an absolute majority with 388 votes in the first ballot. The other two candidates were the Polish Liberal Bronisław Geremek (208 votes) and the French communist Francis Wurtz (51 votes). He was the first newly elected MEP to hold the post since direct elections were held in 1979. As part of a deal with the conservative faction in the parliament, the EPP, he was succeeded as president of the parliament by the German conservative politician Hans-Gert Pöttering in the second part of the five-year term.

In his capacity as president, Borrell also chaired the Parliament&#x27;s temporary committee on policy challenges and budgetary means of the enlarged Union 2007–2013. From 2007 until leaving the Parliament in 2009, he served as chairman of the Committee on Development. In addition to his committee assignments, he was a member of the Parliament&#x27;s delegation to the ACP–EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly.

=== Step back from the political front ===

Borrell was nominated president of the European University Institute on 12 December 2008, and assumed this position in January 2010. In 2012, he was forced to resign after failing to disclose a financial relationship with Abengoa, which paid him €300,000 yearly as a board member for the company.

In 2012, the University of Lleida appointed Borrell to a professorship of competition and regional development sponsored by energy company Repsol. He also held the Jean Monnet Chair at the Institute of International Studies at Complutense University of Madrid. 

Borrell collaborated along with other prominent PSOE figures, such as Cristina Narbona, José Félix Tezanos and Manuel Escudero, in the making of &quot;Somos socialistas. Por una nueva socialdemocracia&quot; (&quot;We are socialists. For a new social-democracy&quot;), a manifesto in support of Pedro Sánchez&#x27;s successful bid to the leadership of the PSOE in the May 2017 PSOE primary election prior to the 39th Federal Congress of the party.

He also stood out as one of the most outspoken opponents of Catalan secessionism. Borrell co-authored &quot;Las cuentas y los cuentos de la independencia&quot; (&quot;The calculations and tales behind independence&quot;), a 2015 essay that vowed to dismantle the economic arguments laid out by the pro-independence movement. He also took a leading role in a mass rally defending the unity of Spain held in Barcelona on 8 October 2017, in which Borrell gave an impassionated speech demanding &quot;not to bring up more frontiers&quot; while displaying a European Union flag that he called &quot;our &quot;estelada&quot;&quot; (starred flag), bringing him back to the media first line. He also took part on a second mass rally on 29 October 2017 under the slogan &quot;We are all Catalonia&quot;.

=== Foreign Minister, 2018–2019 ===

Following the 2018 successful motion of no confidence against Mariano Rajoy and subsequent investiture of Pedro Sánchez as new prime minister, Borrell was announced on 5 June as Sánchez&#x27;s choice for the post of foreign minister in his new government. 22 years after the end of his last tenure as member of the Government of Spain, Borrell assumed the portfolio of Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation on 7 June along the rest of the new cabinet in La Zarzuela. The new minister relocated some of the high-rank officials appointed by the government of Mariano Rajoy with a diplomatic background to ambassadorial posts, including secretaries of State and, most notably, the former foreign minister (Alfonso Dastis) and the prime minister&#x27;s chief of staff (Jorge Moragas).

Borrell decided to reformulate the High Commissioner for the &#x27;Marca España&#x27; (Spain Brand), a one-person body functionally dependent directly on the Office of the Prime Minister but organically included within the Foreign Office structure to the post of Secretary of State for Global Spain. The officeholder responsible for the &#x27;Marca España&#x27; since 2012, The Marquess of Valtierra, was replaced by Irene Lozano.

In June 2018, Borrell accompanied King Felipe VI on an official visit to the US. Borrell had a meeting with Mike Pompeo, where the Spanish delegation expressed concern over the US protectionist drift; discrepancies were found between the two countries in their approach to migration policies.

In September 2018, the National Securities Market Commission (CNMV) settled a disciplinary action against Borrell opened in 2017 due to the latter&#x27;s insider trading in the sale of stocks of Abengoa (whose board of directors Borrell was a member of) in November 2015, sanctioning him with a fine of €.

Regarding the negotiations with the United Kingdom on Gibraltar in the context of Brexit, Borrell vowed to prioritise improvement of the living conditions in neighbouring Campo de Gibraltar (he reportedly considered the reality of the &quot;3rd territory with the highest GDP per capita in the World&quot;—Gibraltar—surrounded by &quot;a flatland of underdevelopment&quot;—the Campo de Gibraltar—as something unacceptable). On the other hand, he renounced attempts to include the longstanding bid for sovereignty as an element of the negotiations. Borrell highlighted the fact that this soft approach was the same stance used by his predecessor, Dastis, outlining a continuity in the negotiations with the former government, with the ministry keeping the same negotiating team as before the government change. In November 2018, he signed four MoUs negotiated with the United Kingdom, settling aspects of the future relationship with the British Overseas Territory.

Given the aggravation of the political crisis in Nicaragua, in December 2018 Borrell pressed EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs Federica Mogherini for EU-wide involvement in the situation.

In May 2019, the Spanish Embassy in Caracas lodged Venezuelan dissident Leopoldo López as a guest following the Venezuelan uprising, as the latter had been freed from domiciliary imprisonment by forces endorsing Juan Guaidó. However, Borrell warned Spain was not going &quot;to allow the embassy to become a centre of political activism&quot;, vowing to restrict the political activities of López as a guest.

For the 2019 European Parliament election in Spain, Borrell ran first in the PSOE list. During the electoral campaign, he appealed to the unity of Europe and stressed the need for EU member states to pool sovereignty in order to survive as a civilization. Shortly after his election, he gave up his newly won seat before the inaugural session of the legislature, arguing that acting prime minister Pedro Sánchez and he had agreed that, amid the uncertainty regarding the second investiture of Sánchez, the post of foreign minister should not be left vacant for an indefinite period.

In October 2019, Borrell condemned the Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria against Syrian Kurds, adding that &quot;We don&#x27;t have magic powers&quot; to stop the Turkish invasion.

He stepped down from the office on 29 November 2019 and was succeeded &quot;ad interim&quot; by the Minister of Defence, Margarita Robles.

===European Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy===

====2019====
On 2 July 2019, President of the European Council Donald Tusk announced that the European Council would nominate Josep Borrell as High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. The portfolio had been reportedly beefed up with additional responsibilities in humanitarian aid, support of development policies in Africa and the external dimension of immigration. Also in July 2019, he announced the acquisition of double Argentine–Spanish citizenship, assumed on 18 July 2019, thus gaining the citizenship his father was born with. He passed the hearing before the European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs (AFET) on 7 October 2019. His nomination was green-lighted the next day by a vote of AFET members.

To counter its negative image in the EU, China sent medical aid and supplies to EU countries affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Borrell warned that there is &quot;a geopolitical component, including a struggle for influence through spinning and the &#x27;politics of generosity&#x27;.&quot; He also said that &quot;China is aggressively pushing the message that, unlike the US, it is a responsible and reliable partner.&quot;
====2020====

Borrell said that proposed Israeli annexation of the West Bank &quot;could not pass unchallenged&quot; and warned that &quot;failure to adequately respond would encourage other states with territorial claims to disregard basic principles of international law&quot;. He said that &quot;In line with international law and relevant U.N. Security Council resolutions, the EU does not recognize Israel&#x27;s sovereignty&quot; over the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. Borrell hailed the peace agreement between Israel and the United Arab Emirates as benefiting both nations and being important for stability in the Middle East. He also called Israeli suspension of its annexation plans positive and stated that the European Union hoped for a two-state solution.
On 9 April 2020, Borrell, on behalf of the EU, with the release of the first report of the Investigation and Identification Team to the Executive Council of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and to the Secretary-General of the United Nations on 8 April 2020, declared that &quot;We fully support the report&#x27;s findings and note with great concern its conclusions. The European Union strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab Air Force as concluded by the report. Those identified responsible for the use of chemical weapons must be held accountable for these reprehensible acts.&quot;

On 24 April, the EU&#x27;s foreign security policy agency, the European External Action Service (EEAS), published a report on disinformation related to the COVID-19 pandemic. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that the language had been toned down amid criticism from China. The final report differed in key areas from both an internal version and an earlier draft planned for public release. At a parliamentary hearing on 30 April, Borrell acknowledged that China had expressed concerns about the report after it leaked but he denied the EU had bowed to pressure or that the report had been revised. Borrell said that there were two separate reports, one for internal consumption and one for publication. Responding to questions from members of the European Parliament, Borrell accused staff of damaging the EU by leaking. He also appeared to suggest that analysts&#x27; views were biased and cast doubt on their credibility: &quot;I cannot accept that the personal belief or feeling of a member of staff leaking mails—maybe being written to be leaked—created damage to the credibility of the institution&quot;, he said, later asking MEPs why &quot;more credibility&quot; was being given &quot;to the personal opinion of a member of a staff&quot;. 

Multiple EU officials told BuzzFeed News and &quot;The New York Times&quot; that they were angry and disappointed by Borrell&#x27;s focus on leaks and, in particular, his singling out of junior staff members.

Concerning the long-standing Aegean dispute between Turkey and Greece, Borrell in August 2020 expressed &quot;full solidarity&quot; with Greece and Cyprus (Turkey has occupied northern Cyprus since July 1974) and called for &quot;immediate deescalation&quot; by Turkey and &quot;reengaging in dialogue.&quot;
In October 2020, Borrell called on Armenia and Azerbaijan to cease fighting in the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh region and return to the negotiating table.

====2021====

In February 2021, Borrell voiced &quot;strong concern&quot; about China&#x27;s &quot;treatment of ethnic and religious minorities, in particular&quot; ethnic Uyghurs in Xinjiang. In March 2021, he said China&#x27;s sanctions on EU officials had created &quot;a new atmosphere&quot; and &quot;a new situation&quot;.

Although warned against doing so by several EU countries, Borrell decided on his own initiative to make the first high-level EU trip of its type in four years to Russia amidst the 2021 Russian protests, to meet with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov. The visit was described by MEPs, diplomats and other political observers as a humiliation for Borrell, as he stood by while Lavrov called the EU an &quot;unreliable partner&quot; and Russia expelled three EU diplomats while Borrell and Lavrov held their joint press briefing. This led to a group of over 70 MEPs to call for Borrell&#x27;s resignation.

In May 2021, Borrell called for a ceasefire between Israel and the Palestinian Islamist group Hamas.

In June 2021, the Spanish newspaper ABC published a mail that described that Borrell had informed the Cuban embassy about the debate in the European Parliament about the situation in Cuba and that showed his intention to stop the debate and prevent it from reaching the Parliament&#x27;s floor. A group of at least 16 MEPs asked Borrell for explanations.

In August 2021, Borrell received criticism for sending a high-ranking EU representative, Enrique Mora, to attend the inauguration of Iranian president Ebrahim Raisi. Mora was seated directly behind senior leaders of Hamas and Hezbollah during the ceremony. Borrell&#x27;s decision to send him there was blasted by David Lega and eight other members of the European Parliament who sent Borrell a letter stating that his action &quot;contradicts European commitments to uphold and stand for human rights.&quot; The MEPs also pointed to Raisi&#x27;s role in the 1988 executions of Iranian political prisoners and warned that honoring the &quot;inauguration of the &#x27;Hangman of Tehran&#x27; only serves to encourage such behavior&quot;.

In September 2021, Borrell compared the situation on the Belarus–Poland border to the migrant crisis on the Morocco–Spain border.

In October 2021, he went to Saudi Arabia after visiting Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. Borrell said that the EU &quot;now has human rights dialogues with all Gulf States and we launched such a dialogue with Saudi Arabia this week. This is an area where there is much to gain for both sides from closer cooperation.&quot; Borrell and Saudi Arabia&#x27;s Foreign Minister Faisal bin Farhan Al Saud also discussed the conflict in Yemen and the humanitarian situation in Taliban-controlled Afghanistan. Borell described the situation in Yemen as a &quot;terrible tragedy&quot; and called for a peaceful solution to the war in Yemen, which is largely seen in the region as a proxy conflict between Iran and Saudi Arabia.

On 8 October 2021, Borrell said the EU&#x27;s relations with Turkey has significantly improved and he called his relationship with Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan &quot;excellent&quot;.

On 18 October 2021, Borrell argued that the 2021 global energy crisis had &quot;deep geopolitical roots. ... the price of gas, the scarcity, is something that has to be looked at from a geopolitical perspective.&quot;

In December 2021, he criticised EU member states for not imposing sanctions on Ethiopia, which was accused of war crimes during the Tigray War. Borrell said the situation in Ethiopia was &quot;one of my biggest frustrations&quot; of the year because the EU was not able to react properly to the large-scale human rights violations, &quot;mass rapes using sexual violence as a war arm, killings and concentration camps based on ethnic belonging.&quot;

====2022====

On 22 February 2022, after Russia recognised the breakaway Donetsk People&#x27;s Republic and Lugansk People&#x27;s Republic and subsequently sent troops into the two regions, Borrell issued a statement condemning the actions and called upon Russia to return to the tenets of the Normandy Format. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine on 24 February, Borrell and European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen were part of an EU delegation visiting Kyiv on 8 April. Borrell said he wants EU countries to confiscate frozen foreign-exchange reserves of the Russian central bank—which amount to over $300 billion—to cover the costs of rebuilding Ukraine after the war.

In September 2022, he welcomed a UN report on the human rights abuses of the Uyghur minority in China.

On 13 October 2022, when speaking at the European Diplomatic Academy&#x27;s inauguration ceremony in Bruges, Belgium, Borrell declared that &quot;Europe is a garden and the rest of the world is a jungle.&quot; He added that the garden could be invaded by the jungle and that the gardeners would need to travel there in order to defend it. On 18 October, in response to his comments, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the United Arab Emirates summoned the acting head of the EU mission at UAE to explain Borrell&#x27;s remarks, stating that the remarks were &quot;inappropriate and discriminatory&quot; and &quot;contribute to a worsening climate of intolerance and discrimination worldwide.&quot;

====2023==== 
In March 2023, after the Ethiopia–Tigray peace agreement was signed and after talks with US Secretary of State Antony Blinken, Borrell said that the European Union and the United States would normalize relations with Ethiopia &quot;in a gradual way, step-by-step&quot;.

In April 2023, he criticized China for its support of Russia, saying that &quot;We have been clear with China that its position on Russia&#x27;s atrocities and war crimes will determine the quality of our relations with Beijing.&quot;
On 3 June 2023, Indonesian Defense Minister Prabowo Subianto proposed a multi-point peace plan for the Russian invasion of Ukraine, calling for a ceasefire, a demilitarized zone observed and monitored by UN peacekeepers, and a U.N. referendum in what he called &quot;disputed territory&quot;. Borrell criticized Prabow&#x27;s proposal, saying that &quot;We need to bring peace to Ukraine&quot;, but it must be a &quot;just peace, not a peace of surrender.&quot;

On 21 September 2023, Borrell released a statement which condemned the military operation by Azerbaijan against the Armenian population of Nagorno-Karabakh and deplored the casualties and loss of life caused by the offensive.

He condemned the &quot;barbaric and terrorist attack&quot; by Hamas on Israel which started the 2023 Israel–Hamas war. On 10 October 2023, Borrell accused Israel of breaking international law by imposing a blockade of the Gaza Strip. On 3 January 2024, he condemned the comments of the Israeli ministers Itamar Ben-Gvir and Bezalel Smotrich, writing, &quot;Forced displacements are strictly prohibited as a grave violation of [international humanitarian law] &amp; words matter.&quot; In March 2024, Borrell said Israel&#x27;s depriving food from Palestinians was a serious violation of international humanitarian law, and described the Flour massacre as &quot;totally unacceptable carnage&quot;. German Chancellor Olaf Scholz confronted Borrell over his months-long criticism of Israel, saying Borrell did not speak for Germany.

====2024==== 

In April 2024, Borrell &quot;strongly condemned&quot; the Iranian strikes on Israel, calling them &quot;an unprecedented escalation and a grave threat to regional security&quot;. Previously in March 2024, Borrell had stalled efforts by nine EU foreign ministers to sanction Iran over its missile and drone program, because he felt that new sanctions might hamper efforts to bind Iran to a nuclear non-proliferation deal.

On 15 May 2024, Borrell called on Israel to immediately halt its assault on Rafah, stating it was disrupting humanitarian aid and causing a humanitarian crisis, while also calling on Hamas to release all Israeli hostages. Borrell condemned the Tel al-Sultan massacre, saying that Israel&#x27;s military actions needed to stop.

==Other positions==
;Corporate boards
* Abengoa, member of the board of directors (2009–2016)

;Non-profit organizations
* European Institute of the Mediterranean (IEMed), member of the board
* European Movement International, member of the board of trustees
* Fundación Focus, member of the board of trustees 
* Graduate School for Global and International Studies, University of Salamanca, member of the advisory board
* Reporters Without Borders (RWB), member of the emeritus board 

==Honours==
===National honours===
* 1996 : Grand Cross of the Order of Charles III
* 2000 : Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic
* 2007 : Grand Cross of the Order of the Civil Merit
* 2011 : Medal of the Order of Constitutional Merit
* Doctor &quot;honoris causa&quot; by Universidad de Valladolid (Spain, 2024).
* 2024 : Grand Cross - White Decoration - of the Cross of Aeronautical Merit 
* Doctor &quot;honoris causa&quot; by Universidad Pontificia Comillas (Spain, 2025).

===Foreign honours===
* 2015 : Commander of the Légion d&#x27;Honneur (France)
* 2022 : Third Class of the Order of Merit (Ukraine) 

==Personal life==

Borrell was first married to French sociologist Carolina Mayeur. The marriage produced two sons, Joan, a diplomat, and Lionel, an aircraft pilot. Borrell and Mayeur divorced in the 1990s. 

Since 1998, Borrell has been in a relationship with Cristina Narbona, a Spanish PSOE politician and former Minister of Environment (2004–2008) in the Zapatero administration. The couple, resident in Valdemorillo since 2001, married in July 2018.

In 2019, he acquired Argentine citizenship through descent, stating that he wished to honour the memory of his father, who grew up in Mendoza, Argentina.

Borrell speaks Spanish, Catalan, Italian, French and English.

He has been a keen participant in the annual festivity in his native Pobla de Segur descending the Noguera Pallaresa river, in which the stream is rowed down by the partakers as log drivers ().

===Corrupt share dealing ===
In November 2018, the national stock market regulator in Spain concluded that Borrell traded shares of the company Abengoa while in possession of insider information. Borrell was fined 30,000 euros for the breach.

== Electoral history ==
==Publications==
;Authored books
* 
* 
;Co-authored books
* 

==Notes==
== References ==
==External links==
*Official biography
*Josep Borrell 
*Biography by CIDOB (in Spanish)



|-


|-


|-





|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312901" start="0" end="23" title="Josep Borrell" label="Josep Borrell Fontelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q634291" start="85" end="157" title="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy" label="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q651703" start="162" end="203" title="Vice-President of the European Commission" label="Vice-President of the European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="239" end="276" title="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q740126" start="298" end="334" title="President of the European Parliament" label="President of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654490" start="373" end="432" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Spain)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17172" start="495" end="512" title="La Pobla de Segur" label="La Pobla de Segur"/>
<link wikidata="Q874209" start="677" end="713" title="Spanish transition to democracy" label="Spain&amp;#x27;s transition to democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156799" start="783" end="798" title="Felipe González" label="Felipe González"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058576" start="982" end="1002" title="Council of Ministers (Spain)" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657635" start="1006" end="1044" title="Ministry of Development (Spain)" label="Minister of Public Works and Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508563" start="1162" end="1186" title="Leader of the Opposition (Spain)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="1324" end="1357" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="Member of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q740126" start="1419" end="1455" title="President of the European Parliament" label="President of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058576" start="1508" end="1528" title="Council of Ministers (Spain)" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017179" start="1565" end="1628" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Spain)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs, the European Union and Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q54628955" start="1636" end="1654" title="Sánchez I Government" label="Sánchez government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="1699" end="1715" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q634291" start="1747" end="1819" title="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy" label="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17172" start="1967" end="1984" title="La Pobla de Segur" label="La Pobla de Segur"/>
<link wikidata="Q13904" start="1986" end="2004" title="province of Lleida" label="province of Lleida"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="2015" end="2023" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="2208" end="2217" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q44237" start="2258" end="2265" title="Mendoza, Argentina" label="Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q9293957" start="2280" end="2303" title="General San Martín Park" label="General San Martín Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="2460" end="2477" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758042" start="2726" end="2739" title="Spanish Baccalaureate" label="Baccalaureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15090" start="2753" end="2759" title="Lleida" label="Lleida"/>
<link wikidata="Q29043218" start="2858" end="2879" title="Fundación Juan March" label="Juan March Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q253936" start="2888" end="2905" title="Fulbright Program" label="Fulbright Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="2927" end="2936" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q25864" start="3041" end="3071" title="Technical University of Madrid" label="Technical University of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468110" start="3156" end="3162" title="Gal On" label="Gal On"/>
<link wikidata="Q161387" start="3163" end="3170" title="kibbutz" label="kibbutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q219694" start="3372" end="3404" title="Complutense University" label="Complutense University of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="3504" end="3523" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q116455574" start="3603" end="3632" title="French Institute of Petroleum" label="French Institute of Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="3685" end="3688" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q219694" start="3716" end="3719" title="Complutense University of Madrid" label="UCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q25864" start="3833" end="3836" title="Polytechnic University of Madrid" label="UPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q768224" start="3914" end="3938" title="University of Valladolid" label="University of Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q608819" start="3977" end="3982" title="Cepsa" label="Cepsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="4246" end="4283" title="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q874209" start="4341" end="4377" title="Spanish transition to democracy" label="Spain&amp;#x27;s transition to democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366745" start="4385" end="4413" title="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party of the Community of Madrid" label="Socialist Grouping of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9025370" start="4425" end="4436" title="Luis Solana" label="Luis Solana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749847" start="4441" end="4462" title="Luis Carlos Croissier" label="Luis Carlos Croissier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11918794" start="4523" end="4546" title="1979 Spanish local elections" label="1979 municipal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q427505" start="4550" end="4561" title="Majadahonda" label="Majadahonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044930" start="4654" end="4675" title="Provincial deputation (Spain)" label="Provincial Deputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q537616" start="4847" end="4868" title="1982 Spanish general election" label="1982 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="4979" end="4994" title="Spanish Second Republic" label="Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156799" start="5017" end="5032" title="Felipe González" label="Felipe González"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="5332" end="5359" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="5429" end="5440" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q242084" start="5505" end="5516" title="Lola Flores" label="Lola Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081492" start="5518" end="5531" title="Marujita Díaz" label="Marujita Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469123" start="5554" end="5575" title="1986 Spanish general election" label="1986 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q539149" start="5617" end="5637" title="Congress of Deputies" label="Congress of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="5655" end="5657" title="Member of parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859840" start="5671" end="5680" title="Barcelona (Spanish Congress Electoral District)" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058576" start="5716" end="5736" title="Council of Ministers (Spain)" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657635" start="5740" end="5778" title="Minister of Public Works and Transport" label="Minister of Public Works and Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q746418" start="5814" end="5828" title="liberalization" label="liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="5972" end="5991" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633212" start="6207" end="6228" title="1993 Spanish general election" label="1993 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058576" start="6267" end="6287" title="Council of Ministers (Spain)" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q185088" start="6473" end="6492" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Spain)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="6652" end="6656" title="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="PSOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q311229" start="6682" end="6697" title="Joaquín Almunia" label="Joaquín Almunia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="6720" end="6736" title="Partisan primary" label="primary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="6769" end="6784" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518293" start="6886" end="6907" title="2000 Spanish general election" label="2000 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q66063000" start="7927" end="7981" title="Joint Congress-Senate Committee for the European Union" label="Joint Congress-Senate Committee for the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q458323" start="8009" end="8021" title="Pedro Solbes" label="Pedro Solbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="8036" end="8038" title="Member of parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518293" start="8060" end="8081" title="2000 Spanish general election" label="2000 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="8242" end="8267" title="Cortes Generales" label="Spanish parliament&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q845296" start="8290" end="8324" title="Convention on the Future of Europe" label="Convention on the Future of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9052835" start="8375" end="8404" title="Order of Constitutional Merit" label="Order of Constitutional Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="8479" end="8500" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="European Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="8528" end="8544" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41395" start="8910" end="8938" title="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero" label="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586871" start="8992" end="9015" title="2004 European Parliament election in Spain" label="2004 European elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q220945" start="9166" end="9194" title="Party of European Socialists" label="Party of European Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q740126" start="9290" end="9326" title="President of the European Parliament" label="President of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q635616" start="9368" end="9371" title="European People&amp;#x27;s Party group" label="EPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q507343" start="9380" end="9390" title="Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats" label="Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q449826" start="9448" end="9461" title="Enrique Barón Crespo" label="Enrique Barón"/>
<link wikidata="Q682757" start="9466" end="9487" title="José María Gil-Robles" label="José María Gil-Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="9526" end="9560" title="Members of the European Parliament" label="Members of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q157282" start="9686" end="9703" title="Bronisław Geremek" label="Bronisław Geremek"/>
<link wikidata="Q568949" start="9741" end="9754" title="Francis Wurtz" label="Francis Wurtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q635616" start="9932" end="9935" title="European People&amp;#x27;s Party European Democrats" label="EPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q57301" start="10023" end="10042" title="Hans-Gert Pöttering" label="Hans-Gert Pöttering"/>
<link wikidata="Q780110" start="10330" end="10354" title="Committee on Development" label="Committee on Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867102" start="10457" end="10492" title="ACP–EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly" label="ACP–EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378099" start="10578" end="10607" title="European University Institute" label="European University Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q319039" start="10761" end="10768" title="Abengoa" label="Abengoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235594" start="10850" end="10870" title="University of Lleida" label="University of Lleida"/>
<link wikidata="Q174747" start="10976" end="10982" title="Repsol" label="Repsol"/>
<link wikidata="Q219694" start="11064" end="11096" title="Complutense University of Madrid" label="Complutense University of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984396" start="11170" end="11186" title="Cristina Narbona" label="Cristina Narbona"/>
<link wikidata="Q55655187" start="11188" end="11206" title="José Félix Tezanos" label="José Félix Tezanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q44612714" start="11211" end="11226" title="Manuel Escudero" label="Manuel Escudero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070218" start="11394" end="11407" title="Pedro Sánchez" label="Pedro Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958393" start="11467" end="11497" title="2017 Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party leadership election" label="May 2017 PSOE primary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q893331" start="11608" end="11628" title="Catalan independence movement" label="Catalan secessionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q148002" start="12152" end="12160" title="estelada" label="estelada"/>
<link wikidata="Q54567414" start="12395" end="12456" title="2018 vote of no confidence in the government of Mariano Rajoy" label="2018 successful motion of no confidence against Mariano Rajoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070218" start="12487" end="12500" title="Pedro Sánchez" label="Pedro Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q54628955" start="12617" end="12635" title="Sánchez I Government" label="his new government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194749" start="12696" end="12715" title="Government of Spain" label="Government of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017179" start="12750" end="12797" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Spain)" label="Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q604921" start="12845" end="12856" title="Zarzuela Palace" label="La Zarzuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666774" start="13094" end="13108" title="Alfonso Dastis" label="Alfonso Dastis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744794" start="13118" end="13154" title="Moncloa Chief of Staff" label="prime minister&amp;#x27;s chief of staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11037498" start="13156" end="13169" title="Jorge Moragas" label="Jorge Moragas"/>
<link wikidata="Q57163841" start="13436" end="13471" title="Secretary of State for Global Spain" label="Secretary of State for Global Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16299033" start="13551" end="13572" title="Carlos Espinosa de los Monteros y Bernaldo de Quirós" label="Marquess of Valtierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920188" start="13590" end="13602" title="Irene Lozano" label="Irene Lozano"/>
<link wikidata="Q191045" start="13639" end="13653" title="King Felipe VI" label="King Felipe VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q473239" start="13713" end="13724" title="Mike Pompeo" label="Mike Pompeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894522" start="13922" end="13959" title="National Securities Market Commission" label="National Securities Market Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q854623" start="14053" end="14068" title="insider trading" label="insider trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q319039" start="14094" end="14101" title="Abengoa" label="Abengoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="14109" end="14127" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="14242" end="14256" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="14260" end="14269" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="14288" end="14294" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116986" start="14377" end="14395" title="Campo de Gibraltar" label="Campo de Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="15049" end="15053" title="Memorandum of understanding" label="MoUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="15143" end="15169" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866508" start="15201" end="15230" title="2018–2022 Nicaraguan protests" label="political crisis in Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741557" start="15308" end="15326" title="Federica Mogherini" label="Federica Mogherini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="15406" end="15413" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672657" start="15442" end="15456" title="Leopoldo López" label="Leopoldo López"/>
<link wikidata="Q63395926" start="15482" end="15501" title="2019 Venezuelan uprising attempt" label="Venezuelan uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q58833335" start="15582" end="15593" title="Juan Guaidó" label="Juan Guaidó"/>
<link wikidata="Q28226351" start="15788" end="15830" title="2019 European Parliament election in Spain" label="2019 European Parliament election in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q70207089" start="16403" end="16445" title="2019 Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria" label="Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q619829" start="16454" end="16466" title="Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria" label="Syrian Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181026" start="16655" end="16674" title="Ministry of Defence (Spain)" label="Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997107" start="16676" end="16692" title="Margarita Robles" label="Margarita Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q735587" start="16806" end="16839" title="President of the European Council" label="President of the European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q946" start="16840" end="16851" title="Donald Tusk" label="Donald Tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="16871" end="16887" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q634291" start="16920" end="16992" title="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy" label="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q826745" start="17074" end="17090" title="humanitarian aid" label="humanitarian aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q780176" start="17379" end="17427" title="European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs" label="European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="17569" end="17574" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="17637" end="17654" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30527300" start="17986" end="18030" title="proposed Israeli annexation of the West Bank" label="proposed Israeli annexation of the West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="18399" end="18422" title="Palestinian territories" label="Palestinian territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q98371472" start="18463" end="18478" title="Israel–United Arab Emirates peace agreement" label="peace agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="18487" end="18493" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="18502" end="18522" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q719543" start="18718" end="18736" title="two-state solution" label="two-state solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="18899" end="18951" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="18963" end="18980" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="18988" end="19002" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416238" start="19201" end="19222" title="Syrian Air Force" label="Syrian Arab Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q672941" start="19437" end="19469" title="European External Action Service" label="European External Action Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q85173778" start="19500" end="19547" title="misinformation related to the COVID-19 pandemic" label="disinformation related to the COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="19555" end="19573" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076911" start="19632" end="19652" title="China–European Union relations" label="criticism from China"/>
<link wikidata="Q55715275" start="20657" end="20670" title="BuzzFeed News" label="BuzzFeed News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352880" start="20869" end="20883" title="Aegean dispute" label="Aegean dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="20977" end="20983" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="20988" end="20994" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050999" start="21007" end="21031" title="Turkish invasion of Cyprus" label="occupied northern Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="21184" end="21191" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="21196" end="21206" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44302" start="21241" end="21257" title="Nagorno-Karabakh" label="Nagorno-Karabakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="21475" end="21482" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="21486" end="21494" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076911" start="21532" end="21557" title="China–European Union relations" label="sanctions on EU officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q105008734" start="21813" end="21834" title="2021 Russian protests" label="2021 Russian protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418873" start="21849" end="21873" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Russia)" label="Russian Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q58217" start="21874" end="21887" title="Sergey Lavrov" label="Sergey Lavrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="21916" end="21920" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q106775117" start="22276" end="22285" title="2021 Israel–Palestine crisis" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="22321" end="22329" title="Islamist" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="22336" end="22341" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q287076" start="22380" end="22383" title="ABC (newspaper)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="22527" end="22531" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379766" start="22789" end="22801" title="Enrique Mora" label="Enrique Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="22833" end="22837" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947347" start="22851" end="22864" title="Ebrahim Raisi" label="Ebrahim Raisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="22916" end="22921" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="22926" end="22935" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236464" start="23014" end="23024" title="David Lega" label="David Lega"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="23041" end="23075" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="members of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907554" start="23259" end="23305" title="1988 executions of Iranian political prisoners" label="1988 executions of Iranian political prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499730" start="23495" end="23516" title="Belarus–Poland border" label="Belarus–Poland border"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748217" start="23546" end="23566" title="Morocco–Spain border" label="Morocco–Spain border"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="23597" end="23609" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="23625" end="23630" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="23639" end="23659" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q72099398" start="23944" end="23969" title="Faisal bin Farhan Al Saud" label="Faisal bin Farhan Al Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="24001" end="24006" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="24041" end="24048" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="24060" end="24071" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686631" start="24189" end="24201" title="Yemeni civil war (2014–present)" label="war in Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948406" start="24244" end="24258" title="Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict" label="proxy conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q20969057" start="24337" end="24358" title="Turkey–European Union relations" label="relations with Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q39259" start="24440" end="24460" title="Recep Tayyip Erdoğan" label="Recep Tayyip Erdoğan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108904013" start="24529" end="24554" title="2021 global energy crisis" label="2021 global energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="24783" end="24791" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105638985" start="24814" end="24846" title="War crimes in the Tigray War" label="war crimes during the Tigray War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150196" start="25229" end="25259" title="Donetsk People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Donetsk People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16746854" start="25264" end="25294" title="Lugansk People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Lugansk People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206998" start="25450" end="25465" title="Normandy Format" label="Normandy Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="25481" end="25508" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772" start="25567" end="25587" title="Ursula von der Leyen" label="Ursula von der Leyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324629" start="25700" end="25725" title="List of countries by foreign-exchange reserves" label="foreign-exchange reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q113681179" start="25878" end="25887" title="UN Human Rights Office report on Xinjiang" label="UN report"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754778" start="25895" end="25914" title="Persecution of Uyghurs in China" label="human rights abuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="25922" end="25928" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q30684101" start="26336" end="26391" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (United Arab Emirates)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q115124248" start="26687" end="26718" title="Ethiopia–Tigray peace agreement" label="Ethiopia–Tigray peace agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821917" start="26773" end="26787" title="Antony Blinken" label="Antony Blinken"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="26962" end="26967" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q130570" start="26976" end="26993" title="China–Russia relations" label="support of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="27184" end="27193" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107268" start="27212" end="27228" title="Prabowo Subianto" label="Prabowo Subianto"/>
<link wikidata="Q111030945" start="27252" end="27262" title="Peace negotiations in the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="peace plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="27271" end="27298" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077987" start="27372" end="27387" title="List of United Nations peacekeeping missions" label="UN peacekeepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q122700456" start="27702" end="27734" title="2023 Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh" label="military operation by Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44302" start="27770" end="27786" title="Nagorno-Karabakh" label="Nagorno-Karabakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="27920" end="27925" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="27954" end="27975" title="2023 Israel–Hamas war" label="2023 Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q122982851" start="28064" end="28090" title="October 2023 Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip" label="blockade of the Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q12403861" start="28162" end="28177" title="Itamar Ben-Gvir" label="Itamar Ben-Gvir"/>
<link wikidata="Q18759744" start="28182" end="28198" title="Bezalel Smotrich" label="Bezalel Smotrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695144" start="28495" end="28509" title="Flour massacre" label="Flour massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q61053" start="28573" end="28584" title="Olaf Scholz" label="Olaf Scholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q125464497" start="28762" end="28787" title="April 2024 Iranian strikes against Israel" label="Iranian strikes on Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q124512668" start="29191" end="29207" title="Rafah offensive" label="assault on Rafah"/>
<link wikidata="Q123005094" start="29330" end="29346" title="Israel–Hamas war hostage crisis" label="Israeli hostages"/>
<link wikidata="Q126140767" start="29370" end="29392" title="Tel al-Sultan massacre" label="Tel al-Sultan massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q319039" start="29494" end="29501" title="Abengoa" label="Abengoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377261" start="29648" end="29679" title="European Movement International" label="European Movement International"/>
<link wikidata="Q308963" start="29821" end="29844" title="University of Salamanca" label="University of Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="29877" end="29902" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q751275" start="29985" end="30024" title="Order of Charles III" label="Grand Cross of the Order of Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="30034" end="30083" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703201" start="30093" end="30136" title="Order of Civil Merit" label="Grand Cross of the Order of the Civil Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9052835" start="30146" end="30188" title="Order of Constitutional Merit" label="Medal of the Order of Constitutional Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="30204" end="30217" title="honoris causa" label="honoris causa"/>
<link wikidata="Q768224" start="30227" end="30252" title="Universidad de Valladolid" label="Universidad de Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q129426" start="30317" end="30344" title="Cross of Aeronautical Merit" label="Cross of Aeronautical Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="30361" end="30374" title="honoris causa" label="honoris causa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687025" start="30384" end="30415" title="Universidad Pontificia Comillas" label="Universidad Pontificia Comillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="30480" end="30501" title="Legion of Honour" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;Honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q431230" start="30539" end="30563" title="Order of Merit (Ukraine)" label="Order of Merit (Ukraine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984396" start="30827" end="30843" title="Cristina Narbona" label="Cristina Narbona"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="30855" end="30859" title="PSOE" label="PSOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q41395" start="30925" end="30948" title="Zapatero administration" label="Zapatero administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q10783" start="30974" end="30986" title="Valdemorillo" label="Valdemorillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789480" start="31043" end="31064" title="Argentine nationality law" label="Argentine citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q44237" start="31156" end="31174" title="Mendoza, Argentina" label="Mendoza, Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="31192" end="31199" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="31201" end="31208" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="31210" end="31217" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="31219" end="31225" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="31230" end="31237" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q17172" start="31309" end="31323" title="Pobla de Segur" label="Pobla de Segur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23160" start="31339" end="31356" title="Noguera Pallaresa" label="Noguera Pallaresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15008046" start="31418" end="31429" title="Log driving" label="log drivers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816554" wikidata="Q1725537" url="?curid=816554" title="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway">
<text>The New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway , also referred to as the Susie-Q or the Susquehanna, and formerly referred to as the New York, Susquehanna and Western Railroad, is an American Class II freight railway that operates over of trackage in the states of New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania.

The NYS&amp;W was formed in 1881 out of a merger of multiple smaller companies, and their original primary source of income was shipping anthracite coal out of Pennsylvania. From 1898 to 1940, the NYS&amp;W operated as a subsidiary of the Erie Railroad. They emerged from the Erie&#x27;s control, as part of their bankruptcy reorganization, and they discontinued their coal operations.

The railroad completely dieselized by 1945 and changed their primary source of income to providing commuter and bus services around the New York City-area. But by 1955, the services were losing money for the company. All of their commuter services were discontinued in 1966, and by that time, railroad experienced additional financial troubles from a loss of freight customers and interchange partners.

In 1980, the NYS&amp;W was purchased by the Delaware Otsego Corporation (DO), and they reorganized and expanded the railway&#x27;s operations and finances. They also benefited from Conrail&#x27;s monopoly in the northeastern U.S., by operating competing intermodal trains until 1999, when Conrail was split between Norfolk Southern (NS) and CSX.

As of 2025, the NYS&amp;W consists of a southern division and a northern division. The southern division runs from Jersey City, New Jersey to Binghamton, New York and contains what is left of the original NYS&amp;W mainline. The northern division, formed by two branches north of Binghamton, serves Utica and Syracuse and was purchased in 1982. The two divisions are connected via trackage rights over a segment of the Southern Tier Line.

==History==

===Pre-company beginnings===
The origins of the New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway trace back to the New Jersey, Hudson and Delaware Railroad (NJH&amp;D), which was chartered by a group of Paterson, New Jersey businessmen in 1832, with the purpose of connecting the ports of the Hudson Waterfront near New York City to Pennsylvania via the Delaware Water Gap.

By that time, many industrial firms had been established throughout northern New Jersey, and anthracite coal was being mined out of the Pennsylvania Coal Region. The NJH&amp;D was unable to raise enough funds to begin laying down their trackage, due to money panics and competition from the nearby Morris and Essex Canal.

In 1857, the NJH&amp;D charter was sold to the Pennsylvania Coal Company, but they also struggled to raise enough capital to begin construction. Following the events of the Civil War, canals became disused, and a major railroad boom began throughout the United States.

In 1866, the New York and Oswego Midland Railroad (NY&amp;OM) was incorporated under the leadership of DeWitt Clinton Littlejohn, and his plan for the railroad was to provide a connection from New York City to the port city of Oswego, New York at Lake Ontario. Construction on their trackage began at Oswego, two years later.

In 1867, the NJH&amp;D began their grading in Butler, and several competing railroads also emerged and attempted to develop routes throughout northern New Jersey; the Hoboken, Ridgefield and Paterson (HR&amp;P) graded from the industrial city of Paterson to the Hudson River; and the Sussex Valley Railroad completed a grade that reached the Delaware Water Gap. The most successful attempt was by the New Jersey Western Railroad (NJW), which was founded by Cornelius Wortendyke in 1868, and they began laying down their trackage at Hawthorne, the following year.

The NJW quickly decided to shift its focus towards connecting their route with the NY&amp;OM to benefit both railroads. Cornelius Wortendyke signed an agreement with DeWitt Littlejohn, where the two companies would lease and access each other&#x27;s routes. By 1870, the NJW expanded westward from Hackensack to Hanford, but in doing so, they encountered the NJH&amp;D, the HR&amp;P, and the Sussex Valley, all of which already obtained resources and created their route grades.

All four railroads decided it would be convenient to consolidate the work that had already been completed, so they merged together to create the New Jersey Midland Railway (NJM). Concurrently, the NY&amp;OM expanded to Middletown, New York, and they leased the Middletown, Unionville and Water Gap Railroad (MU&amp;WG), since it had provided a connection between the NY&amp;OM at Middletown and the NJM at Hanford.

In 1872, the NJM formally became leased by the NY&amp;OM, and the NJM completed construction on their final stretch of trackage from Hackensack to Jersey City, using trackage rights over the Pennsylvania Railroad (PRR). On July 9, 1873, the first train over the NY&amp;OM and NJM was operated from Oswego to Jersey City. With the inaugural run, the two railroads created the third trunk railroad line to connect New York City and the Great Lakes region, but the ongoing Panic of 1873 quickly affected the finances of both companies, with the NY&amp;OM falling under receivership.

The NY&amp;OM suspended all lease payments, and their partnership with the NJM was quickly put to an end. The NY&amp;OM was later reorganized as the New York, Ontario and Western Railway (NYO&amp;W) in 1879, and they began forming a separate partnership with the West Shore Railroad (later the New York Central Railroad (NYC) to access New York City. The NJM took over the lease of the MU&amp;WG, but in 1875, the NJM was also put into receivership from the after affects of the Panic, and James McCulloh and Garret Hobart served as the NJM&#x27;s receivers.

=== Formation and expansion ===

In 1880, investors from the original NJM regrouped and reorganized the company as the Midland Railroad of New Jersey, with Hobart serving as their president, and the company regained their finances by serving New Jersey industrial firms. The investors decided to profit from hauling anthracite out of Pennsylvania, and they chartered the New York and Scranton Construction Company, which in turn chartered four other small companies, to lay down portions of the NJM route from New Jersey to Pennsylvania.

On May 26, 1881, the Midland Railroad of New Jersey merged with the five companies to form the New York, Susquehanna and Western Railroad (NYS&amp;W); &quot;Susquehanna&quot; was incorporated in the name, since one of the company&#x27;s goals was to reach the Susquehanna River.

In 1882, the new NYS&amp;W railroad extended westward to Gravel Place, Pennsylvania, but they were originally reluctant to extend through the Pocono Mountains, so they began to outsource their coal traffic to the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad (DL&amp;W) and interchange with them at Stroudsburg. To reach the Hudson River waterfront ports, the NYS&amp;W would transfer their coal traffic to the Pennsylvania Railroad at Marion Junction via the Hudson Connecting Railway.

The NYS&amp;W also began operating passenger trains. By the late 1880s, the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s profitability boomed from their coal-hauling business and from their industrial and farmer customers. In 1887, the railroad laid down a double-track route from Paterson to Jersey City to accommodate their rising traffic.

In 1892, the Susquehanna ended their transfer partnerships with the DL&amp;W and the PRR, when they extended their own line eastward from their Little Ferry Yard to a new coal terminal at Edgewater, and they began leasing the newly-chartered Wilkes-Barre and Eastern Railroad (WB&amp;E) between Stroudsburg and Wilkes-Barre, for direct coal mine access. In 1896, the NYS&amp;W chartered the Susquehanna Connecting Railroad to directly access the Wyoming Valley south of Scranton, and to divert coal traffic away from the DL&amp;W.

=== Erie Railroad control ===

The NYS&amp;W&#x27;s prosperity caught the attention of an influential financer, J. P. Morgan, and a company he financed, the Erie Railroad. The Erie already had access to coal mines north of Scranton, but they desired to also access the mines south of the area, and they believed the Susquehanna provided the best route there.

On behalf of the Erie, Morgan quietly purchased the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s stock until he obtained the majority of their shares, and by July 1898, the Erie took over control of all of the railroad&#x27;s operations, making the Susquehanna their subsidiary. In 1908, the Susquehanna purchased their final new steam locomotive, 2-8-0 No. 140, from the Baldwin Locomotive Works; all of their subsequent steam locomotives were either leased or purchased second-hand from the Erie.

In 1911, the Susquehanna&#x27;s Jersey City passenger terminus was moved from the PRR&#x27;s Exchange Place Station to the Erie&#x27;s Pavonia Terminal, and their freight terminus was moved from the PRR&#x27;s Marion yards to the Erie&#x27;s Croxton yards. In 1923, the Susquehanna&#x27;s total gross income peaked at $5.5 million.

The Erie subsequently invested in rebuilding and upgrading the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s trackage and bridges. During the 1920s, the Erie began operating under the control of the Van Sweringen brothers, and they installed a new president for the Erie, John J. Bernet. During Bernet&#x27;s tenure for the Erie, he initiated a major modernization program for the Susquehanna; most of the railroad&#x27;s original steam locomotives and wooden passenger cars were scrapped and replaced with newer Erie equipment.

Throughout the 1930s, the NYS&amp;W experienced some major financial problems from the Great Depression, and the Erie began to neglect them. The general demand for anthracite coal was declining, and while other anthracite-hauling railroads were able to change their freight priorities, the NYS&amp;W struggled to follow suit.

During 1937, the railroad defaulted on some major bonds and taxes they owed, and on June 1, they filed for bankruptcy and reorganization. That same month, the bankruptcy court appointed two co-trustees to the NYS&amp;W; Walter Kidde and Hudson Bordwell, but the latter died only five months into his position, making the former their sole trustee.

Walter Kidde, who had no prior experience in operating railroads, began to explore ways of reorganizing the NYS&amp;W and its assets. The first task he did was to terminate the company&#x27;s lease of the Wilkes-Barre and Eastern, effectively ending their anthracite coal operations, and the WB&amp;E was quickly shut down and ripped up, after they filed for their own bankruptcy.

He also entrusted ownership of the Susquehanna Connecting Railroad to the Erie. In 1938, Kidde discontinued a portion of the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s commuter passenger services. By March 1940, Kidde arranged other cutbacks for the Susquehanna, which resulted in the company being disbanded from the Erie&#x27;s control.

=== Walter Kidde-Henry Norton reorganization ===

Following the abandonment of the WB&amp;E, the NYS&amp;W did not prospect any benefits in continuing their Pennsylvania operations, so by 1941, they cut back the western end of their line to Hainesburg, New Jersey. Walter Kidde decided to have the Susquehanna improve their remaining suburban commuter passenger trains and make profits from providing bus services to Manhattan, and the Susquehanna Transfer Railway was created in 1939, for this purpose.

Kidde also opted to dieselize the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s locomotive roster to reduce their operating costs. In June 1940, they began to purchase some streamlined self-propelled rail cars from the American Car and Foundry Company (ACF) to cover their commuter services. In 1941, the NYS&amp;W began to order some S-2 switchers and RS-1 road switchers from the American Locomotive Company (ALCO) to supersede their steam locomotives. A precedent was quickly set on the NYS&amp;W, where all of their diesels with multiple-unit controls would only receive even road numbers, while all of their non-multiple-unit diesels would only receive odd road numbers.

The Susquehanna also settled a $7 million freight balance debt they owed the Erie by paying them $250,000 and purchasing their freight terminal in Edgewater. The railroad also obtained money from World War II, by providing an effective coastal coal barge route out of Edgewater, to aid a major coal shortage in Great Britain, since a similar route out of Norfolk, Virginia, was blocked by the 1942 submarine menace.

In February 1943, Kidde died, and his deputy and executive officer, Henry K. Norton, subsequently succeeded him as the Susquehanna&#x27;s trustee, and he opted to continue Kidde&#x27;s restructuring plans for the company. By June 1945, almost all of the Susquehanna&#x27;s remaining steam locomotives had either been retired or sold off, and they declared themselves as the first Class I railroad in the United States to completely dieselize. Three locomotives, 2-10-0s Nos. 2435, 2461, and 2492, were retained as yard switchers, until they were also retired by October 1947.

After World War II ended, coal continued to be shipped from Edgewater to Europe, in accordance with the Marshall Plan, until the NYS&amp;W shut down their coal terminal in 1948. During that time, the railroad signed a contract with Seatrain Lines to provide rolling stock-shipping services at Edgewater.

By November 1951, the Susquehanna&#x27;s entire passenger car fleet was replaced with stainless steel cars, their entire streamlined rail car fleet was replaced with Budd Rail Diesel Cars, and many of their passenger stations were revamped. On June 3, 1953, the NYS&amp;W emerged from bankruptcy and completed its reorganization process, having reduced their capitalization from $42 million to $16 million. Norton subsequently became the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s newest president, as a reward for his and Kidde&#x27;s restructuring methods.

=== 1955-1961 financial troubles ===
Two years later, in 1955, stockholders voted to have Norton demoted to chairman and replaced by former Chicago Great Western vice-president James M. Baths, due to Norton&#x27;s excessively-progressive foresight. In December that same year, the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s president position was changed again to Ralph E. Sease, a former Central of Georgia executive.

By that time, the Susquehanna had run all of their passenger trains at a financial loss from declining ridership and competition from a new park and ride service, and they considered filing an application to discontinue their services. The railroad also lost money after one of their primary customers, the Ford Motor Company, closed their Edgewater assembly plant.

Following the Recession of 1957, the NYS&amp;W experienced additional financial problems, and a portion of their other freight customers abandoned the railroad to begin relying on truck shipping. Sease opted to arrange some cutbacks for the company, which involved discontinuing a number of their commuter services and moving their Jersey City passenger terminus from Pavonia Terminal to the DL&amp;W&#x27;s Hoboken Terminal.

The NYS&amp;W subsequently sold off its Budd passenger cars and replaced them with used second-hand equipment. One of the other cutbacks was the abandonment of the Hanford Branch, the remains of the original NJM-NY&amp;OM route, since it had lost its farm traffic to the recession, and long-time interchange partner NYO&amp;W had shut down.

In 1961, another one of the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s long-time interchange partners, the Lehigh and New England Railroad (L&amp;NE), ceased operations, and the following year, the NYS&amp;W consequently abandoned its route between Hainesburg and Sparta Junction. The route was later ripped up and became part of the Paulinskill Valley Trail.

=== Irving Maidman ownership ===
In October 1962, the NYS&amp;W railroad was purchased by a New York real-estate developer and millionaire, Irving Maidman. Maidman previously acquired the former Ford Edgewater plant for use as a rental warehouse, and since the NYS&amp;W happened to have served the building, Maidman opted to purchase the majority of the railroad&#x27;s shares to ensure their freight services in Edgewater remained active.

The first task Maidman did for the NYS&amp;W was to obtain a $550,000 federal loan for the purchase of three EMD GP18 road switchers to assist the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s failing ALCO locomotives. In 1963, Maidman became the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s newest board chairman and chief executive officer (CEO), and he began to install new executives for the railroad, including his wife Edith Shivitz and his son and attorney Robert Maidman. The management changes also involved Ralph Sease resigning from his president position and being replaced by John P. Clark.

That same year, Maidman began to have the NYS&amp;W prioritize on serving his warehouse business, but the railroad consequently began to neglect their other stockholders and the rest of their remaining freight customers. Maintenance on the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s trackage also became deffered, and in ensuing years, it resulted in derailments and slower deliveries, which in turn resulted in additional customers abandoning the railroad.

Maidman also arranged for the NYS&amp;W to sell some of their land properties to other businesses Maidman owned, and they began to lease some new land property in Edgewater for use as backup storage. He also discontinued all of the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s bus services, and he filed a petition to the state of New Jersey to terminate all of the railroad&#x27;s commuter services. As a desperate attempt to eliminate all ridership, Maidman personally offered to pay the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s 200 remaining commuters $1,000 each to stop using their trains, but only five of them accepted.

In June 1966, the NYS&amp;W obtained court permission to terminate all of their passenger services, despite commuters having petitioned to keep them open. The railroad&#x27;s final commuter train operated on June 30 with only a day&#x27;s notice, and the following day, uninformed commuters waited to board NYS&amp;W trains that never arrived.

By that time, Maidman had petitioned the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to have the NYS&amp;W involved in the Pennsylvania Railroad-New York Central merger. The ICC in turn asked the PRR and NYC to incorporate the Susquehanna, along with the bankrupt New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad (New Haven) into the merger as a condition, and both railroads agreed to the former, since it provided a major connection between the PRR and NYC in New Jersey.

The new Penn Central Transportation Company (PC) was formally created on February 1, 1968, but only the New Haven became included in the merger. The NYS&amp;W&#x27;s inclusion fell through, after Maidman and PC&#x27;s management disputed over the railroad&#x27;s price value; Maidman wanted to sell the NYS&amp;W for its business value, while PC&#x27;s management wanted to purchase it for its salvage value. In March 1969, the NYS&amp;W withdrew their ICC application to save costs and continue independently.

By December 1968, the Susquehanna turned a profit for the first time since 1955, with an income of $17,755. That same year, the railroad lost another interchange partner, the Lehigh and Hudson River Railway (L&amp;HR), when their Station Road bridge in Sparta was deemed unsafe, and they had to cut back their Sparta route to Oak Ridge. Also in that same year, Seatrain Lines breached their shipping contract with the NYS&amp;W by moving their shipyard operations from Edgewater to Brooklyn for a separate partnership with the U.S. government, and Maidman sued Seatrain for $4.8 million in compensatory damages.

The NYS&amp;W also sued the Erie&#x27;s successor, the Erie Lackawanna Railway (EL), for $1.6 million in unpaid usage of Susquehanna trackage, but they subsequently settled for a $186,315 claim, and the EL agreed to pay a $15,000 yearly fee. By the end of 1969, the NYS&amp;W turned a profit of $297,644. In 1970, NYS&amp;W executive William T. Frazier became the railroad&#x27;s newest president, after the position had been changed three times within the previous five years.

In 1971, the NYS&amp;W lost their interchange with the Central Railroad of New Jersey (CNJ) at Green Pond Junction, when a stretch of trackage at Smoke Rise was washed away and mud-covered by Tropical Storm Doria. Following the damage from Storm Doria, along with that from Hurricane Agnes the following year, the Susquehanna began operating at a financial loss again, and the condition of their remaining trackage worsened. Concurrently, Irving Maidman also began to lose money from his other businesses, and he began intentionally defaulting on property taxes owed to the state of New Jersey and Citibank, believing they were overcharging him.

In mid-1975, William Frazier became hospitalized for cancer treatment, and then in August, Maidman ransacked Fraizer&#x27;s desk and discovered that since 1971, Frazier, along with chief engineer Joseph J. Novellino, both defrauded the railroad with fake bills for personal gain and funding for Novellino&#x27;s private business. The board of directors quickly voted to have Frazier resign, and Maidman became the Susquehanna&#x27;s president. In September, Maidman, along with his son Robert, convinced the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s board of directors to purchase $2 million in general mortgage bonds from W. E. Hutton &amp; Co. while secretly arranging the transaction to bail Maidman out of a major debt he owed Hutton.

=== Second bankruptcy protection ===
By January 1976, the NYS&amp;W defaulted on $252,498 of business and property taxes owed to the state of New Jersey, and they were forced to file for section 77 bankruptcy. By that time, the NYS&amp;W railroad was cut down to a line from Croton and Edgewater through Paterson to Butler. Simultaneously, Conrail was being developed to assume control of many other bankrupt railroads in the northeastern U.S., but the NYS&amp;W was not included.

The Securities and Exchange Commission began to investigate the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s operations, and they quickly discovered that the railroad&#x27;s purchase of their $2 million bond on Maidman&#x27;s behalf was stock fraud. The bankruptcy court quickly confiscated control of the Susquehanna from Maidman and appointed Walter G. Scott as the railroad&#x27;s new trustee. Maidman&#x27;s other businesses, including the Edgewater warehouse, were also confiscated by other creditors, and by June 1977, Maidman&#x27;s final remaining source of income was his new limited position on the NYS&amp;W as a real-estate consultant.

Scott began to rearrange the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s operations and assets; the railroad suspended all land leases Maidman began, they reprioritized the maintenance of their locomotives and trackage, and they hired new industrial customers. Some other members of the new court-appointed management team believed the NYS&amp;W would be able to regain its finances by serving as an alternative to Conrail&#x27;s services.

Maidman, who often quarreled with Scott, had hopes of regaining control of the railroad before selling it on his own after it emerged from bankruptcy, having said to &quot;The Record&quot; &quot;I expect to straighten things out. I&#x27;ll get the railroad back. I&#x27;ll tell Scott to go to hell.&quot; In June 1978, Maidman became physically weakened and hospitalized, following a car accident, and then in October 1979, he died at the age of 82. During that time, the NYS&amp;W still struggled to financially recover, and their trackage was deteriorated to the point they held a speed restriction. The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) had banned the NYS&amp;W from shipping hazardous materials on their trackage as a safety precaution.

On November 21, 1979, their creditors decided to petition the ICC to shut down and liquidate the railroad by February 1, 1980. The NYS&amp;W&#x27;s remaining customers appealed the petition, since they envisioned the shut down would result in 6,000 jobs being lost across the state. A public hearing subsequently postponed the railroad&#x27;s closure throughout 1980. On August 15, the ICC authorized the closure, and the NYS&amp;W railroad&#x27;s final revenue train operated on August 29.

=== Delaware Otsego acquisition and expansion ===

In 1966, the Delaware Otsego Corporation (DO) was founded by a group of businessmen and railfans led by Walter G. Rich. DO&#x27;s original purpose was to operate tourist trains over a section of the NYC&#x27;s abandoned Ulster and Delaware branch near Oneonta, New York. In 1971, after the section was ripped up in favor of Interstate 88&#x27;s construction, DO purchased the Cooperstown branch from the Delaware and Hudson Railway (D&amp;H) and began operating it as the Cooperstown and Charlotte Valley Railroad (CACV).

Within ensuing years, DO&#x27;s tourist operations were shut down from low ridership, and they began making profits from reactivating abandoned branch lines as short line freight railroads. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, DO acquired and leased multiple short lines; in 1972, they acquired the Erie Lackawanna&#x27;s Richfield Springs branch and began operating it as the Central New York Railroad (CNYK); from 1974 to 1984, they owned and operated the Fonda, Johnstown and Gloversville Railroad (FJ&amp;G); and from 1976 to 1989, they were contracted to operate the Lackawaxen and Stourbridge Railroad (LASB).

By 1979, DO&#x27;s short line renovations caught the attention of New Jersey state and county officials, who were exploring ways of having the NYS&amp;W continue operations under new ownership. They asked DO to submit a proposal to purchase the NYS&amp;W, and in turn, DO sent a team of inspectors to evaluate the railroad&#x27;s trackage.

Two other parties also offered to purchase the railroad, but in June 1980, the bankruptcy court accepted DO&#x27;s $5 million offer. On September 1, DO took over the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s operations under lease before purchasing all of their assets, two years later. DO quickly rebranded the railroad as the New York, Susquehanna and Western Rail&quot;way&quot;, with Walter Rich becoming their newest president and CEO, and he opted to retain the Susquehanna name out of his fondness of the NYO&amp;W. The NYS&amp;W&#x27;s first train under DO operated on September 2, 1980.

That same year, DO established their own real-estate unit to begin arranging for the NYS&amp;W to lease and sell line-side land property that was deemed unessential for railroad purposes. Within the next two years, the NYS&amp;W retained their status quo in serving industrial customers, having retained most of their pre-DO executives and employees. DO and the New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) jointly funded a $1.35 million reconditioning of the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s trackage. By that time, seven of the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s twenty-seven locomotives were still operable: three GP18s, three RS-1s, and one S-2; the rest had deteriorated outdoors and were subsequently scrapped.

In 1982, the NYS&amp;W sold their deteriorating Edgewater branch, but they continued to maintain and operate it until October 1989, when it was shut down from a lack of customers and unsafe conditions of the branch&#x27;s tunnel. The Edgewater yard was subsequently ripped up and redeveloped as a shopping mall and condominium complex, and the tunnel began to house a pipeline for the Amerada Hess Corporation.

Following the Staggers Rail Act of 1980, Conrail began to abandon many of their routes to streamline their operations, including their former DL&amp;W Binghamton-Jamesville and Binghamton-Utica branches in New York, their former L&amp;HR Warwick-Franklin route, and their former Erie Greenwood Lake Branch in New Jersey. DO feared the abandonment of the Utica branch would landlock their CNYK railroad, and they were interested in further expanding their operations. They contacted the routes&#x27; customers for freight potential, and they negotiated with Conrail to purchase the routes.

On April 16, 1982, the ICC approved DO&#x27;s $4.2 million purchase of the routes from Conrail, and they commenced operations under DO, the following day. The two DL&amp;W branches out of Binghamton and the CNYK quickly became labeled as the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s Northern Division, and the former L&amp;HR route, the Greenwood Lake Branch, and the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s remaining original trackage in New Jersey became labeled as their Southern Division.

To connect the two divisions, DO arranged a haulage rights agreement with Conrail, where once-a-week NYS&amp;W trains would operate over a portion of Conrail&#x27;s Southern Tier Line between Binghamton and Passaic Junction in Saddle Brook, New Jersey, using Conrail crews. If Conrail chose to terminate their haulage rights contract, a trackage rights agreement would be exercised, involving the restoration and usage of the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s route between Butler and Sparta Junction, which had been completely shut down since the early 1970s.

To cover the Northern Division operations, one GP18 was transferred over, and DO purchased some ALCO locomotives second-hand: one RS-3 from the recently-closed Adirondack Railway; two C420s from a holding firm owned by Tony Hannold; and five C430s from Conrail. In July 1983, the first NYS&amp;W haulage train operated over Conrail, as per the haulage agreement. That same year, DO established a new subsidiary, Susquehanna Properties, Inc., to expand the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s land-leasing program, and customers who had solely relied on truck-shipping began to purchase Susquehanna property and constructed line-side facilities for rail services.

They also put a portion of their Little Ferry Yard up for lease and redevelopment, since most of their freight classification operations had been moved to Passaic Junction. By that time, Walter Rich reported to his fellow stockholders that reorganizing the NYS&amp;W helped DO expand from a short line operation to a regional railroad network. In 1985, Conrail filed their former L&amp;HR route between Franklin and Belvidere, for abandonment. DO and Sussex County jointly purchased a portion of the route between Franklin and Lime Crest, to serve its remaining customers and to preserve the NYS&amp;W-L&amp;HR interchange at Sparta Junction.

=== Launch of intermodal trains ===
In 1984, the NYS&amp;W was approached by SeaLand, an international shipping corporation, to form an intermodal container-shipping partnership, and to lease part of the railway&#x27;s Little Ferry Yard for use as a container facility. SeaLand previously negotiated with Conrail for the partnership, but they were unimpressed with Conrail&#x27;s terms where only their container facilities would be used; SeaLand preferred to establish their own facility.

DO knew that operating intermodal trains was becoming a booming business, so they agreed to the partnership. In 1985, SeaLand signed a contract with the NYS&amp;W where they would lease of their Little Ferry property for twenty years, and they quickly began construction on their new facility. At the same time, the NYS&amp;W signed a partnership contract with the D&amp;H and CSX to ship SeaLand trains from Little Ferry to Chicago, Illinois.

On August 5, 1985, the NYS&amp;W operated their first SeaLand intermodal train. It was quickly followed by many other trains bound between Little Ferry and the western U.S., and for shipping east of Little Ferry, the containers were shipped via truck to nearby shipyards. The intermodal operations quickly boosted the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s income by 125%, and the following year, the railway turned a profit of $3.2 million out of a gross take of $19 million.

DO decided to purchase some additional diesels to accommodate their expanding intermodal operations. They originally planned to purchase four ALCO C636s from Conrail, but after some coaxing from CSX for compatible motive power, DO instead purchased a fleet of EMD SD45s and F45s from GATX, which previously leased them to the Burlington Northern Railroad (BN). The NYS&amp;W subsequently began to retire their ALCO diesel roster.

Despite Conrail being kept out of the partnership, the NYS&amp;W still used Conrail trackage and crews, as per their haulage agreement, and Conrail became slightly agitated by having to haul competing intermodal trains. On April 1, 1986, Conrail terminated their haulage contract with the NYS&amp;W—operations continued under the contract until October 1—and they negotiated for a new contract with higher rates, hoping the railway would accept the new rates before quietly abandoning their intermodal operations.

In doing so, Conrail allowed the NYS&amp;W the opportunity to restore their Butler-Sparta route and to exercise their proposed trackage rights agreement. DO quickly initiated a rehabilitation and upgrade on the route, along with their former L&amp;HR trackage, to accommodate their mainline intermodal traffic. The rehabilitation process lasted for six months and cost $8 million to complete, and the railway utilized a grant from NJDOT and a low-interest loan from the FRA.

In October, the upgrades were completed, and the NYS&amp;W began to use DO crews to operate haulage trains under their new trackage rights agreement over Conrail&#x27;s Southern Tier Line between Binghamton and Campbell Hall, and over Conrail&#x27;s L&amp;HR line to the new NYS&amp;W-Conrail interchange at Warwick. Since the rehabilitation process was face-paced, two derailments subsequently occurred on the Butler-Sparta route from some incomplete trackage, but they were quickly repaired, and no further accidents were reported.

=== 1988-1995 expansion ===
In 1988, the Norfolk Southern Railway (NS) partnered with Hanjin to operate intermodal trains between North Bergen, New Jersey, and Chicago, and they subcontracted the NYS&amp;W and the D&amp;H to haul the trains between North Bergen and Buffalo, New York. In June that same year, the Delaware and Hudson was filed for bankruptcy by their parent company, Guilford Transportation Industries, and they disbanded the D&amp;H, following two labor strikes. To preserve their intermodal partnership, Rich convinced the bankruptcy court to appoint the NYS&amp;W to take over the D&amp;H and their operations.

CSX gave the NYS&amp;W some financial support to operate the D&amp;H by underwriting their financial losses and leasing a fleet of GE Dash 8-40Bs. The NYS&amp;W also gained access to the D&amp;H&#x27;s trackage rights over Conrail from Binghamton to Buffalo. In 1991, the bankruptcy court began accepting bids to purchase the D&amp;H, and DO made an offer, but they lost to the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR). CPR succeeded the D&amp;H in the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s intermodal partnership.In 1992, the NYS&amp;W installed various freight transloading facilities for their industrial customers in New Jersey, to diversify their freight operations. From 1992 to 1994, the NYS&amp;W operated their intermodal trains at a $4.1 million loss, since the intermodal-shipping industry was affected by the early 1990s recession.

The NYS&amp;W reversed their losses by renewing their intermodal contracts with NS and CSX to increase their intermodal traffic, and the NYS&amp;W and NS began to jointly haul container-on-flatcar and trailer-on-flatcar trains for CSX Intermodal. In 1995, the NYS&amp;W turned a profit of $1.6 million, but in 1996, the NYS&amp;W experienced a $1 million loss, following that year&#x27;s blizzard and a further decline in intermodal traffic.

In 1994, Onondaga County, New York purchased Conrail&#x27;s former DL&amp;W trackage between Jamesville and Syracuse, with the provision that the NYS&amp;W provide shuttle commuter service in Syracuse between Syracuse University, Armory Square, and the Carousel Mall, and further proposed routes were considered. The NYS&amp;W utilized $7 million state grants and loans and initiated a rehabilitation of the route to boost its speed restriction, and they installed a new intermodal interchange with Conrail at Syracuse.

The shuttle commuter provision lead to the creation of OnTrack, which the NYS&amp;W operated in exchange for property tax relief on the route, and three former New Haven Rail Diesel Cars were acquired and restored. With OnTrack, the NYS&amp;W operated their first commercial passenger trains since 1966. In May 1995, DO obtained another subsidiary, the Illinois-based Toledo, Peoria and Western Railway (TP&amp;W), and they began assisting the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s intermodal interchanges with western U.S. railroads by providing a bypass route around Chicago.

=== Conrail split and management buyout ===
Throughout the 1990s, Norfolk Southern negotiated with Conrail to merge together, and DO and CSX both feared the merger would affect their freight operations. DO made an offer to outright purchase Conrail&#x27;s Southern Tier Line, along with their Meadville Line between Hornell and Youngstown, Ohio, but it was swiftly rejected. DO and CSX then secretly financed a regional development authority&#x27;s purchase of the Meadville Line, to prevent Conrail from ripping it up.

The NS-Conrail merger subsequently fell through, but in October 1996, CSX unexpectedly announced their plans to merge with Conrail. Following some subsequent disputes by NS, it was announced in April 1997 that the Surface Transportation Board (STB) would authorize Conrail to be split between NS and CSX. Since NS and CSX would both receive direct routes into the New York City area, the NYS&amp;W would lose all of their intermodal operations, which by that time, provided 70% of the railway&#x27;s annual income. Walter Rich quickly mulled his options to satisfy his fellow DO stockholders.

One option was to carry out their proposed &quot;Northeast Network&quot; alliance with the Canadian National Railway (CN), where the NYS&amp;W would have provided a New York City connection for CN, and the two railways would have jointly purchased Conrail&#x27;s Montreal Line, while the NYS&amp;W would have either purchased Conrail&#x27;s Southern Tier Line or extended their trackage rights to a Conrail-CN interchange at Buffalo. DO&#x27;s stockholders were looking into selling their DO shares to secure the corporation&#x27;s future, and they contacted fourteen parties for a buyout, but only NS and CSX expressed interest. In June 1997, Walter Rich, along with DO Vice-President C. David Soule, negotiated with CSX chairman and CEO John Snow and NS executive David R. Goode to arrange a transaction between their three companies.

On August 17, a new privately-held holding company, DO Acquisition LLC, completed their $55 million purchase of Delaware Otsego via a stock tender offer of $22 per share. The purchase brought the NYS&amp;W under control of DO Acquisition LLC, with Walter Rich obtaining 80% of DO&#x27;s shares, while Norfolk Southern and CSX each received 10%, along with the right of first refusal to purchase the Susquehanna, if Rich chose to sell it.

The transaction was completed on October 3, and the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s Northeast Network alliance plan with CN was quickly dropped. In 1999, the Conrail split between NS and CSX was finalized, and they began to operate intermodal trains out of New Jersey, on their own. That same year, all of the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s intermodal contracts expired, and their final intermodal train operated on February 3, 2001.

=== Post-Conrail activity ===
The NYS&amp;W reoriented their freight operations to solely serve their industrial customers, but Rich explored other opportunities for the railway to gain additional profits. Following the Conrail split, CSX and NS both experienced overflowing freight traffic on their new routes, so the NYS&amp;W allowed CSX to use their trackage as a detour for their River Line trains, and they allowed NS to use their Southern Division as a relief route to prevent their Southern Tier trains from conflicting with NJ Transit&#x27;s commuter operations.

Concurrently, NJ Transit negotiated with the NYS&amp;W to provide commuter service in the Southern Division between Hawthorne and Sparta, to alleviate roadway congestion on Route 23. The proposal was postponed, when a suitable location for an NJ Transit storage yard around Sparta could not be agreed upon. In 2005, the NYS&amp;W leased a section of the Southern Tier Line from Port Jervis to Binghamton from Norfolk Southern under the Central New York Railroad name, which was previously reorganized as a paper corporation. All operations and maintenance of the route would be performed by NYS&amp;W personnel, while NS retained overhead trackage rights.

In 2006, NYS&amp;W&#x27;s Utica branch experienced some major storm damage, with some sections of trackage in Chenango County, being washed out. The branch was consequently removed from service, and the NYS&amp;W began to rely on CSX&#x27;s connection in Utica to serve their customers on the branch between Utica and Sangerfield. On August 9, 2007, Walter Rich died of pancreatic cancer, at the age of 61. Nathan Fenno succeeded Rich as president of the NYS&amp;W, and he ordered for all passenger operations to be discontinued, including the cost-prohibitive OnTrack service, and the railway&#x27;s remaining passenger equipment was subsequently sold off. Many older diesel locomotives were also sold off.

In July 2011, NYS&amp;W obtained ownership of five leased CEFX locomotives to aid their increasing power shortage. The five locomotives were used to supplement the railway&#x27;s fleet in mainline service and occasional local freight service. New FRA-compliant diesel multiple unit rail cars were also placed into service.

That same year, a project to rehabilitate the Utica branch began by the Chenango County Industrial Development Agency, with funding being provided by the agency, Chenango County, the New York State Department of Transportation, and the federal Economic Development Administration. Throughout the 2010s, the project was promoted via social networking blogs and Facebook, resulting in Kinnelon officials publicly voicing support for it. By May 2017, the project was completed, and service on the Utica branch was resumed.

In October 2015, U.S. Congressman Bill Pascrell joined state legislators in creating a coalition to revive NJ Transit&#x27;s proposed Hawthorne-Sparta commuter service over the NYS&amp;W. In January 2016, the local governments of the involved municipalities passed concurrent resolutions to restart the project. In 2021, the NYS&amp;W formally abandoned their Lodi and Passaic branch lines.

== Excursion operations ==

Under Delaware Otsego management, the Susquehanna began to operate diesel-powered public excursion trains, with the first one taking place in October 1981, for the Jersey Central Chapter of the National Railway Historical Society (NRHS). In 1982, DO purchased a fleet of dome cars from the bankrupt Auto-Train Corporation and began to use them for additional excursion trains in the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s Northern Division. Passenger ridership on the trains barely broke-even, so in 1985, the excursion services were reduced, and most of the dome cars were sold to fund the rehabilitation of the NYS&amp;W&#x27;s Butler-Sparta route. There was subsequently a hiatus of excursion operations until July 1988, when the NYS&amp;W hosted some additional trains, as part of that year&#x27;s NRHS Convention.

In 1989, the NYS&amp;W decided to host their own steam-powered excursion program, taking inspiration from similar programs hosted by Norfolk Southern and Union Pacific (UP). They originally planned to restore and operate Southern Railway 385 and United States Army 4039, both of which previously operated on the defunct Morris County Central tourist railroad, but those plans fell through, after it was determined the restoration of both locomotives would be too costly.

In June 1990, the NYS&amp;W decided to import a new steam locomotive from China, taking inspiration from SY Nos. 1647 and 1658 on the Connecticut Valley (VALE) and Knox and Kane (K&amp;K) railroads, respectively. The railway contracted the Tangshan Locomotive and Rolling Stock Works to construct a modified copy of the SY class, and its boiler design was altered to abide with the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) boiler code and Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) regulations. The new locomotive, numbered SY-1698M, was planned to be renumbered as NYS&amp;W No. 141, and following several months of shipping delays, the locomotive was loaded on board Norwegian vessel &quot;Braut Team&quot; and began its voyage to the U.S., in May 1991. The following month, on June 7, &quot;Braut Team&quot; sunk at the Bay of Bengal after encountering a major storm, and SY-1698M was lost.

The NYS&amp;W subsequently explored multiple steam locomotives to acquire and replace their lost SY. In November that same year, two operable steam locomotives became available for purchase; No. 1647 by the VALE and Canadian National 6060 by the Canadian government of Alberta. The NYS&amp;W began negotiating with both parties to purchase their locomotives, but the group that operated No. 6060 at the time protested to keep the locomotive from leaving Canada, and the Alberta government subsequently began to reconsider the locomotive&#x27;s future. The Susquehanna believed the reconsideration would be a long process, so they dropped their negotiations with them, and by December 2, they finalized their purchase of No. 1647 from the VALE.

After being repainted as NYS&amp;W No. 142 and reclassified as an N-4, the locomotive began hauling multiple excursions on the Susquehanna&#x27;s trackage. In 1997, the Susquehanna quietly diminished their excursion program to lower their operating costs, and the Susquehanna Technical and Historical Society gained the rights to operate No. 142-led excursions for occasional events. In 2003, the NYS&amp;W sold the No. 142 locomotive to the historical society, following a major increase in insurance premium prices, and since 2004, No. 142 resided at the Belvidere and Delaware River Railway (Bel-Del). Following the death of Walter Rich in 2007, all remaining excursions on the Susquehanna were put to an end.

==Connections with other railroads==
* The railroad has connections with two Class I railroads:
# CSX Transportation - Syracuse, New York; Utica, New York; North Bergen, New Jersey
# Norfolk Southern Railway - Binghamton, New York, Marion Junction (New Jersey) and the Passaic Junction (rail yard) rail yard in Saddle Brook, New Jersey
* The railroad has connections with five other railroads:
# Morristown and Erie Railway and New Jersey Transit - Passaic Junction (rail yard), Saddle Brook, New Jersey
# Middletown and New Jersey Railroad - Warwick, New York
# Finger Lakes Railway - Syracuse, New York
# Mohawk, Adirondack and Northern Railroad (MHWA) - Utica, New York
# Stourbridge Railroad - Lackawaxen, Pennsylvania

== Stations ==
==Locomotive roster==
==Former locomotives==
==See also==

* Delaware Otsego Corporation - Parent company for NYS&amp;W
* Hawthorne station (New York, Susquehanna and Western Railroad)
* Maywood Station Museum
* Susquehanna Transfer station

==References==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 

==External links==

* NYS&amp;W Web Site — Official Corporate Site
* New York, Susquehanna &amp; Western Technical &amp; Historical Society
* Maywood Station Historical Committee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1725537" start="4" end="45" title="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway" label="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725537" start="72" end="79" title="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway" label="Susie-Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725537" start="87" end="98" title="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway" label="Susquehanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725537" start="132" end="174" title="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway" label="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="191" end="199" title="Railroad classes#Class II" label="Class II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234623" start="200" end="215" title="Rail freight transport" label="freight railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="264" end="274" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="276" end="284" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="290" end="302" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="442" end="457" title="Anthracite" label="anthracite coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353770" start="544" end="557" title="Erie Railroad" label="Erie Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="828" end="841" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253327" start="1140" end="1167" title="Delaware Otsego Corporation" label="Delaware Otsego Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="1277" end="1284" title="Conrail" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1350" end="1367" title="Intermodal freight transport#Railways" label="intermodal trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="1411" end="1427" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="1437" end="1440" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="1558" end="1581" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q213814" start="1585" end="1605" title="Binghamton, New York" label="Binghamton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495519" start="1742" end="1747" title="Utica, New York" label="Utica"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="1752" end="1760" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984814" start="1862" end="1880" title="Southern Tier Line" label="Southern Tier Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="2092" end="2112" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929032" start="2182" end="2199" title="Hudson Waterfront" label="Hudson Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2205" end="2218" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="2222" end="2234" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021487" start="2243" end="2261" title="Delaware Water Gap" label="Delaware Water Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="2357" end="2367" title="anthracite" label="anthracite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137767" start="2413" end="2424" title="Coal Region" label="Coal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q114380" start="2517" end="2529" title="Financial crisis" label="money panics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2760" end="2769" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244178" start="2960" end="2985" title="DeWitt Clinton Littlejohn" label="DeWitt Clinton Littlejohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017583" start="3084" end="3100" title="Oswego, New York" label="Oswego, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062" start="3104" end="3116" title="Lake Ontario" label="Lake Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591926" start="3219" end="3226" title="Grading (earthworks)" label="grading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086677" start="3230" end="3236" title="Butler, New Jersey" label="Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="3430" end="3438" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="3446" end="3458" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086688" start="3716" end="3725" title="Hawthorne, New Jersey" label="Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q138458" start="4046" end="4056" title="Hackensack, New Jersey" label="Hackensack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928615" start="4373" end="4399" title="New Jersey Midland Railway" label="New Jersey Midland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q304801" start="4447" end="4467" title="Middletown, New York" label="Middletown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842127" start="4489" end="4534" title="Middletown and New Jersey Railroad" label="Middletown, Unionville and Water Gap Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="4791" end="4802" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="4835" end="4856" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q695566" start="5114" end="5127" title="Panic of 1873" label="Panic of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339036" start="5374" end="5411" title="New York, Ontario and Western Railway" label="New York, Ontario and Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986481" start="5488" end="5507" title="West Shore Railroad" label="West Shore Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371464" start="5519" end="5544" title="New York Central Railroad" label="New York Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5683" end="5709" title="Panic of 1873#Effects" label="after affects of the Panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q310841" start="5734" end="5747" title="Garret Hobart" label="Garret Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="6584" end="6601" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083052" start="6661" end="6687" title="Gravel Place, Pennsylvania" label="Gravel Place, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745292" start="6746" end="6762" title="Pocono Mountains" label="Pocono Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183933" start="6817" end="6858" title="Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad" label="Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185729" start="6899" end="6910" title="Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania" label="Stroudsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765258" start="7036" end="7051" title="Marion Junction (New Jersey)" label="Marion Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894202" start="7547" end="7564" title="Little Ferry Yard" label="Little Ferry Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q178035" start="7591" end="7600" title="Edgewater, New Jersey" label="Edgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002451" start="7645" end="7678" title="Wilkes-Barre and Eastern Railroad" label="Wilkes-Barre and Eastern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q745594" start="7714" end="7726" title="Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania" label="Wilkes-Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q604264" start="7849" end="7863" title="Wyoming Valley" label="Wyoming Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="7873" end="7881" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="8047" end="8059" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353770" start="8092" end="8105" title="Erie Railroad" label="Erie Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994663" start="8615" end="8620" title="2-8-0" label="2-8-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q804868" start="8639" end="8663" title="Baldwin Locomotive Works" label="Baldwin Locomotive Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419583" start="8860" end="8882" title="Exchange Place station (Pennsylvania Railroad)" label="Exchange Place Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156043" start="8902" end="8918" title="Pavonia Terminal" label="Pavonia Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705729" start="8977" end="8983" title="Marion Section" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189628" start="9009" end="9016" title="Croxton, Jersey City" label="Croxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913683" start="9270" end="9292" title="Van Sweringen brothers" label="Van Sweringen brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242111" start="9343" end="9357" title="John Joseph Bernet" label="John J. Bernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="9688" end="9704" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965356" start="10148" end="10160" title="Walter Kidde" label="Walter Kidde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639431" start="11214" end="11236" title="Hainesburg, New Jersey" label="Hainesburg, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="11390" end="11399" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649349" start="11409" end="11437" title="Susquehanna Transfer" label="Susquehanna Transfer Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275033" start="11498" end="11507" title="Dieselisation" label="dieselize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842866" start="11668" end="11700" title="American Car and Foundry Company" label="American Car and Foundry Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652297" start="11784" end="11797" title="ALCO S-2 and S-4" label="S-2 switchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q432673" start="11802" end="11821" title="ALCO RS-1" label="RS-1 road switchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q383589" start="11831" end="11858" title="American Locomotive Company" label="American Locomotive Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332542" start="11982" end="12004" title="Multiple-unit train control" label="multiple-unit controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12322" end="12334" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="12437" end="12450" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="12481" end="12498" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q569454" start="12515" end="12540" title="Second Happy Time" label="the 1942 submarine menace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12923" end="12939" title="Railroad classes#Class I" label="Class I railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q764728" start="13005" end="13011" title="2-10-0" label="2-10-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="13224" end="13237" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262426" start="13352" end="13366" title="Seatrain Lines" label="Seatrain Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q425755" start="13591" end="13611" title="Budd Rail Diesel Car" label="Budd Rail Diesel Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q365751" start="14099" end="14120" title="Chicago Great Western Railway" label="Chicago Great Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944435" start="14322" end="14340" title="Central of Georgia Railway" label="Central of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q738031" start="14493" end="14506" title="park and ride" label="park and ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="14660" end="14678" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467859" start="14693" end="14717" title="Ford Motor Company Edgewater Assembly Plant" label="Edgewater assembly plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302387" start="14734" end="14751" title="Recession of 1958" label="Recession of 1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128305" start="15128" end="15144" title="Hoboken Terminal" label="Hoboken Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229121" start="15570" end="15601" title="Lehigh and New England Railroad" label="Lehigh and New England Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q599251" start="15727" end="15742" title="Sparta, New Jersey" label="Sparta Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155128" start="15797" end="15821" title="Paulinskill Valley Trail" label="Paulinskill Valley Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323428" start="16375" end="16383" title="EMD GP18" label="EMD GP18"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647715" start="18209" end="18239" title="Interstate Commerce Commission" label="Interstate Commerce Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472738" start="18425" end="18466" title="New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad" label="New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428642" start="18637" end="18672" title="Penn Central Transportation Company" label="Penn Central Transportation Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q647518" start="19316" end="19347" title="Lehigh and Hudson River Railway" label="Lehigh and Hudson River Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073690" start="19467" end="19476" title="Oak Ridge, New Jersey" label="Oak Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="19623" end="19631" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="19668" end="19683" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q444183" start="19809" end="19832" title="Erie Lackawanna Railway" label="Erie Lackawanna Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053974" start="20288" end="20318" title="Central Railroad of New Jersey" label="Central Railroad of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603090" start="20328" end="20347" title="Green Pond, New Jersey" label="Green Pond Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545868" start="20379" end="20389" title="Smoke Rise (community)" label="Smoke Rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382012" start="20425" end="20445" title="Tropical Storm Doria" label="Tropical Storm Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711419" start="20507" end="20522" title="Hurricane Agnes" label="Hurricane Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="20831" end="20839" title="Citibank" label="Citibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="21102" end="21111" title="Fraud" label="defrauded"/>
<link wikidata="Q112136657" start="21478" end="21500" title="W. E. Hutton &amp;amp; Co." label="W. E. Hutton &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="21935" end="21942" title="Conrail" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="22081" end="22115" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570975" start="22286" end="22297" title="Securities fraud" label="stock fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759803" start="23278" end="23300" title="The Record (North Jersey)" label="&amp;quot;The Record&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440355" start="23718" end="23749" title="Federal Railroad Administration" label="Federal Railroad Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323006" start="24489" end="24497" title="Railfan" label="railfans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547983" start="24621" end="24647" title="Ulster and Delaware Railroad" label="Ulster and Delaware branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019805" start="24653" end="24670" title="Oneonta, New York" label="Oneonta, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q94954" start="24725" end="24738" title="Interstate 88 (New York)" label="Interstate 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q384045" start="24805" end="24832" title="Delaware and Hudson Railway" label="Delaware and Hudson Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167958" start="24873" end="24914" title="Cooperstown and Charlotte Valley Railroad" label="Cooperstown and Charlotte Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061511" start="25296" end="25321" title="Central New York Railroad" label="Central New York Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075337" start="25377" end="25419" title="Fonda, Johnstown and Gloversville Railroad" label="Fonda, Johnstown and Gloversville Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25491" end="25526" title="The Stourbridge Line#Lackawaxen &amp;amp; Stourbridge" label="Lackawaxen and Stourbridge Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="26811" end="26850" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="27433" end="27446" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q161851" start="27451" end="27462" title="condominium" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615684" start="27529" end="27545" title="Hess Corporation" label="Hess Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328859" start="27562" end="27579" title="Staggers Rail Act" label="Staggers Rail Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q213814" start="27699" end="27709" title="Binghamton, New York" label="Binghamton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146281" start="27710" end="27720" title="Jamesville, New York" label="Jamesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495519" start="27736" end="27741" title="Utica, New York" label="Utica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708823" start="27786" end="27793" title="Warwick, New York" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085963" start="27794" end="27802" title="Franklin, New Jersey" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28629" end="28643" title="Arrangements between railroads#Haulage agreement" label="haulage rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984814" start="28750" end="28768" title="Southern Tier Line" label="Southern Tier Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086321" start="28812" end="28836" title="Saddle Brook, New Jersey" label="Saddle Brook, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28922" end="28937" title="Arrangements between railroads#Trackage rights" label="trackage rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066268" start="29260" end="29264" title="ALCO RS-3" label="RS-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q20880545" start="29290" end="29308" title="Adirondack Railway (1976–1981)" label="Adirondack Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q432663" start="29314" end="29319" title="ALCO Century 420" label="C420s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652263" start="29372" end="29377" title="ALCO Century 430" label="C430s"/>
<link wikidata="Q519608" start="29878" end="29900" title="Classification yard" label="freight classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q816285" start="30191" end="30200" title="Belvidere, New Jersey" label="Belvidere"/>
<link wikidata="Q495998" start="30226" end="30239" title="Sussex County, New Jersey" label="Sussex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014026" start="30496" end="30503" title="SeaLand" label="SeaLand"/>
<link wikidata="Q187956" start="30555" end="30575" title="intermodal container" label="intermodal container"/>
<link wikidata="Q492425" start="30669" end="30687" title="Container port" label="container facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="31287" end="31290" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="31335" end="31342" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="31344" end="31352" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652270" start="31953" end="31963" title="ALCO Century 636" label="ALCO C636s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688181" start="32071" end="32079" title="EMD SD45" label="EMD SD45"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323407" start="32085" end="32089" title="EMD F45" label="F45s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016648" start="32137" end="32165" title="Burlington Northern Railroad" label="Burlington Northern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491670" start="32934" end="32948" title="Land rehabilitation" label="rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708679" start="33444" end="33457" title="Hamptonburgh, New York" label="Campbell Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="33809" end="33833" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q483274" start="33854" end="33860" title="Hanjin" label="Hanjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000528" start="33898" end="33922" title="North Bergen, New Jersey" label="North Bergen, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="34034" end="34051" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048811" start="34151" end="34185" title="Pan Am Railways" label="Guilford Transportation Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007009" start="34530" end="34543" title="GE Dash 8-40B" label="GE Dash 8-40B"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="34777" end="34801" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410234" start="34931" end="34943" title="transloading" label="transloading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394220" start="35189" end="35210" title="early 1990s recession" label="early 1990s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426316" start="35389" end="35409" title="Flatcar" label="container-on-flatcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231704" start="35414" end="35432" title="trailer-on-flatcar" label="trailer-on-flatcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053910" start="35584" end="35609" title="North American blizzard of 1996" label="that year&amp;#x27;s blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q114904" start="35665" end="35690" title="Onondaga County, New York" label="Onondaga County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="35764" end="35772" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300750" start="35820" end="35844" title="Shuttle train" label="shuttle commuter service"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="35865" end="35884" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793763" start="35886" end="35899" title="Armory Square" label="Armory Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045562" start="35909" end="35922" title="Carousel Mall" label="Carousel Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090872" start="36232" end="36239" title="OnTrack" label="OnTrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530579" start="36545" end="36579" title="Toledo, Peoria and Western Railway" label="Toledo, Peoria and Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378011" start="37051" end="37058" title="Hornell, New York" label="Hornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q216820" start="37063" end="37079" title="Youngstown, Ohio" label="Youngstown, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368496" start="37470" end="37498" title="Surface Transportation Board" label="Surface Transportation Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="37941" end="37966" title="Canadian National Railway" label="Canadian National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982213" start="38113" end="38126" title="Montreal Subdivision (CSX Transportation)" label="Montreal Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238817" start="38616" end="38630" title="David R. Goode" label="David R. Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245116" start="38828" end="38840" title="tender offer" label="tender offer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337852" start="39918" end="39928" title="River Subdivision (CSX Transportation)" label="River Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="40066" end="40076" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q822060" start="40279" end="40287" title="New Jersey Route 23" label="Route 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q487616" start="40873" end="40888" title="Chenango County, New York" label="Chenango County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708718" start="41081" end="41092" title="Sangerfield, New York" label="Sangerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="41133" end="41150" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567915" start="41733" end="41753" title="diesel multiple unit" label="diesel multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q527769" start="41979" end="42022" title="New York State Department of Transportation" label="New York State Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333366" start="42040" end="42075" title="Economic Development Administration" label="Economic Development Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084058" start="42179" end="42187" title="Kinnelon, New Jersey" label="Kinnelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q529090" start="42351" end="42364" title="Bill Pascrell" label="Bill Pascrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982436" start="42931" end="42966" title="National Railway Historical Society" label="National Railway Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q780451" start="43008" end="43017" title="Dome car" label="dome cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872451" start="43036" end="43058" title="Auto-Train Corporation" label="Auto-Train Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15213823" start="43197" end="43207" title="Break-even" label="broke-even"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="43689" end="43702" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570365" start="43756" end="43776" title="Southern Railway 385" label="Southern Railway 385"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889526" start="43781" end="43804" title="United States Army 4039" label="United States Army 4039"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43855" end="43893" title="Whippany Railway Museum#History" label="Morris County Central tourist railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583372" start="44112" end="44114" title="China Railways SY" label="SY"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423510" start="44129" end="44133" title="Valley Railroad 3025" label="1658"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912179" start="44141" end="44159" title="Valley Railroad (Connecticut)" label="Connecticut Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423628" start="44171" end="44184" title="Knox and Kane Railroad" label="Knox and Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141856" start="44247" end="44290" title="CRRC Tangshan" label="Tangshan Locomotive and Rolling Stock Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q466950" start="44389" end="44429" title="American Society of Mechanical Engineers" label="American Society of Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q353699" start="44688" end="44694" title="Feeder ship" label="vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="44832" end="44845" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37777443" start="45120" end="45142" title="Canadian National 6060" label="Canadian National 6060"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="45173" end="45180" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884910" start="46206" end="46242" title="Belvidere and Delaware River Railway" label="Belvidere and Delaware River Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428122" start="46440" end="46457" title="Railroad classes" label="Class I railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="46461" end="46479" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="46482" end="46500" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495519" start="46502" end="46517" title="Utica, New York" label="Utica, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000528" start="46519" end="46543" title="North Bergen, New Jersey" label="North Bergen, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="46546" end="46570" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q213814" start="46573" end="46593" title="Binghamton, New York" label="Binghamton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765258" start="46595" end="46623" title="Marion Junction (New Jersey)" label="Marion Junction (New Jersey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705844" start="46632" end="46660" title="Passaic Junction" label="Passaic Junction (rail yard)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086321" start="46674" end="46698" title="Saddle Brook, New Jersey" label="Saddle Brook, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914113" start="46759" end="46786" title="Morristown and Erie Railway" label="Morristown and Erie Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="46791" end="46809" title="NJ Transit" label="New Jersey Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705844" start="46812" end="46840" title="Passaic Junction" label="Passaic Junction (rail yard)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086321" start="46842" end="46866" title="Saddle Brook, New Jersey" label="Saddle Brook, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842127" start="46869" end="46903" title="Middletown and New Jersey Railroad" label="Middletown and New Jersey Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708823" start="46906" end="46923" title="Warwick, New York" label="Warwick, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450207" start="46926" end="46946" title="Finger Lakes Railway" label="Finger Lakes Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="46949" end="46967" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q22061023" start="46970" end="47010" title="Mohawk, Adirondack and Northern Railroad" label="Mohawk, Adirondack and Northern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495519" start="47020" end="47035" title="Utica, New York" label="Utica, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620588" start="47038" end="47058" title="The Stourbridge Line" label="Stourbridge Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468717" start="47061" end="47085" title="Lackawaxen Township, Pike County, Pennsylvania" label="Lackawaxen, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253327" start="47163" end="47190" title="Delaware Otsego Corporation" label="Delaware Otsego Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685545" start="47224" end="47286" title="Hawthorne station (New York, Susquehanna and Western Railroad)" label="Hawthorne station (New York, Susquehanna and Western Railroad)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705738" start="47289" end="47311" title="Maywood Station Museum" label="Maywood Station Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649349" start="47314" end="47342" title="Susquehanna Transfer station" label="Susquehanna Transfer station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816555" wikidata="Q19361673" url="?curid=816555" title="Mother church">
<text>Mother church or matrice is a term depicting the Christian Church as a mother in her functions of nourishing and protecting the believer. It may also refer to the primary church of a Christian denomination or (arch)diocese, i.e. a cathedral church. For a particular individual, one&#x27;s mother church is the church in which one received the sacrament of baptism. The term has specific meanings within different Christian traditions. Catholics refer to the Catholic Church as &quot;Holy Mother Church&quot;.

==Church as an organization==
=== Primatial local churches ===
The &quot;first see&quot;, or primatial see, of a regional or national church is sometimes referred to as the mother church of that nation. For example, Armagh is the primatial see of Ireland, because it was the first established local church in that country. Similarly, Rome is the primatial see of Italy, and Baltimore of the United States, and so on.

The first local church in all of Christianity is that of Jerusalem, the site of the Passion of the Christ and of Pentecost, making it the Mother Church of all Christianity.

=== Catholic Church ===
This term is most often used among Catholics as &quot;Holy Mother Church&quot;. The Church is considered to be a mother to her members because she is the Bride of Christ, and all because the Church is considered the mother of believers just as God is called the Father of believers. Another term used in the Catechism is the title &quot;Mater et Magistra&quot; (Mother and Teacher). Pope John XXIII made this the title of his encyclical celebrating the seventieth year after Leo XIII&#x27;s groundbreaking social encyclical, explaining that in this &quot;Mother and Teacher&quot; all nations &quot;should find ... their own completeness in a higher order of living.&quot; Pope Francis said:

===Anglican Communion===

In Anglicanism, the Church of England gave rise to all the other Churches in the Anglican Communion, and as such she is considered the Mother Church. The Archbishop of Canterbury thus serves as the focus of unity within the Anglican Communion.

===Methodist Church===
In Methodism, the Methodist Church of Great Britain is considered the Mother Church by all the other Methodist Churches in the World Methodist Council, with Methodist Central Hall often being a symbol of this tradition. This is because the Methodist Church of Great Britain &quot;gave birth to the whole Methodist enterprise and then of a nineteenth-century church whose influence reached out across the world through the missionary endeavors of the various British Connexions within and beyond the British Empire.&quot;

===Apostolic Sees or &quot;Ecclesia matrix&quot;===
Apostolic sees are those local churches founded by one of the Twelve Apostles or Paul the Apostle. In 1855 Bingham wrote: &quot;&quot;Ecclesia matrix&quot;, a &quot;mother-church&quot;, is sometimes taken for an original church planted immediately by the Apostles, whence others were derived and propagated afterward. ...And in this sense the Church of Jerusalem is called &#x27;the mother-church of all churches in the world.&#x27;&quot;

He also refers to &quot;Arles the mother church of France, supposedly planted by the Apostle&#x27;s missionary Trophimus, first bishop of the place.&quot;

==Church as a building==
===Place of baptism===

For a particular individual, one&#x27;s mother church is the church at which one received the Christian sacrament of baptism (christening). In the British Isles, Mothering Sunday is the traditional day in which one visits one&#x27;s mother church.

===Church of the Resurrection===
The Mother Church of Christianity is the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, the traditional site of the most important events in the religion. Within are the holiest spots of Christianity, chiefly, the place of Jesus&#x27; crucifixion, death, burial, and resurrection.

===Cathedral===
&quot;Mother church&quot; may also be a title of distinction based on a church&#x27;s hierarchical importance. The church of the (arch)bishop of an episcopal see is often considered the mother church of the (arch)diocese. Holy Name Cathedral in Chicago, Illinois, falls under this category. While it was not the first Roman Catholic cathedral of the city, it became the mother church due to the presence of the episcopal &quot;cathedra&quot;. This form of distinction based on hierarchical importance is usually used by the Roman Catholic Church, and, sometimes, the churches of the Lutheran World Federation and Anglican Communion, while other Protestant denominations tend to refrain from using the title in this manner.

The pope&#x27;s cathedral, the Papal Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran, is called &quot;Sacrosancta Lateranensis ecclesia omnium urbis et orbis ecclesiarum mater et caput&quot; (&quot;Most Holy Lateran Church, Mother and Head of all the churches in the city and the world&quot;).
Canterbury Cathedral, seat of the Archbishop of Canterbury, describes itself as the &quot;Mother Church of the worldwide Anglican Communion&quot;.

===First mission church===
The first church built in a mission area is sometimes called the mother church. For example, the Cathedral of Our Lady of Peace in Honolulu, Hawaii, was the site of the first French Catholic mission of the Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary, from which the modern Hawaii Catholic Church was established. Under these circumstances it is today considered the mother church of all Hawaii. Similarly, the Mission San Carlos Borromeo in Carmel, California, is considered the mother church of California, as it historically served as the headquarters of the California mission system.

=== Principal church of a religious institute ===

The term may also relate to the churches of the various religious institutes, royal orders, or civic orders. For example, Madonna Della Strada Chapel became the mother church of the province of Chicago of the Society of Jesus (Jesuits), as the principal church of the Jesuits in its particular province including Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, and Ohio. On a broader scale, the Chiesa del Gesù in Rome is the mother church of all Jesuits throughout the world as it is the church of the Society&#x27;s Superior General.

===Plantation churches===
Another form of the phrase is mainly used in Protestant churches. A mother church is one from which other &quot;daughter churches&quot; were planted nearby.

===Historically significant churches===

The oldest churches of various religious communities are often considered the mother churches to others that follow either in that same tradition or, alternatively, in a reformist tradition. A church&#x27;s hierarchical importance is often derived from its historical importance in its organization. In addition, in communities where churches may change their ecclesiastical association or become independent (particularly in Pentecostal, charismatic, and nondenominational churches in America), a mother church may have daughter churches in one or more organizations.

The mother church in Christian Science is The First Church of Christ, Scientist in Boston, the Church of Christ Scientist, of which all others are branches. Per the &quot;Manual of The Mother Church&quot;, the legal title of the mother church is &quot;The First Church of Christ, Scientist,&quot; and while its branch churches may call themselves First Church of Christ, Scientist, or Second Church of Christ, Scientist, etc., they are prohibited from using &quot;The&quot; in front of their names. Only The Mother Church can do so.

Greater Refuge Temple Church in New York City is the mother church of the Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ of the Apostolic Faith, an Apostolic Pentecostal denomination. As such, it is also ultimately the mother church of its various offshoot churches and organizations, including both Bible Way organizations and the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ and its daughter churches. In addition, churches that were independently founded by ministers who were ordained or directly influenced by the church&#x27;s founder, Robert C. Lawson, or his spiritual successor, William L. Bonner, may also look to Greater Refuge Temple as their mother church, including the Progressive Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Evangelistic Church of Christ, and many others.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19361673" start="0" end="13" title="Mother church" label="Mother church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19361673" start="17" end="24" title="Mother church" label="matrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="49" end="65" title="Christian Church" label="Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560" start="71" end="77" title="mother" label="mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="183" end="205" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="210" end="214" title="archdiocese" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="215" end="222" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="231" end="240" title="cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="343" end="352" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="356" end="363" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="458" end="473" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q326330" start="603" end="616" title="primatial see" label="primatial see"/>
<link wikidata="Q632602" start="985" end="994" title="Greek Orthodox Church of Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="1041" end="1050" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1161" end="1170" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004401" start="1280" end="1295" title="Bride of Christ" label="Bride of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="1434" end="1443" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="1509" end="1524" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="1552" end="1562" title="encyclical" label="encyclical"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="1601" end="1609" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q335987" start="1617" end="1649" title="Rerum novarum" label="groundbreaking social encyclical"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="1798" end="1810" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="1847" end="1858" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1864" end="1881" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="1925" end="1943" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="1998" end="2022" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="2115" end="2124" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="2130" end="2163" title="Methodist Church of Great Britain" label="Methodist Church of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641470" start="2239" end="2262" title="World Methodist Council" label="World Methodist Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q81473" start="2269" end="2291" title="Methodist Central Hall, Westminster" label="Methodist Central Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147274" start="2686" end="2699" title="Apostolic see" label="Apostolic see"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="2748" end="2763" title="Twelve Apostles" label="Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="2767" end="2783" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="2820" end="2828" title="Christian Church" label="Ecclesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="2941" end="2949" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q48292" start="3150" end="3155" title="Arles" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383483" start="3237" end="3246" title="Trophimus of Arles" label="Trophimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="3435" end="3444" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="3448" end="3455" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q24899277" start="3493" end="3509" title="Mothering Sunday" label="Mothering Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="3654" end="3682" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="3686" end="3695" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q170516" start="3823" end="3828" title="Calvary" label="place"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="3844" end="3855" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818625" start="3864" end="3870" title="Tomb of Jesus" label="burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="3876" end="3888" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="4037" end="4041" title="archbishop" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="4042" end="4048" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="4055" end="4068" title="episcopal see" label="episcopal see"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942930" start="4129" end="4148" title="Holy Name Cathedral, Chicago" label="Holy Name Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="4152" end="4169" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138500" start="4334" end="4342" title="cathedra" label="cathedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4431" end="4452" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q942284" start="4490" end="4515" title="Lutheran World Federation" label="Lutheran World Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="4520" end="4538" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="4552" end="4562" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="4635" end="4639" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="4668" end="4702" title="Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran" label="Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="4912" end="4932" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="4946" end="4970" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052335" start="5184" end="5214" title="Cathedral of Our Lady of Peace" label="Cathedral of Our Lady of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="5218" end="5234" title="Honolulu, Hawaii" label="Honolulu, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5262" end="5268" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5269" end="5277" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q697595" start="5293" end="5344" title="Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary" label="Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681149" start="5368" end="5390" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Honolulu" label="Hawaii Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689743" start="5505" end="5532" title="Mission San Carlos Borromeo" label="Mission San Carlos Borromeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q625458" start="5536" end="5554" title="Carmel, California" label="Carmel, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5591" end="5601" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824509" start="5656" end="5681" title="California mission system" label="California mission system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135744" start="5791" end="5810" title="religious institute" label="religious institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728377" start="5857" end="5884" title="Madonna Della Strada Chapel" label="Madonna Della Strada Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="5944" end="5960" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="6003" end="6010" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="6048" end="6056" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="6058" end="6065" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="6067" end="6075" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="6081" end="6085" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q719794" start="6111" end="6126" title="Church of the Gesu" label="Chiesa del Gesù"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="6130" end="6134" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="6904" end="6915" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425524" start="6917" end="6928" title="Charismatic (Christians)" label="charismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882536" start="6934" end="6951" title="nondenominational" label="nondenominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q624477" start="7069" end="7086" title="Christian Science" label="Christian Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734092" start="7090" end="7127" title="The First Church of Christ, Scientist" label="The First Church of Christ, Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="7131" end="7137" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682820" start="7143" end="7169" title="Church of Christ Scientist" label="Church of Christ Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752318" start="7219" end="7246" title="Manual of The Mother Church" label="Manual of The Mother Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7614" end="7627" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617023" start="7656" end="7710" title="Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ of the Apostolic Faith" label="Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ of the Apostolic Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="7725" end="7736" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903114" start="7867" end="7876" title="Bible Way" label="Bible Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117982" start="7899" end="7930" title="Church of the Lord Jesus Christ" label="Church of the Lord Jesus Christ"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816565" wikidata="Q1292742" url="?curid=816565" title="Edward J. Hoffman">
<text>Edward Joseph Hoffman (January 1, 1942 – July 1, 2004) helped invent the first human PET scanner, a commonly used whole-body scanning procedure for detecting diseases like cancer. Hoffman, with Michel Ter-Pogossian and Michael E. Phelps, developed the Positron Emission Tomography scanner in 1973.

Hoffman was born in St. Louis, Missouri. He earned a BS chemistry from Saint Louis University in 1963, his Ph.D. in Nuclear Chemistry from Washington University in St. Louis in 1970 and completed postgraduate work in nuclear chemistry at the University of Pennsylvania. In 1972 he joined the faculty of Washington University&#x27;s School of Medicine, where he and Dr. Michael Phelps began developing what later became known as the PET scanner, used to detect cancer, heart disease and other serious illnesses. In 1975, Phelps and Hoffman moved to the University of Pennsylvania.

Starting in 1976, Hoffman was a professor at UCLA medical school in the Departments of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology and Radiological Sciences. In 1999, he authored a book that reviews the biochemical basis of alternative medical treatments for cancer. He served as Editor-in-Chief of the journal &quot;IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science&quot;.

He died of liver cancer in Los Angeles, California.

==Bibliography==
* Hoffman, EJ (2008) &quot;Cancer and the Search for Selective Biochemical Inhibitors&quot;, 2nd edition, &quot;CRC Press&quot;, 

==References==
==External links==
* Eulogy by Michael Phelps</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1292742" start="0" end="21" title="Edward J. Hoffman" label="Edward Joseph Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="85" end="96" title="Positron emission tomography" label="PET scanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507963" start="114" end="133" title="Full-body scan" label="whole-body scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="172" end="178" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q380807" start="194" end="214" title="Michel Ter-Pogossian" label="Michel Ter-Pogossian"/>
<link wikidata="Q353671" start="219" end="236" title="Michael E. Phelps" label="Michael E. Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="252" end="280" title="Positron Emission Tomography" label="Positron Emission Tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q734774" start="370" end="392" title="Saint Louis University" label="Saint Louis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="438" end="472" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="541" end="567" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972509" start="602" end="649" title="Washington University School of Medicine" label="Washington University&amp;#x27;s School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="925" end="929" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15759568" start="1188" end="1224" title="IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science" label="IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1260" end="1271" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="1273" end="1283" title="California" label="California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816566" wikidata="Q1760271" url="?curid=816566" title="Poilu">
<text>Poilu (; ) is an informal term for a late 18th century–early 20th century French infantryman, meaning, literally, &quot;the hairy one&quot;. It is still widely used as a term of endearment for the French infantry of World War I. The word carries the sense of the infantryman&#x27;s typically rustic, agricultural background, and derives from the bushy moustaches and other facial hair affected by many French soldiers after the outbreak of the war as a sign of masculinity. The poilu was particularly known for his love of pinard, his ration of cheap wine. 

The image of the , bearded French soldier was widely used in propaganda and war memorials. 
The stereotype of the poilu was of bravery and endurance, but not always of unquestioning obedience. At the disastrous Chemin des Dames offensive of 1917 under General Robert Nivelle, they were said to have gone into no man&#x27;s land making baa&#x27;ing noises—a collective bit of gallows humour signalling the idea that they were being sent as lambs to the slaughter. Outstanding for its mixture of horror and heroism, this spectacle proved a sobering one. As the news of it spread, the French high command soon found itself coping with a widespread mutiny. A minor revolution was averted only with the promise of an end to the costly offensive.

The last surviving poilu from World War I was Pierre Picault. However, French authorities recognised Lazare Ponticelli—who had served in the French Foreign Legion as an Italian citizen—as the last poilu, as he was the last veteran whose service met the strict official criteria. Lazare Ponticelli died in Le Kremlin-Bicêtre on 12 March 2008, aged 110.

==See also==
*&quot;A Very Long Engagement&quot;, a French film in which &quot;poilus&quot; are featured
*&quot;&quot;, a silent French film about Poilus in the Battle of Verdun
*Digger, referring to Australian and New Zealand soldiers
*Doughboy, referring to American soldiers
*Mehmetçik, referring to Ottoman soldiers
*Tommy, referring to British soldiers

==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1760271" start="0" end="5" title="Poilu" label="Poilu"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="81" end="92" title="infantry" label="infantryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="292" end="298" title="Rural" label="rustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15179" start="352" end="361" title="moustache" label="moustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388596" start="523" end="529" title="pinard (wine)" label="pinard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694094" start="770" end="786" title="Second Battle of the Aisne" label="Chemin des Dames"/>
<link wikidata="Q49448" start="819" end="833" title="Robert Nivelle" label="Robert Nivelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q773403" start="868" end="886" title="no man&amp;#x27;s land" label="no man&amp;#x27;s land"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="934" end="948" title="gallows humour" label="gallows humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088431" start="1191" end="1210" title="1917 French Army mutinies" label="a widespread mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q312082" start="1402" end="1419" title="Lazare Ponticelli" label="Lazare Ponticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q135104" start="1606" end="1624" title="Le Kremlin-Bicêtre" label="Le Kremlin-Bicêtre"/>
<link wikidata="Q936425" start="1674" end="1696" title="A Very Long Engagement" label="A Very Long Engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275627" start="1833" end="1839" title="Digger (soldier)" label="Digger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251907" start="1891" end="1899" title="Doughboy" label="Doughboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736453" start="1933" end="1942" title="Mehmetçik" label="Mehmetçik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836057" start="1975" end="1980" title="Tommy Atkins" label="Tommy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816578" wikidata="Q236090" url="?curid=816578" title="470 (dinghy)">
<text>The 470 (Four-Seventy) is a double-handed monohull planing dinghy with a centreboard, Bermuda rig, and centre sheeting. Equipped with a spinnaker, trapeze and a large sail-area-to-weight ratio, it is designed to plane easily, and good teamwork is necessary to sail it well. The name comes from the boat&#x27;s length of . 

The 470 is a World Sailing International Class and has been an Olympic class since the 1976 games.

==History==
The 470 was designed by the Frenchman André Cornu in 1963 (four years after the 420, its smaller sister) as a modern fibreglass planing dinghy to appeal to sailors of different sizes and ages. This formula succeeded, and the boat spread around the world. In 1969, the class was given international status and it has been an Olympic class since 1976. In 1988, the first Olympic women&#x27;s sailing event used the 470.

== Sailing ==
To sail the 470, good physical fitness but not too much physical strength is required. The optimal weight of the combined crew ranges between 110 and 145 kg, making it a suitable boat for men, women and youth teams. Due to various options for sail trimming one can sail the boat well at 1 to 6 Beaufort scale, slightly above by experienced teams. For racing the 470 is a tactically demanding class, since differences in boat speed are small and the boat does not lose much speed during manoeuvers. Good teamwork between helm and crew is essential for successful racing.

==Races==

World and Continental Championships are organised every year with separate starts for women and men/mixed teams. There is also a World Championship for juniors and a Master World Championship. The 470 is used in regional championships such as the Asian, Mediterranean, and PanAm Games. Entries are limited in important international races, encouraging more competition by requiring qualifying races in most countries.
In the World Championships more than 30 countries have been represented. There are 65 member nations in the International Class Association and more than 40,000 boats have been built in 20 countries.

The 470 may be raced in a mixed fleet of boats, its performance being adjusted by the Portsmouth Yardstick handicapping scheme. In the RYA-administered scheme, the 470 has a Portsmouth number of 973. In the US Sailing-administered scheme, it has a D-PN of 86.3.

==Construction==
The 470 is a strict one-design class, and its builder must be approved a Licensed Builder by World Sailing. The class design may evolve, but its intent is to use proven, economical, and environmentally sound materials, currently fibreglass with integral buoyancy tanks for the hull.

The 470 dinghy is long with a mast. Its weight without sails is .

==Events==

===Olympics===
At the Olympic Games, the 470 Class was initially an open class, but since the 1988 games there have been separate events for men and women. Since 2008 each consists of a 10-race series, with teams being awarded points on a point-per-place system, and each team&#x27;s worst result being discarded. At the 2024 Olympics, the 470 will be sailed by a mixed crew only.

==== Men ====
==== Women ====
==== Mixed ====
===470 World Championships===
====Open====
====Men and Mixed====

====Men====
====Women====
===470 World Junior Championships===
====Men====
====Women====
==See also==
*ISAF Sailing World Championships
*International Sailing Federation

==References==
==External links==

* Official class website
* International Sailing Federations 470 Microsite</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q236090" start="4" end="7" title="470 (dinghy)" label="470"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999103" start="42" end="50" title="monohull" label="monohull"/>
<link wikidata="Q406790" start="51" end="58" title="planing (sailing)" label="planing"/>
<link wikidata="Q239617" start="59" end="65" title="dinghy" label="dinghy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571036" start="73" end="84" title="centreboard" label="centreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548312" start="86" end="97" title="Bermuda rig" label="Bermuda rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137340" start="136" end="145" title="spinnaker" label="spinnaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q510369" start="147" end="154" title="Trapeze (sailing)" label="trapeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q406790" start="212" end="217" title="planing (boat)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q381929" start="337" end="350" title="World Sailing" label="World Sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="387" end="394" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="411" end="421" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976 games"/>
<link wikidata="Q141531" start="516" end="519" title="420 (dinghy)" label="420"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1112" end="1125" title="Sailing#Trimming" label="sail trimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q170464" start="1163" end="1177" title="Beaufort scale" label="Beaufort scale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2096" end="2107" title="Sailing (sport)#Handicap Racing" label="mixed fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879394" start="2156" end="2176" title="Portsmouth Yardstick" label="Portsmouth Yardstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q478756" start="2205" end="2208" title="Royal Yachting Association" label="RYA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875928" start="2277" end="2287" title="US Sailing" label="US Sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="2579" end="2589" title="glass-reinforced plastic" label="fibreglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="2735" end="2748" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284388" start="3310" end="3342" title="ISAF Sailing World Championships" label="ISAF Sailing World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q381929" start="3344" end="3376" title="International Sailing Federation" label="International Sailing Federation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816581" wikidata="Q2207882" url="?curid=816581" title="Birkbeck station">
<text>Birkbeck is a railway station and light rail stop in the London Borough of Bromley in the southern suburbs of London. On the rail network it is measured from . It is located on Elmers End Road (A214) and alongside Beckenham Crematorium.

==History and layout==

===National Rail===
The line through Birkbeck was opened as a double-track branch of the West End of London and Crystal Palace Railway in 1858, but was closed from 1860 to 1863 and again in 1915 until reopened in 1929 as part of the Southern Railway electrification scheme. A year later, on 2 March 1930, a new station was opened, to serve a growing suburban area, and named after the Birkbeck Freehold Land Society, whose name derived from the Yorkshire philanthropist George Birkbeck. In 1983 the line between Beckenham Junction and Bromley Junction was reduced to single track and the former up line and up platform was abandoned. The track was subsequently removed and the station building demolished.

The tracks in the station are located well above street level; the National Rail buildings were damaged by fire in 1983.

When the Croydon Tramlink was constructed a single line through the station was laid using the trackbed of the former BR up line and the former BR up platform was rebuilt. The National Rail line is served by a high level platform to the north of the track, whilst the Croydon Tramlink rail line is served by a low level platform to the south of the track. Each platform has its own access from the street, and the only access between the two platforms is via the street, with a fence between the two tracks to deter any attempt to cross the lines.
===Tramlink ===
The one-platform Tramlink stop opened in 2000. This platform is used for both services which run to Beckenham Junction and Wimbledon.

A proposed line alternative through Birkbeck station from Crystal Palace railway station to Beckenham Junction was considered for conversion to a Tramlink route but Transport for London has dropped the plan on the grounds that the existing rail service is adequate.

==Services==
===National Rail===
All National Rail services at Birkbeck are operated by Southern using EMUs.

The typical off-peak service in trains per hour is:
* 2 tph to via 
* 2 tph to 

During the evenings (after approximately 20:00), the service is reduced to hourly in each direction.

No National Rail services call at the station on Sundays.

===London Trams===
Tram services at Birkbeck are operated by Tramlink. The tram stop is served by trams every 10 minutes between and via Croydon. This is reduced to a tram every 15 minutes on Saturday early mornings and evenings, and on Sundays.

Services are operated using Bombardier CR4000 and Stadler Variobahn Trams.



==Connections==
The stop is served by London Buses routes 354 and 356 which provide connections to Beckenham, Bromley, Elmers End, Penge and Sydenham.

Free interchange for journeys made within an hour is available between bus services and between buses and trams is available at Birkbeck as part of Transport for London&#x27;s Hopper Fare.

==Gallery==
== References ==
== External links ==
*Birkbeck tram Stop – Timetables and live departures at Transport for London</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2207882" start="0" end="8" title="Birkbeck station" label="Birkbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="34" end="44" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q208201" start="57" end="82" title="London Borough of Bromley" label="London Borough of Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="110" end="116" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878646" start="214" end="235" title="Beckenham Crematorium and Cemetery" label="Beckenham Crematorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985112" start="351" end="396" title="West End of London and Crystal Palace Railway" label="West End of London and Crystal Palace Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q741266" start="495" end="511" title="Southern Railway (UK)" label="Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536992" start="732" end="747" title="George Birkbeck" label="George Birkbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q786032" start="1672" end="1680" title="Tramlink" label="Tramlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q801616" start="1778" end="1787" title="Wimbledon station" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q676281" start="1848" end="1878" title="Crystal Palace railway station" label="Crystal Palace railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189753" start="1882" end="1900" title="Beckenham Junction" label="Beckenham Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q786032" start="1936" end="1944" title="Tramlink" label="Tramlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="1955" end="1975" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334" start="2094" end="2107" title="National Rail" label="National Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258373" start="2145" end="2153" title="Southern (Govia Thameslink Railway)" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="2160" end="2164" title="Electric multiple units" label="EMUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q786032" start="2470" end="2478" title="Tramlink" label="Tramlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="2546" end="2553" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013810" start="2684" end="2701" title="Bombardier CR4000" label="Bombardier CR4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q730066" start="2706" end="2723" title="Stadler Variobahn" label="Stadler Variobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063597" start="2724" end="2729" title="Low-floor tram" label="Trams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="2772" end="2784" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="2792" end="2795" title="London Buses route 354" label="354"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="2800" end="2803" title="London Buses route 356" label="356"/>
<link wikidata="Q123372" start="2833" end="2842" title="Beckenham" label="Beckenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q122892" start="2844" end="2851" title="Bromley" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076782" start="2853" end="2863" title="Elmers End" label="Elmers End"/>
<link wikidata="Q124007" start="2865" end="2870" title="Penge" label="Penge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104233" start="2875" end="2883" title="Sydenham, London" label="Sydenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="3034" end="3054" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816583" wikidata="Q433751" url="?curid=816583" title="ATC code A04">
<text>==A04A Antiemetics and antinauseants==

===A04AA Serotonin (5-HT3) antagonists===
:A04AA01 Ondansetron
:A04AA02 Granisetron
:A04AA03 Tropisetron
:A04AA04 Dolasetron
:A04AA05 Palonosetron
:A04AA55 Palonosetron, combinations

===A04AD Other antiemetics===
:A04AD01 Scopolamine
:A04AD02 Cerium oxalate
:A04AD04 Chlorobutanol
:A04AD05 Metopimazine
:A04AD10 Dronabinol
:A04AD11 Nabilone
:A04AD12 Aprepitant
:A04AD13 Casopitant
:A04AD14 Rolapitant
:A04AD51 Scopolamine, combinations
:A04AD54 Chlorobutanol, combinations
:QA04AD90 Maropitant

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q575136" start="7" end="17" title="Antiemetic" label="Antiemetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="49" end="58" title="Serotonin" label="Serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410943" start="67" end="78" title="receptor antagonist" label="antagonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q410011" start="91" end="102" title="Ondansetron" label="Ondansetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q596708" start="112" end="123" title="Granisetron" label="Granisetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q29428" start="133" end="144" title="Tropisetron" label="Tropisetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829318" start="154" end="164" title="Dolasetron" label="Dolasetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q419841" start="174" end="186" title="Palonosetron" label="Palonosetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q337188" start="263" end="274" title="Hyoscine hydrobromide" label="Scopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415480" start="284" end="298" title="Cerium oxalate" label="Cerium oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047468" start="308" end="321" title="Chlorobutanol" label="Chlorobutanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q194682" start="331" end="343" title="Metopimazine" label="Metopimazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705066" start="353" end="363" title="Dronabinol" label="Dronabinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q419079" start="373" end="381" title="Nabilone" label="Nabilone"/>
<link wikidata="Q621834" start="391" end="401" title="Aprepitant" label="Aprepitant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049003" start="411" end="421" title="Casopitant" label="Casopitant"/>
<link wikidata="Q76415423" start="431" end="441" title="Rolapitant" label="Rolapitant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849795" start="524" end="534" title="Maropitant" label="Maropitant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816585" wikidata="Q2975547" url="?curid=816585" title="Cap badge">
<text>A cap badge, also known as head badge or hat badge, is a badge worn on uniform headgear and distinguishes the wearer&#x27;s nationality and/or organisation. The wearing of cap badges is a convention commonly found among military and police forces, as well as uniformed civilian groups such as the Boy Scouts, civil defence organisations, ambulance services (e.g. the St. John Ambulance Brigade), customs services, fire services etc.

Cap badges are a modern form of heraldry and their design generally incorporates highly symbolic devices. Some badges that contain images of lions or other cats are sometimes informally referred to as cat badges.

== Instances in military forces ==

===British armed forces===

The British Armed Forces utilise a variety of metal and cloth cap badges on their headdress, generally on caps and berets. They are also worn on Sikh turbans.

====British Army====
In the British Army (as well as other Commonwealth armies) each regiment and corps has its own cap badge. The cap badge of the Queen&#x27;s Royal Lancers is called a motto by those within the regiment, that of the Royal Horse Artillery is known as a cypher and that of the Coldstream Guards, Scots Guards and Irish Guards is known as a cap star.
That of the Grenadier Guards is known as the &quot;grenade fired proper&quot;.

The concept of regimental badges appears to have originated with the British Army. The &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;″s 1911 Edition notes that although branch badges for infantry, cavalry and so on were common to other armies of the time, only the British Army wore distinctive regimental devices.

=====Cap badge variations=====

Plastic cap badges were introduced during the Second World War, when metals became strategic materials. Nowadays many cap badges in the British Army are made of a material called &quot;stay-brite&quot; (anodised aluminium, anodising is an electro-plating process resulting in lightweight shiny badge), this is used because it is cheap, flexible and does not require as much maintenance as brass badges.

Regimental cap badges are usually cast as one single piece but in a number of cases they may be cast in different pieces. For instance, the badge of the now amalgamated, The Highlanders (Seaforth, Gordons and Camerons) was cast in two separate pieces: the Queen&#x27;s Crown and the thistle forming one piece, and the stag&#x27;s head and scroll with regimental motto forming a second piece (see the first picture above). 

The Royal Corps of Signals also has a two-part badge. The top being a brass crown and the bottom consisting of a silver flying body of Mercury (the winged messenger of the gods &#x27;Jimmy&#x27;) above a brass world and the motto (&#x27;swift and sure&#x27;).

A regiment or battalion may maintain variations of the same cap badge for different ranks. These variations are usually in the badges&#x27; material, size and stylization. Variations in cap badges are normally made for:

* Officers: usually three-dimensional in design with more expensive materials such as silver, enamel and gilt. Most officers&#x27; beret badges are embroidered rather than metal or &quot;stay-brite&quot;.
* Senior non-commissioned officers such as sergeants, colour sergeants and warrant officers: a more elaborate design compared with those worn by other ranks but usually not as elaborate as those worn by officers.

There are exceptions such as the Welsh Guards, where all ranks wear a cloth cap badge. Officers wearing a more elaborate version compared to that of soldiers, made using gold thread and has a more three-dimensional design. The only exception to this is recruits in training who have to wear the brass (or more often &quot;stay-brite&quot;) leek, often referred to as the &quot;NAAFI fork&quot;, until they have passed out of training and reached their battalion will they receive their cloth leek. All ranks of the Special Air Service wear an embroidered cap badge and all ranks of The Rifles and Royal Regiment of Fusiliers wear the same metal badge.

Some regiments maintain a blackened or subdued version of their cap badges as shiny brass cap badges may attract the enemy&#x27;s attention on the battlefield. However, since the practice of British soldiers operating in theatre with regimental headdress (i.e. peaked cap, beret) has all but died out, the wearing of these has become much less common in recent years.

=====Wearing conventions=====
The cap badge is positioned differently depending on the form of headdress:

*Home Service Helmet or Wolseley Helmet: above the centre between the wearer&#x27;s eyebrows.
*Service dress cap: above the centre point between the wearer&#x27;s eyebrows
*Beret: above the left eye
* Side cap: Between the left eye and the left ear
* Scottish tam o&#x27;shanter: Between the left eye and the left ear
* Scottish glengarry: Between the left eye and the left ear
* Feather bonnet: Slightly off the left ear towards the left eye
* Fusilier cap or Busby: Slightly off the left ear towards the left eye
* Jungle hat (as worn by the Brigade of Gurkhas in Number 2 dress): Centre front or between left eye and left ear.

Soldiers of the Gloucestershire Regiment and subsequently the Royal Gloucestershire, Berkshire and Wiltshire Regiment wore a cap badge on both the front and the rear of their headdress, a tradition maintained by soldiers in The Rifles when in service dress. The back badge is unique in the British Army and was awarded to the 28th Regiment of Foot for their actions at the Battle of Alexandria in 1801.

Additional items that reflect a regiment&#x27;s historical accomplishments, such as backing cloth and hackles, may be worn behind the cap badge. In Scottish regiments, for instance, it is a tradition for soldiers to wear their cap badges on a small square piece of their regimental tartans. Officer cadets may wear a small white backing behind their badges. Members of arms such as the Adjutant General&#x27;s Corps and Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers serving on attachment to other units often wear that regiment&#x27;s beret or headdress but with their own Corps cap badge.

For a period leading up to Remembrance Day artificial poppies are worn by many people in the United Kingdom and Canada to commemorate those killed in war. On forage caps the paper petals are fitted under the left hand chin strap button.

====Royal Air Force====
Cap badges in the Royal Air Force differ in design between those of commissioned officers and other ranks. In addition to caps and berets, they are also worn on forage caps.

===Canadian Armed Forces===

The Canadian Armed Forces utilize a variety of metal and cloth cap badges on their headdress, and many follow British traditions for additions such as cloth behind and blackened metal badges for rifle regiments. Distinct cap badges identify members&#x27; personnel branch or, in the case of infantry and armoured soldiers, regimental affiliation. Some units further differentiate non-commissioned members from officers by cap badge material (for example, artillery officers wear gold-wire embroidered cloth instead of brass, Lord Strathcona&#x27;s Horse officers wear silver rather than brass).

===United States===


====U.S. Army====
In the United States Army, a distinctive unit insignia (DUI) is worn on the flash of a beret. For service caps, a gilt eagle device is worn. This is the Great Seal of the United States. In the late nineteenth century, this device on a blue circle was listed as the equivalent of the roundel that appeared on headgear of many European armies. 
For officers, a large eagle device is worn. For enlisted men, a small version of the officer&#x27;s insignia centered on a disk is worn on the front. Warrant officers used to wear a gold eagle device, known as &quot;Eagle Rising,&quot; centered on the cap but now wear the same devices as regular officers. For garrison caps, generally the rank insignia is worn, but recent regulations call for the wear of the DUI.

====U.S. Air Force====
For U.S. Air Force service caps, a large, silver eagle device is worn on the service caps. For enlisted men, a smaller version of the officer&#x27;s insignia is worn, but enclosed in a ring. The use of the same device is because the U.S. Air Force was once part of the U.S. Army.

==Navies==
Cap badges used by navies (and merchant mariners) around the world tend to follow the pattern in use by the Royal Navy: an anchor, or occasionally a cockade, surrounded by golden leaf-shaped embroidery, and often topped by a crown or another symbol. They may be worn on peaked caps or berets. For petty officers the leaves may be absent or replaced by a ring of golden cable. 

===United Kingdom===

====Royal Navy====

Cap badges in the Royal Navy differ between ranks but have some common features: junior rates (Able Seaman to Leading Seaman) do not wear cap badges, wearing the peakless sailor&#x27;s cap in number one dress. When wearing a beret, junior ratings will wear a fouled anchor within a gold ring as a beret badge. 

Petty Officers wear a silver fouled anchor within a gold circle, with St Edward&#x27;s Crown above the ring as their cap badge. That of Chief Petty Officers is the same, but with a small laurel wreath around the gold ring. That of warrant officers (both Class I and Class II) has a larger wreath around the anchor, but omits the ring. 

The laurel wreath around that of commissioned officers is larger still.

====Royal Marines====
In the Royal Marines, cap badges are worn on peaked caps and berets. Those of commissioned officers below the rank of colonel are split in two, the crown and lion atop, but separated from, the globe and laurels. They are brass and silver. Those of other ranks are of the same design but not split in two. They are plain brass.

Blackened or subdued versions of both variants, those of officers and other ranks, are worn on berets, with combat uniforms. 

The lion and crown denote a royal regiment, conferred by King George III in 1802. The globe was chosen by King George IV to reflect their successes around the world. The laurels honour their gallantry at the Capture of Belle Île in 1761.

In the Royal Marines Band Service, the Portsmouth band and CTCRM band have different cap badges from the rest of the Corps. The SBS also has its own cap badge.

===United States===
====Navy and Coast Guard====

The main exceptions to the Royal Navy pattern are the United States Navy and the United States Coast Guard, which once followed this pattern, but changed after the American Civil War to their current designs. The Navy has crossed anchors behind the eagle and shield for commissioned officers, while the Coast Guard uses a single large anchor held in the eagle&#x27;s claws on its commissioned officers&#x27; caps; officers in both branches wear a miniature version of the commissioned officer insignia on the left side of the garrison cap, with rank insignia worn on the wearer&#x27;s right. Chief petty officers and above in both the Navy and the Coast Guard have a larger version of their collar insignia as their cap badge for the combination cover and a miniature version worn on the garrison cap; petty officer first class and below in both services wear a full-sized rank insignia on the garrison cap. Junior enlisted coastguards wear a combination cap badge featuring a gold disc in front of two silver crossed anchors, while junior enlisted sailors of both genders wear a sailor cap without any insignia. Midshipmen at the US Naval Academy and the US Merchant Marine Academy and in the Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps (NROTC), and wear a single, upright fouled anchor on combination and garrison caps, while cadets at the US Coast Guard Academy wear a single fouled anchor surmounted by a silver five-pointed star, with one point facing down.

====Marine Corps====

United States marines wear the Eagle, Globe, and Anchor as their cap device: gilt and silver for officers and gold for enlisted on blue dress uniforms, and subdued for all ranks on service and utility uniforms. Marine-option midshipmen at the US Naval Academy wear the same cap device as other midshipmen, while NROTC midshipmen wear the enlisted-dress Eagle, Globe, and Anchor on all their uniforms instead of an anchor.

==International forces==
Badges are worn on berets of international military and peacekeeping forces.

==Police==
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police, as well as provincial and municipal police forces, utilize forage caps and metal cap badges.

===United Kingdom===
Where the majority of British police forces have silver-coloured cap badges, those of the City of London Police are brass. They are in the form of each force&#x27;s crest and include the name of that force.

Different badge designs are also worn on the headgear of police community support officers.

==Civilian organisations==

Cap badges are worn by a variety of other organisations:

In the United Kingdom, cadets of the Community Cadet Forces, Combined Cadet Force and Volunteer Cadet Corps generally wear cap badges of the armed forces they are affiliated to. Cadets of the Sea Cadet Corps and Air Training Corps wear a badge with a unique design.

==See also==
*Cockade
*Irish Defence Forces cap badge

==References==
==External links==

*British &amp; Commonwealth Military Badge Forum
*Badges of The Royal Canadian Regiment
*RGBW insigna (Site is authorized by the colonel of the RGBW)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2975547" start="2" end="11" title="Cap badge" label="cap badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975547" start="27" end="37" title="Cap badge" label="head badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975547" start="41" end="50" title="Cap badge" label="hat badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434" start="71" end="78" title="uniform" label="uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="297" end="307" title="Scouting" label="Boy Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q699370" start="367" end="385" title="St. John Ambulance" label="St. John Ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429148" start="466" end="474" title="Heraldic badge" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="716" end="736" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="857" end="869" title="Uniforms_of_the_British_Armed_Forces#Turbans" label="Sikh turbans"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="900" end="912" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="931" end="943" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="957" end="965" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="970" end="975" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413994" start="1020" end="1046" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Royal Lancers" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Royal Lancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445962" start="1107" end="1128" title="Royal Horse Artillery" label="Royal Horse Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107953" start="1166" end="1183" title="Coldstream Guards" label="Coldstream Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856034" start="1185" end="1197" title="Scots Guards" label="Scots Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q252564" start="1202" end="1214" title="Irish Guards" label="Irish Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="1251" end="1267" title="Grenadier Guards" label="Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1702" end="1718" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093970" start="1739" end="1757" title="strategic material" label="strategic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q567502" start="1859" end="1877" title="anodised aluminium" label="anodised aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914713" start="2230" end="2278" title="The Highlanders (Seaforth, Gordons and Camerons)" label="The Highlanders (Seaforth, Gordons and Camerons)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="2619" end="2626" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="2759" end="2768" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3214" end="3222" title="Sergeant#United_Kingdom" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149215" start="3225" end="3240" title="colour sergeant" label="colour sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="3246" end="3261" title="warrant officer" label="warrant officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304791" start="3555" end="3566" title="Goldwork (embroidery)" label="gold thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959686" start="3762" end="3767" title="Navy, Army and Air Force Institutes" label="NAAFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="3900" end="3919" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920229" start="3967" end="3977" title="The Rifles" label="The Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340951" start="3982" end="4009" title="Royal Regiment of Fusiliers" label="Royal Regiment of Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236437" start="4609" end="4626" title="Combination cap" label="Service dress cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q211718" start="4687" end="4692" title="Beret" label="Beret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038222" start="4774" end="4792" title="tam o&amp;#x27;shanter (hat)" label="tam o&amp;#x27;shanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321936" start="4843" end="4852" title="glengarry" label="glengarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q367958" start="4975" end="4980" title="Busby (military headdress)" label="Busby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635167" start="5058" end="5076" title="Brigade of Gurkhas" label="Brigade of Gurkhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572115" start="5161" end="5185" title="Gloucestershire Regiment" label="Gloucestershire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182930" start="5207" end="5262" title="Royal Gloucestershire, Berkshire and Wiltshire Regiment" label="Royal Gloucestershire, Berkshire and Wiltshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920229" start="5369" end="5379" title="The Rifles" label="The Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750968" start="5518" end="5538" title="Battle of Alexandria (1801)" label="Battle of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755375" start="5651" end="5657" title="hackle" label="hackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216797" start="5831" end="5837" title="tartan" label="tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497929" start="5840" end="5853" title="Officer cadet" label="Officer cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683223" start="5935" end="5964" title="Adjutant General&amp;#x27;s Corps" label="Adjutant General&amp;#x27;s Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374138" start="5969" end="6010" title="Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers" label="Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27631" start="6163" end="6178" title="Remembrance Day" label="Remembrance Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6190" end="6197" title="Remembrance poppy#United Kingdom" label="poppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6248" end="6254" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656482" start="6294" end="6304" title="forage cap" label="forage cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="6416" end="6431" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774109" start="6492" end="6503" title="RAF other ranks" label="other ranks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6559" end="6570" title="Forage_cap#Royal_Air_Force" label="forage caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="6606" end="6627" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170688" start="6857" end="6873" title="personnel branch" label="personnel branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259400" start="7127" end="7155" title="Lord Strathcona&amp;#x27;s Horse" label="Lord Strathcona&amp;#x27;s Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="7245" end="7263" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282973" start="7267" end="7292" title="distinctive unit insignia" label="distinctive unit insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211718" start="7325" end="7330" title="beret" label="beret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236437" start="7336" end="7347" title="service cap" label="service cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q171663" start="7391" end="7422" title="Great Seal of the United States" label="Great Seal of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049919" start="7521" end="7528" title="roundel" label="roundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="7731" end="7746" title="Warrant officer" label="Warrant officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="8421" end="8431" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168432" start="8436" end="8442" title="anchor" label="anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q285272" start="8462" end="8469" title="cockade" label="cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q322749" start="8610" end="8623" title="petty officer" label="petty officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="8751" end="8761" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10989378" start="8828" end="8839" title="Able Seaman" label="Able Seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122639" start="8843" end="8857" title="Leading Seaman" label="Leading Seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q650132" start="8904" end="8921" title="sailor&amp;#x27;s cap" label="sailor&amp;#x27;s cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q322749" start="9045" end="9058" title="Petty Officer" label="Petty Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294341" start="9115" end="9137" title="St Edward&amp;#x27;s Crown" label="St Edward&amp;#x27;s Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q461167" start="9181" end="9200" title="Chief Petty Officer" label="Chief Petty Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="9276" end="9292" title="warrant officers" label="warrant officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="9484" end="9497" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9555" end="9576" title="Royal Navy officer rank insignia#Royal Marines" label="commissioned officers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9725" end="9736" title="Royal Navy other rank insignia#Royal_Marines" label="other ranks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9913" end="9928" title="Combat_uniform#United_Kingdom" label="combat uniforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="9989" end="10004" title="George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="10038" end="10052" title="George IV" label="King George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q734844" start="10102" end="10109" title="Laurel wreath" label="laurels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403807" start="10140" end="10160" title="Capture of Belle Île" label="Capture of Belle Île"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374448" start="10178" end="10204" title="Royal Marines Band Service" label="Royal Marines Band Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q843421" start="10299" end="10302" title="Special Boat Service" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="10436" end="10454" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="10463" end="10488" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="10546" end="10564" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096883" start="10974" end="10994" title="Chief petty officer (United States)" label="Chief petty officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236437" start="11116" end="11133" title="Peaked cap" label="combination cover"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11170" end="11182" title="Side cap#United States" label="garrison cap"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11184" end="11209" title="Petty officer first class#United States)" label="petty officer first class"/>
<link wikidata="Q650132" start="11462" end="11472" title="sailor cap" label="sailor cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="11513" end="11529" title="United States Naval Academy" label="US Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806541" start="11538" end="11564" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy" label="US Merchant Marine Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981909" start="11576" end="11613" title="Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps" label="Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q650935" start="11718" end="11740" title="United States Coast Guard Academy" label="US Coast Guard Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276730" start="11893" end="11917" title="Eagle, Globe, and Anchor" label="Eagle, Globe, and Anchor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11993" end="12003" title="Uniforms of the United States Marine Corps#Dress uniform" label="blue dress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12043" end="12062" title="Uniforms of the United States Marine Corps#Service uniform" label="service and utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="12087" end="12097" title="midshipmen" label="midshipmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="12403" end="12432" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094151" start="12639" end="12660" title="City of London Police" label="City of London Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="12665" end="12670" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12814" end="12847" title="Police community support officer#Uniform and equipment" label="police community support officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000759" start="12973" end="12995" title="Community Cadet Forces" label="Community Cadet Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q731977" start="12997" end="13017" title="Combined Cadet Force" label="Combined Cadet Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467678" start="13022" end="13043" title="Volunteer Cadet Corps" label="Volunteer Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439850" start="13128" end="13143" title="Sea Cadets (United Kingdom)" label="Sea Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698217" start="13148" end="13166" title="Air Training Corps" label="Air Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q285272" start="13217" end="13224" title="Cockade" label="Cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070693" start="13226" end="13256" title="Irish Defence Forces cap badge" label="Irish Defence Forces cap badge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816587" wikidata="Q3062548" url="?curid=816587" title="Theatre of Cruelty (Discworld)">
<text>&quot;Theatre of Cruelty&quot; is a short &quot;Discworld&quot; story by Terry Pratchett written in 1993. The name derives from a concept of Antonin Artaud (Theatre of Cruelty).

It was originally written for W. H. Smith &quot;Bookcase&quot; magazine and was then slightly modified and extended, being published again in the programme of the OryCon 15 convention, and then again in &quot;The Wizards of Odd&quot;, a compilation of fantasy short stories.

It has since been made available on the Internet along with dozens of translations by fans, with Pratchett having stated, &quot;I don&#x27;t want to see it distributed in print anywhere but don&#x27;t mind people downloading it for their own enjoyment.&quot;

The story involves both the Ankh-Morpork City Watch and a parallel of Punch and Judy.

== Plot ==
A murder has been committed: a street entertainer, found apparently battered to death with a very small blunt object, on him bite marks from a very small crocodile. Investigating the incident in his typically direct manner, Carrot Ironfoundersson discovers the death was an accident, the man having choked on a swazzle. It emerges that the entertainer had invented a parallel, live-action version of Punch and Judy, using — and abusing — a troupe of gnomes as the live cast. Carrot asserts that such brutal theatre could never find favour in Ankh-Morpork: &quot;That&#x27;s not the way to do it&quot;.

==External links==
*&quot;Theatre of Cruelty&quot; at The L-Space Web</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3062548" start="6" end="24" title="Theatre of Cruelty (Discworld)" label="Theatre of Cruelty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257270" start="48" end="57" title="Discworld" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="73" end="88" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q187166" start="141" end="155" title="Antonin Artaud" label="Antonin Artaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q668433" start="157" end="175" title="Theatre of Cruelty" label="Theatre of Cruelty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548712" start="209" end="220" title="W. H. Smith" label="W. H. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105291" start="342" end="362" title="OryCon" label="OryCon 15 convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775397" start="388" end="406" title="The Wizards of Odd" label="The Wizards of Odd"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="431" end="438" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="495" end="503" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320632" start="743" end="766" title="Ankh-Morpork City Watch" label="Ankh-Morpork City Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250832" start="785" end="799" title="Punch and Judy" label="Punch and Judy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320632" start="1037" end="1059" title="Carrot Ironfoundersson" label="Carrot Ironfoundersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654151" start="1124" end="1131" title="swazzle" label="swazzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250832" start="1213" end="1227" title="Punch and Judy" label="Punch and Judy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188215" start="1263" end="1268" title="gnome" label="gnome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328564" start="1355" end="1367" title="Ankh-Morpork" label="Ankh-Morpork"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816591" wikidata="Q381042" url="?curid=816591" title="Sweyn III of Denmark">
<text>Sweyn III Grathe (; – 23 October 1157) was the king of Denmark between 1146 and 1157, in shifting alliances with Canute V and his own cousin Valdemar I. In 1157, the three agreed to a tripartition of Denmark. Sweyn attempted to kill his rivals at the peace banquet, and was subsequently defeated by Valdemar I at the Battle of Grathe Heath and killed.

==Early life==
Sweyn was the illegitimate son of King Erik II the Memorable and the concubine Thunna. Sweyn travelled with Eric II to Norway in the mid-1130s, when his father fought King Niels to win the Danish throne. When Eric II died in 1137, he was succeeded by Eric III, and Sweyn was sent to the court of Conrad III of Germany. Here he befriended Conrad&#x27;s nephew Frederick.

Sweyn travelled to Denmark, where he and his cousin Valdemar sought to canonize Sweyn&#x27;s uncle and Valdemar&#x27;s father Canute Lavard in 1146, under protest from Archbishop Eskil of Lund in Scania. At the abdication of Eric III in 1146, Sweyn was elected king by the magnates on Zealand while Canute V was crowned by their counterparts in Jutland. 

==Civil war==
For the next years, Sweyn fought a civil war against Canute for the kingship of Denmark, supported by Valdemar. Canute was supported by Archbishop Eskil, but Sweyn moved to secure Eskil&#x27;s loyalty by granting the Archbishop of Lund land holdings in Scania and Bornholm. Sweyn subsequently defeated Canute on Zealand, to confine him to Jutland. In 1147, Sweyn and Canute united to support the Wendish Crusade. As Sweyn engaged the Wends in naval battle, he received little support from Canute, and lost his flagship. The civil war was soon re-ignited.

After several battles, Sweyn conquered Funen and parts of Jutland, and set Valdemar up as Duke of Schleswig. Sweyn then campaigned with Etheler von Dithmarschen against Adolf II of Holstein, a supporter of Canute. Sweyn succeeded in banishing Canute in 1150, and Canute&#x27;s re-entry with German troops in 1151 was also repulsed. Both Canute and Sweyn sought the support of Conrad III of Germany. In 1152, Frederick I was crowned King of Germany, and he brokered a deal in Merseburg later that year. The deal made Sweyn &quot;premier king&quot;, with Canute eligible to receive a substantial portion of Denmark, and Valdemar keeping the Duchy of Schleswig. However, Sweyn only granted Canute small holdings, breaking the agreement, and Sweyn&#x27;s position in Denmark was further undermined by his alleged tyrant manners and his pro-German behaviour. 

==Tripartition==
In 1154, Sweyn was overthrown by an alliance between Canute and Valdemar, who was crowned Canute&#x27;s co-ruler as Valdemar I. Eskil and the majority of Sweyn&#x27;s other supporters deserted him, and he went into exile in Germany. Sweyn spent three years seeking support for a reconquest, and returned to Denmark in 1157 with the support of German duke Henry the Lion. This prompted the Danish magnates to force through a tripartition of the kingdom into Jutland, Zealand, and Scania. Sweyn chose first, and was made the ruler of Scania. At the peace banquet in Roskilde on 9 August 1157, Sweyn planned on killing his two co-rulers, and succeeded in having Canute killed. The incident became known as the &quot;Bloodfeast of Roskilde&quot;.

Valdemar escaped to Jutland, and on 23 October 1157, Sweyn and his army faced and met him at the Battle of Grathe Heath, which gave him his nickname &quot;Grathe&quot;. Sweyn&#x27;s army was defeated, and he was killed by peasants who caught him when his horse was sucked into a bog while he fled from the battle.

==Marriage and issue==
In 1152, Sweyn married Adela of Meissen, daughter of Conrad, Margrave of Meissen, and Luitgard of Ravenstein. They had a short-lived son, possibly named Eric, and a daughter, Luitgard, who married Berthold I of Istria.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q381042" start="0" end="16" title="Sweyn III of Denmark" label="Sweyn III Grathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="47" end="62" title="king of Denmark" label="king of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q381080" start="113" end="121" title="Canute V" label="Canute V"/>
<link wikidata="Q297194" start="141" end="151" title="Valdemar I of Denmark" label="Valdemar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267709" start="317" end="339" title="Battle of Grathe Heath" label="Battle of Grathe Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q365085" start="407" end="428" title="Eric II of Denmark" label="Erik II the Memorable"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="487" end="493" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q364751" start="535" end="545" title="Niels of Denmark" label="King Niels"/>
<link wikidata="Q365064" start="619" end="627" title="Eric III of Denmark" label="Eric III"/>
<link wikidata="Q157133" start="664" end="685" title="Conrad III of Germany" label="Conrad III of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="727" end="736" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q297194" start="791" end="799" title="Valdemar I of Denmark" label="Valdemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="810" end="818" title="canonize" label="canonize"/>
<link wikidata="Q434760" start="865" end="878" title="Canute Lavard" label="Canute Lavard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367800" start="918" end="931" title="Eskil of Lund" label="Eskil of Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="935" end="941" title="Scania" label="Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="950" end="960" title="abdication" label="abdication"/>
<link wikidata="Q903810" start="1012" end="1019" title="magnate" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25535" start="1024" end="1031" title="Zealand (Denmark)" label="Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q381080" start="1038" end="1046" title="Canute V of Denmark" label="Canute V"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="1084" end="1091" title="Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q106839672" start="1144" end="1153" title="Danish Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836998" start="1326" end="1344" title="Archbishop of Lund" label="Archbishop of Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q769680" start="1373" end="1381" title="Bornholm" label="Bornholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q683635" start="1505" end="1520" title="Wendish Crusade" label="Wendish Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q158281" start="1543" end="1548" title="Wends" label="Wends"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="1619" end="1627" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q26503" start="1704" end="1709" title="Funen" label="Funen"/>
<link wikidata="Q617703" start="1755" end="1772" title="Duke of Schleswig" label="Duke of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1801" end="1825" title="Etheler von Dithmarschen" label="Etheler von Dithmarschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q362626" start="1834" end="1854" title="Adolf II of Holstein" label="Adolf II of Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883514" start="2097" end="2112" title="King of Germany" label="King of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945" start="2140" end="2149" title="Merseburg" label="Merseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2501" end="2507" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q297194" start="2654" end="2664" title="Valdemar I of Denmark" label="Valdemar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q105378" start="2893" end="2907" title="Henry the Lion" label="Henry the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26563" start="3102" end="3110" title="Roskilde" label="Roskilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267709" start="3379" end="3401" title="Battle of Grathe Heath" label="Battle of Grathe Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="3504" end="3511" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="3537" end="3542" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="3561" end="3564" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210372" start="3643" end="3659" title="Adela of Meissen" label="Adela of Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q531805" start="3673" end="3700" title="Conrad, Margrave of Meissen" label="Conrad, Margrave of Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3706" end="3728" title="Luitgard of Ravenstein" label="Luitgard of Ravenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q68632" start="3817" end="3837" title="Berthold I of Istria" label="Berthold I of Istria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816595" wikidata="Q2691877" url="?curid=816595" title="Brondesbury Park railway station">
<text>Brondesbury Park is a station on the Mildmay line of the London Overground, located in Brondesbury Park in the London Borough of Brent. It is situated in Travelcard Zone 2 and is close to the Queen&#x27;s Park area.
==History==

The Hampstead Junction Railway route between (Low Level) and (via ) opened in 1860, but at first there were no stations west of . The line was absorbed by the London and North Western Railway in 1867, but it was not until 1 June 1908 that a station at &quot;Brondesbury Park&quot; was opened.
==Services==
All services at Brondesbury Park are operated by London Overground as part of the Mildmay line using EMUs.

The typical off-peak service in trains per hour is:
* 8 tph to via 
* 4 tph to 
* 4 tph to 

During the late evenings, the services to and from Clapham Junction do not operate.

==Connections==
London Buses route 206 serves the station.

==References==
==External links==
* Excel file displaying National Rail station usage information for 2005/06 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2691877" start="0" end="16" title="Brondesbury Park railway station" label="Brondesbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q131298524" start="37" end="49" title="Mildmay line" label="Mildmay line"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="57" end="74" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q146428" start="87" end="103" title="Brondesbury Park" label="Brondesbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q207201" start="111" end="134" title="London Borough of Brent" label="London Borough of Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q41172219" start="154" end="171" title="Travelcard Zone 2" label="Travelcard Zone 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413990" start="192" end="209" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park, London" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993626" start="233" end="259" title="Hampstead Junction Railway" label="Hampstead Junction Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486303" start="388" end="420" title="London and North Western Railway" label="London and North Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="584" end="601" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q131298524" start="617" end="629" title="Mildmay line" label="Mildmay line"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="636" end="640" title="Electric multiple unit" label="EMUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="837" end="859" title="London Buses route 206" label="London Buses route 206"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816598" wikidata="Q16024056" url="?curid=816598" title="Protestant work ethic">
<text>The Protestant work ethic, also known as the Calvinist work ethic or the Puritan work ethic, is a work ethic concept in sociology, economics, and history. It emphasizes that a person&#x27;s subscription to the values espoused by the Protestant faith, particularly Calvinism, result in diligence, discipline, and frugality. 

The phrase was initially coined in 1905 by sociologist Max Weber in his book &quot;The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism&quot;. Weber asserted that Protestant ethics and values, along with the Calvinist doctrines of asceticism and predestination, enabled the rise and spread of capitalism. Just as priests and caring professionals are deemed to have a vocation (or &quot;calling&quot; from God) for their work, according to the Protestant work ethic the &quot;lowly&quot; workman also has a noble vocation which he can fulfill through dedication to his work.

Weber&#x27;s book is one of the most influential and cited in sociology, although the thesis presented has been controversial since its release. In opposition to Weber, historians such as Fernand Braudel and Hugh Trevor-Roper assert that the Protestant work ethic did not create capitalism and that capitalism developed in pre-Reformation Catholic communities. Historian Laurence R. Iannaccone has written that &quot;the most noteworthy feature of the Protestant Ethic thesis is its absence of empirical support.&quot;

The concept is often credited with helping to define the self-view of societies of Northern, Central and Northwestern Europe as well as the United States.

== Weber&#x27;s theory==

Following a study trip to America, Weber developed his theory of the Protestant Ethic, which included more considerations than attitude to work. Those with the ethic believed that good fortune (e.g. from hard work) is a vindication of God in this life: a &quot;theodicy of fortune&quot;; this supported religious and social actions that proved their right to possess even greater wealth. In contrast, those without the ethic instead emphasized that God will be vindicated by granting wealth and happiness in the next life: a &quot;theodicy of misfortune&quot;. These beliefs guided expectations, behaviour and culture, etc.

== Basis in Protestant theology ==

According to the theory, Protestants, beginning with Martin Luther, conceptualized worldly work as a duty which benefits both the individual and society as a whole. Thus, the Catholic idea of good works was transformed for Protestants into an obligation to consistently work diligently as a sign of grace. Whereas Catholicism teaches that good works are required of Catholics as a necessary manifestation of the faith they received, and that faith apart from works is dead and barren, the Calvinist theologians taught that only those who were predestined to be saved would be saved.

For Protestants, salvation is a gift from God; this is the Protestant distinction of &quot;sola gratia&quot;. In light of salvation being a gift of grace, Protestants viewed work as stewardship given to them. Thus Protestants were not working in order to achieve salvation but viewed work as the means by which they could be a blessing to others. Hard work and frugality were thought to be two important applications of being a steward of what God had given them. Protestants were thus attracted to these qualities and strove to reach them.

There are many specific theological examples in the Bible used to support a work ethic. Old Testament examples abound, such as God&#x27;s command in Exodus 20:8–10 to &quot;Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days you shall labor, and do all your work, but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God.&quot; Another passage from the Book of Proverbs in the Old Testament provides an example: &quot;A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest, and poverty will come upon you like a robber, and want like an armed man.&quot;

The New Testament also provides many examples, such as the Parable of the Ten Minas in the Book of Luke.

The Apostle Paul in 2 Thessalonians said &quot;If anyone is not willing to work, let him not eat.&quot;

==American political history==

The first permanent English settlement in America in the 17th century, at Jamestown, was led by John Smith. He trained the first English settlers to work at farming and fishing. These settlers were ill-equipped to survive in the English settlements in the early 1600s and were on the precipice of dying. John Smith emphasized the Protestant work ethic and helped propagate it by stating &quot;He that will not work, shall not eat&quot; which is a direct reference to 2 Thessalonians 3:10. This policy is credited with helping the early colony survive and thrive in its relatively harsh environment.

Writer Frank Chodorov argued that the Protestant ethic was long considered indispensable for American political figures:
Others have connected the concept of a Protestant work ethic to racist ideals. Civil rights activist Martin Luther King Jr. said:

==Support==

Late 20th century works by Lawrence Harrison, Samuel P. Huntington, and David Landes revitalized interest in Weber&#x27;s thesis.

In a &quot;New York Times&quot; article, published on June 8, 2003, Niall Ferguson claimed, using data from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), that &quot;the experience of Western Europe in the past quarter-century offers an unexpected confirmation of the Protestant ethic&quot;, that the reason that people in modern Protestant Western European nations actually work fewer hours on average than in the Catholic ones or in the United States is due to a decline in active Protestantism.

=== Individuals ===
There are studies of the existence and impact of the so-called Protestant Ethic on individuals. A study at the University of Groningen shows that unemployed Protestants fare much worse than the general population psychologically.

=== United States ===
The original New England Colonies in 1677 were mostly Protestant in origin and exhibited industriousness and respect for laws.

Pastor John Starke writes that the Protestant work ethic &quot;multiplied myths about Protestantism, Calvinism, vocation, and capitalism. To this day, many believe Protestants work hard so as to build evidence for salvation.&quot;

Some support exists that the Protestant work ethic may be so ingrained in American culture that when it appears people may not recognize it. Due to the history of Protestantism in the United States, it may be difficult to separate the successes of the country from the ethic that may have significantly contributed to propelling it.

=== Contrast with prosperity theology ethic ===
Tshilidzi Marwala asserted in 2020 that the principles of Protestant ethic are important for development in Africa and that they should be secularized and used as an alternative to the ethic of Prosperity Christianity, which advocates miracles as a basis of development.

In a recent journal article, Benjamin Kirby agrees that this influence of prosperity theology, particularly within neo-Pentecostal movements, complicates any attempt to draw parallels between, first, the relationship between contemporary Pentecostalism and neoliberal capitalism, and second, the relationship between Calvinistic asceticism and modern capitalism that interested Weber. Nevertheless, Kirby emphasises the enduring relevance of Weber&#x27;s analysis: he proposes a &quot;new elective affinity&quot; between contemporary Pentecostalism and neoliberal capitalism, suggesting that neo-Pentecostal churches may act as vehicles for embedding neoliberal economic processes, for instance by encouraging practitioners to become entrepreneurial, responsibilised citizens.

==Criticism==
===Historicity===
Austrian political economist Joseph Schumpeter argued that capitalism began in Italy in the 14th century, not in the Protestant areas of Europe.

Danish macroeconomist Thomas Barnebeck Andersen &quot;et al.&quot; found that the location of monasteries of the Catholic Order of Cistercians, and specifically their density, highly correlated to this work ethic in later centuries; ninety percent of these monasteries were founded before the year 1300 AD. Economist Joseph Henrich found that this correlation extends right up to the twenty-first century.

Other factors that further developed the European market economy included the strengthening of property rights and lowering of transaction costs with the decline and monetization of feudalism, and the increase in real wages following the epidemics of bubonic plague.

Social scientist Rodney Stark commented that &quot;during their critical period of economic development, these northern centers of capitalism were Catholic, not Protestant&quot;, with the Reformation still far off in the future. Furthermore, he also highlighted the conclusions of other historians, noting that, compared to Catholics, Protestants were &quot;not more likely to hold the high-status capitalist positions&quot;, that Catholic Europe did not lag in its industrial development compared to Protestant areas, and that even Weber wrote that &quot;fully developed capitalism had appeared in Europe&quot; long before the Reformation. As British historian Hugh Trevor-Roper stated, the concept that &quot;large-scale industrial capitalism was ideologically impossible before the Reformation is exploded by the simple fact that it existed&quot;.

French historian Fernand Braudel wrote that &quot;all historians&quot; opposed the &quot;tenuous theory&quot; of Protestant ethic, despite not being able to entirely quash the theory &quot;once and for all&quot;. Braudel continues to remark that the &quot;northern countries took over the place that earlier had been so long and brilliantly been occupied by the old capitalist centers of the Mediterranean. They invented nothing, either in technology or business management&quot;.

Historian Laurence R. Iannaccone has written that &quot;Ironically, the most noteworthy feature of the Protestant Ethic thesis is its absence of empirical support&quot;, citing the work of Swedish economic historian Kurt Samuelsson that &quot;economic progress was uncorrelated with religion, or was temporally incompatible with Weber&#x27;s thesis, or actually reversed the pattern claimed by Weber.&quot;

German economists Sascha Becker and Ludger Wößmann have posited an alternate theory, claiming that the literacy gap between Protestants (as a result of the Reformation) and Catholics was sufficient explanation for the economic gaps, and that the &quot;results hold when we exploit the initial concentric dispersion of the Reformation to use distance to Wittenberg as an instrument for Protestantism&quot;. However, they also note that, between Luther (1500) and Prussia during the Franco-Prussian War (1870–71), the limited data available has meant that the period in question is regarded as a &quot;black box&quot; and that only &quot;some cursory discussion and analysis&quot; is possible.

=== Modern effect===
A 2021 study argues that the values represented by the Protestant ethic as developed by Max Weber are not exclusively related to Protestantism but to the modernization phase of economic development. Weber observed this phase of development in areas dominated by Protestants at the time of his observations. From these observations, he concludes that a worldly asceticism consisting of a preference for work and a sober life are associated with Protestantism. However Dutch management economists Annemiek Schilpzand and Eelke de Jong argue that this value pattern is associated with the modernization phase of a region&#x27;s economic development and thus, in principle, can be found for any religion or for non-religious persons.

A 2013 study of 44 European countries found that religious heritage of countries explains half of the between-country variation in Europe in Work Ethic, more than modernity, while factors such as income, education, religion and (in another study) secularization explain relatively little. However, the study showed that Protestant heritage was actually the least correlated with a strong work ethic, with Muslim, then Orthodox, then Catholic heritages being the strongest.

A 2009 study of 32 mainly developed countries found no difference in &quot;work ethic&quot; between Catholics and Protestants, after correcting for demographic and country effects; however, it found substantial support for a &quot;social ethic&quot; effect due to e.g. the Catholic attention to production within the family and to personal contacts: &quot;Protestant values are shown to shape a type of individual who exerts greater effort in mutual social control, supports institutions more and more critically, is less bound to close circles of family and friends, and also holds more homogenous values.… (which ultimately works) in favour of anonymous markets, as they facilitate legal enforcement and impersonal exchange.&quot; A similar result is in the 2003 analysis of Western Europe by Riis.

==See also==
*Achievement ideology
*Anglo-Saxon economy
*Critical responses to Weber
*Critique of work
*Imperial German influence on Republican Chile
*Industrial Revolution
*Laziness
*Merton thesis
*Pray and work
*Predestination in Calvinism
*Prussian virtues
*Refusal of work
*Right to sit
*Sloth (deadly sin)
*Underclass
==References==
== Further reading ==
* Sascha O. Becker and Ludger Wossmann. &quot;Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of Protestant Economics History&quot;. Munich Discussion Paper No. 2007-7, January 22, 2007. 
* Robert Green, editor. &quot;The Weber Thesis Controversy&quot;. D.C. Heath, 1973, covers some of the criticism of Weber&#x27;s theory.
* Haller, William. &quot;Milton and the Protestant Ethic.&quot; &quot;Journal of British Studies&quot; 1.1 (1961): 52–57 [www.jstor.org/stable/175098 online].
* Max Weber. &quot;The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism&quot;. Charles Scribner&#x27;s sons, 1959.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16024056" start="4" end="25" title="Protestant work ethic" label="Protestant work ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16024056" start="45" end="65" title="Protestant work ethic" label="Calvinist work ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16024056" start="73" end="91" title="Protestant work ethic" label="Puritan work ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426207" start="98" end="108" title="work ethic" label="work ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="120" end="129" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="131" end="140" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="146" end="153" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="233" end="249" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="264" end="273" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427962" start="285" end="294" title="diligence" label="diligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315911" start="296" end="306" title="discipline" label="discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858477" start="312" end="321" title="frugality" label="frugality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="380" end="389" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q392937" start="408" end="457" title="The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism" label="The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="553" end="563" title="asceticism" label="asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193203" start="568" end="582" title="predestination" label="predestination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="615" end="625" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q829183" start="689" end="697" title="vocation" label="vocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185105" start="1085" end="1100" title="Fernand Braudel" label="Fernand Braudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q335087" start="1105" end="1122" title="Hugh Trevor-Roper" label="Hugh Trevor-Roper"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="1224" end="1235" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414323" start="1522" end="1541" title="Northwestern Europe" label="Northwestern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q276183" start="1860" end="1868" title="theodicy" label="theodicy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="2313" end="2326" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2435" end="2443" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714976" start="2452" end="2462" title="good works" label="good works"/>
<link wikidata="Q205194" start="2559" end="2564" title="Grace (Christianity)" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q193203" start="2803" end="2814" title="Predestination" label="predestined"/>
<link wikidata="Q310428" start="2935" end="2946" title="sola gratia" label="sola gratia"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="4272" end="4281" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="4294" end="4304" title="John Smith (explorer)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081269" start="4805" end="4819" title="Frank Chodorov" label="Frank Chodorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="4983" end="4996" title="Racism" label="racist ideals"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="4998" end="5010" title="Civil rights movement" label="Civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="5020" end="5042" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q22073836" start="5090" end="5107" title="Lawrence Harrison (academic)" label="Lawrence Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q19074" start="5109" end="5129" title="Samuel P. Huntington" label="Samuel P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q931541" start="5135" end="5147" title="David Landes" label="David Landes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5205" end="5219" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q377638" start="5262" end="5276" title="Niall Ferguson" label="Niall Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="5306" end="5360" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q850730" start="5844" end="5867" title="University of Groningen" label="University of Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849622" start="6728" end="6745" title="Tshilidzi Marwala" label="Tshilidzi Marwala"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="6836" end="6842" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q655189" start="6922" end="6945" title="Prosperity theology" label="Prosperity Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q350853" start="7115" end="7140" title="Neo-charismatic movement" label="neo-Pentecostal movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="7257" end="7267" title="Neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7751" end="7766" title="Governmentality#Responsibilisation" label="responsibilised"/>
<link wikidata="Q78477" start="7839" end="7856" title="Joseph Schumpeter" label="Joseph Schumpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="7869" end="7879" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480041" start="7889" end="7914" title="Italy in the Middle Ages" label="Italy in the 14th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="8087" end="8097" title="Cistercian" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q973493" start="8273" end="8287" title="Joseph Henrich" label="Joseph Henrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917765" start="8458" end="8472" title="property right" label="property right"/>
<link wikidata="Q877496" start="8490" end="8506" title="transaction cost" label="transaction cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="8545" end="8554" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821213" start="8581" end="8585" title="wage" label="wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="8614" end="8628" title="bubonic plague" label="bubonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q971756" start="8648" end="8660" title="Rodney Stark" label="Rodney Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="8819" end="8830" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q335087" start="9293" end="9310" title="Hugh Trevor-Roper" label="Hugh Trevor-Roper"/>
<link wikidata="Q185105" start="9500" end="9515" title="Fernand Braudel" label="Fernand Braudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808019" start="9975" end="9997" title="Laurence R. Iannaccone" label="Laurence R. Iannaccone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873856" start="10409" end="10423" title="Ludger Wößmann" label="Ludger Wößmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="10529" end="10540" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837" start="10726" end="10736" title="Wittenberg" label="Wittenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="10835" end="10842" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="10843" end="10873" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="during the Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673677" start="13108" end="13128" title="Achievement ideology" label="Achievement ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054209" start="13130" end="13149" title="Anglo-Saxon economy" label="Anglo-Saxon economy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13151" end="13178" title="Max Weber#Critical responses to Weber" label="Critical responses to Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789468" start="13180" end="13196" title="Critique of work" label="Critique of work"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864815" start="13198" end="13243" title="Imperial German influence on Republican Chile" label="Imperial German influence on Republican Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="13245" end="13266" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q484" start="13268" end="13276" title="Laziness" label="Laziness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365905" start="13278" end="13291" title="Merton thesis" label="Merton thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410982" start="13293" end="13306" title="Pray and work" label="Pray and work"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080184" start="13308" end="13335" title="Predestination in Calvinism" label="Predestination in Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897846" start="13337" end="13353" title="Prussian virtues" label="Prussian virtues"/>
<link wikidata="Q250452" start="13355" end="13370" title="Refusal of work" label="Refusal of work"/>
<link wikidata="Q109283903" start="13372" end="13384" title="Right to sit" label="Right to sit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541428" start="13386" end="13404" title="Sloth (deadly sin)" label="Sloth (deadly sin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006336" start="13406" end="13416" title="Underclass" label="Underclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344929" start="13636" end="13648" title="Robert Green (disambiguation)" label="Robert Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="13932" end="13941" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q392937" start="13949" end="13998" title="The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism" label="The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816602" wikidata="Q3146235" url="?curid=816602" title="Camden Road railway station">
<text>Camden Road is a station on the Mildmay line of the London Overground, located in the London Borough of Camden in north London.

The station is situated in Travelcard Zone 2. There is an official out-of-station interchange with Camden Town tube station on the Northern line of the London Underground, located a walk away.

==History==
The first Camden Road station was opened by the North London Railway in 1850 on the east side of what is now St. Pancras Way. It was renamed Camden Town on 1 July 1870, but closed on 5 December the same year when it was replaced by the current station, a short distance to the west.

Designed by Edwin Henry Horne, it opened as Camden Town by the North London Railway on 5 December 1870, but was renamed Camden Road on 25 September 1950 to avoid confusion with the London Underground Northern line which had opened in 1907. Thus, between 1907 and 1950, there were two stations called Camden Town. It remains Horne&#x27;s only station still operating as such.

Between 14 May 1979 and 11 May 1985 Camden Road was the western terminus of the Crosstown Linkline diesel multiple unit service to North Woolwich. 

To allow four-car trains to run on the London Overground network, the North London line between and closed in February 2010, and reopened on 1 June that year, in order to install a new signalling system and to extend 30 platforms. After the reopening the work continued until May 2011 with a reduced service and none on Sundays.

In November 2024 it was announced that toilets would be installed at the station.

==Location==
The station is at the corner of Royal College Street and Camden Road. The present Camden Town London Underground station is 450 metres to the southwest of this station. It is one of the few railway stations in England in which there is a police station.

==Services==
The typical weekday service in trains per hour is:
* 4 westbound to via 
* 4 westbound to Clapham Junction also via Willesden Junction
* 8 eastbound to via .

There is now no normal passenger service on the line from Camden Road to Willesden Junction Low Level via Queens Park, though the route can be (and is) used if the line via Hampstead Heath is blocked for any reason.

In addition to the frequent local passenger service, the station is a busy location for freight traffic due to its proximity to the junctions linking the North London line to both the West Coast Main Line at Camden Junction (via the now closed station at ) and the East Coast Main Line at Copenhagen Junction. The former is particularly well used by container trains from the deep water ports at Felixstowe and Tilbury to various terminals in the Midlands and North West of England; it also carried a passenger service (between and Broad Street/Liverpool Street) until 1992.

==Connections==
London Buses routes 29, 46, 253 and 274 and night routes N29, N253 and N279 serve the station.

There is also an official out of station interchange with Northern Line services at the nearby Camden Town underground station.

===Camden Highline===

In the future there may be a walking connection to and from King&#x27;s Cross station. The Camden Highline is a proposed public park and garden walk transforming a disused section of the North London line between the two stations.

===Potential reinstatement of platform 3===
In a London Rail Freight Strategy released by Network Rail in May 2021, proposed reinstatement of platform 3 as a through platform, with platform 2 becoming a turn back for a potential peak hour service from Camden Road to with potential to continue these during the off peak. 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3146235" start="0" end="11" title="Camden Road railway station" label="Camden Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q131298524" start="32" end="44" title="Mildmay line" label="Mildmay line"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="52" end="69" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q202088" start="86" end="110" title="London Borough of Camden" label="London Borough of Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q734547" start="114" end="126" title="north London" label="north London"/>
<link wikidata="Q41172219" start="156" end="173" title="Travelcard Zone 2" label="Travelcard Zone 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q249400" start="196" end="222" title="out-of-station interchange" label="out-of-station interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028430" start="228" end="252" title="Camden Town tube station" label="Camden Town tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q214793" start="260" end="273" title="Northern line" label="Northern line"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="281" end="299" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q23696685" start="631" end="648" title="Edwin Henry Horne" label="Edwin Henry Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055980" start="682" end="702" title="North London Railway" label="North London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="800" end="818" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q214793" start="819" end="832" title="Northern line" label="Northern line"/>
<link wikidata="Q116044798" start="1075" end="1093" title="Crosstown Linkline" label="Crosstown Linkline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854601" start="1214" end="1231" title="North London line" label="North London line"/>
<link wikidata="Q719530" start="1928" end="1944" title="Clapham Junction railway station" label="Clapham Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854601" start="2368" end="2385" title="North London line" label="North London line"/>
<link wikidata="Q19889" start="2398" end="2418" title="West Coast Main Line" label="West Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q672271" start="2479" end="2499" title="East Coast Main Line" label="East Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000656" start="2610" end="2620" title="Felixstowe" label="Felixstowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q648432" start="2625" end="2632" title="Tilbury" label="Tilbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="2806" end="2818" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670053" start="2826" end="2828" title="London Buses route 29" label="29"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="2830" end="2832" title="London Buses route 46" label="46"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670029" start="2834" end="2837" title="London Buses route 253" label="253"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="2842" end="2845" title="London Buses route 274" label="274"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="2863" end="2866" title="London Buses route N29" label="N29"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="2868" end="2872" title="London Buses route N253" label="N253"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="2877" end="2881" title="London Buses route N279" label="N279"/>
<link wikidata="Q219867" start="3114" end="3131" title="London King&amp;#x27;s Cross railway station" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854601" start="3241" end="3258" title="North London line" label="North London line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816607" wikidata="Q379956" url="?curid=816607" title="Henry de Montherlant">
<text>Henry Marie Joseph Frédéric Expedite Millon de Montherlant (; 20 April 1895 – 21 September 1972) was a French essayist, novelist, and dramatist. He was elected to the Académie française in 1960.

== Biography ==
Born in Paris, a descendant of an aristocratic (yet obscure) Picard family, he was educated at the Lycée Janson de Sailly and the Sainte-Croix boarding school at Neuilly-sur-Seine. Henry&#x27;s father was a hard-line reactionary (to the extent of despising the post-Dreyfus Affair army as too subservient to the Republic, and refusing to have electricity or the telephone installed in his house). His mother, a formerly lively socialite, became chronically ill due to the difficult childbirth, being bedridden most of the time, and dying at the young age of 43.
From the age of seven or eight, Henry was enthusiastic about literature and began writing. In 1905 reading &quot;Quo Vadis&quot; by Henryk Sienkiewicz caused him a lifelong fascination with Ancient Rome and a proficient interest in Latin. He also was enthusiastic about school comradeship, sports and bullfighting. When he was 15 his parents sent him alone to Spain where he became initiated in the &quot;corrida&quot;, killing two young bulls. He was also a talented draughtsman and after 1913 resorted to hiring young people in the street for nude modelling.

On 5 April 1912, aged almost seventeen, Henry was expelled from the Catholic Sainte-Croix de Neuilly school for being a &quot;corruptor of souls&quot;. Together with other five youngsters he had founded a group called &#x27;La Famille&#x27; (the Family), a kind of order of chivalry whose members were bonded by an oath of fidelity and mutual assistance. A member of that group was Philippe Jean Giquel (1897–1977), Montherlant&#x27;s two-year-junior &quot;special friend&quot;, of whom he was enamored but with whom he had no physical contact. According to Montherlant this &quot;special friendship&quot; had raised the fierce and jealous opposition of abbé de La Serre, who managed to get the older boy expelled. This incident (and Giquel) became a lifelong obsession for Montherlant, who would depict it in the 1952 play &quot;La Ville dont le prince est un enfant&quot; and his 1969 novel &quot;Les Garçons&quot;. Later, in his adult years, he would resume his platonic friendship with Giquel, who invited the writer to be the godfather of his daughter Marie-Christine.

After the deaths of his father and mother in 1914 and 1915, he went to live with his doting grandmother and eccentric uncles. Mobilised in 1916, he was wounded and decorated. Marked by his experience of war, he wrote &quot;Songe&quot; (&#x27;Dream&#x27;), an autobiographic novel, as well as his &quot;Chant funèbre pour les morts de Verdun&quot; (&quot;Funeral Chant for the Dead at Verdun&quot;), both exaltations of heroism during the Great War. His work was part of the literature event in the art competition at the 1924 Summer Olympics.
Montherlant first achieved critical success with the 1934 novel &quot;Les Célibataires&quot;, and sold millions of copies of his tetralogy &quot;Les Jeunes Filles&quot;, written from 1936 through 1939. In these years Montherlant, a well-to-do heir, traveled extensively, mainly to Spain (where he met and worked with bullfighter Juan Belmonte), Italy, and Algeria, giving vent to his passion for sexually abusing street boys. During the Second World War after the fall of France in 1940 he remained in Paris and continued to write plays, poems, essays, and worked as a war correspondent. At the height of his fame when the war broke out (he had been awarded the Grand Prix by the prestigious Académie Française in 1934), he described the German victory as evidence of the superiority of a virile, conquering race. Still, after the war he was not treated as harshly as those who openly and enthusiastically collaborated; the Committee for the Purification of Writers sentenced him in 1945 to one year of abstinence from publishing. In 1960, he was elected to lifetime membership in the Académie Française.

Some time in 1968, according to Roger Peyrefitte, outside a movie theatre in Paris, 72-year-old Montherlant was attacked and beaten up by a group of youths because he had groped one of them. Montherlant was blinded in one eye as a result. The British writer Peter Quennell, who edited a collection of translations of his works, recalled that Montherlant attributed the eye injury to &quot;a fall&quot; instead; and mentions in confirmation that Montherlant suffered from vertigo.

After going almost blind in his later years and becoming the target of scorners like Peyrefitte, Montherlant died in 1972 from a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head after swallowing a cyanide capsule. His ashes were scattered by Jean-Claude Barat and Gabriel Matzneff in Rome, at the Forum, among the Temple of Portunus and into the Tiber.

His biography was written by Pierre Sipriot, and published in two volumes (1982 and 1990).

== Works ==
His early successes were works such as &quot;Les Célibataires&quot; (&quot;The Bachelors&quot;) in 1934, and the highly anti-feminist tetralogy &quot;Les Jeunes Filles&quot; (&quot;The Young Girls&quot;) (1936–1939), which sold millions of copies and was translated into 13 languages. His late novel &quot;Chaos and Night&quot; was published in 1963. The novels were praised by writers as diverse as Aragon, Bernanos, and Malraux. Montherlant was well known for his anti-feminist and misogynistic views, as exemplified particularly in &quot;The Girls&quot;. Simone de Beauvoir considered his attitudes about women in detail in her &quot;The Second Sex&quot;.

He wrote plays such as &quot;Pasiphaé&quot; (1936), &quot;La Reine morte&quot; (1942, the first of a series of historical dramas), &quot;Malatesta&quot; (1946), &quot;Le Maître de Santiago&quot; (1947), &quot;Port-Royal&quot; (1954) and &quot;Le Cardinal d&#x27;Espagne&quot; (1960). He is particularly remembered as a playwright. In his plays as well as in his novels he frequently portrayed heroic characters displaying the moral standards he professed, and explored the &#x27;irrationality and unpredictability of human behaviour&#x27;.

He worked as an essayist also. In the collection &quot;L&#x27;Equinoxe de septembre&quot; (1938) he deplored the mediocrity of contemporary France and in &quot;Le solstice de Juin&quot;, (1941), he expressed his admiration for Wehrmacht and claimed that France had been justly defeated and conquered in 1940. Like many scions of the old aristocracy, he had hated the Third Republic, especially as it had become in the aftermath of the Dreyfus Affair. He was in a &quot;round-table&quot; of French and German intellectuals who met at the Georges V Hotel in Paris in the 1940s, including the writers Ernst Jünger, Paul Morand and Jean Cocteau, the publisher Gaston Gallimard and the Nazi legal scholar Carl Schmitt. Montherlant wrote articles for the Paris weekly, &quot;La Gerbe&quot;, directed by the pro-Nazi novelist and Catholic reactionary Alphonse de Châteaubriant.

Montherlant treated pederastic themes in his work, including his play &quot;La Ville dont le prince est un enfant&quot; (1952) and novel &quot;Les Garçons&quot; (The Boys), published in 1969 but written four or five decades earlier. He maintained a private and coded correspondence with Roger Peyrefitte — author of &quot;Les Amitiés particulières&quot; (Special Friendships, 1943), also about relationships between boys at a Roman Catholic boarding school.

Montherlant is remembered for his aphorism &quot;Happiness writes in white ink on a white page&quot;, often quoted in the shorter form &quot;Happiness writes white&quot;.

== Reception, honours and awards ==
&quot;Les célibataires&quot; was awarded the Grand prix de littérature de l&#x27;Académie française in 1934, and the English Northcliffe Prize. In 1960 Montherlant was elected a member of the Académie française, taking the seat which had belonged to André Siegfried, a political writer. He was an Officer of the French Ordre national de la Légion d&#x27;honneur.

He was much acclaimed by Jean Mauriac, Romain Rolland, Andre Marois, Andre Gide, and Georges Bernanos, who called him &quot;perhaps the greatest of our living writers.&quot; That was in 1939. Marguerite Yourcenar called him a &quot;great writer,&quot; but noted that she found some of his writing to be &quot;obtuse and crudely brutal.&quot; German director Rainer Werner Fassbinder references &quot;Les Jeunes Filles&quot; in two films: &quot;Das kleine Chaos&quot; (1967) and &quot;Satansbraten&quot; (1977). In the short film &quot;Das kleine Chaos&quot; the character portrayed by Fassbinder himself reads aloud from a paperback German translation of &quot;Les Jeunes Filles,&quot; a book which he claims to have stolen.

Writing in 1993, Pierre Lapaire noted that even among his detractors, &quot;Montherlant&#x27;s style is recognized for its richness, power and classicism.&quot;

== Translations and adaptations ==
Terence Kilmartin, best known for revising the Moncrieff translation of Proust, translated some of Montherlant&#x27;s novels into English, including a 1968 edition of the four volumes of &quot;Les Jeunes Filles&quot;, in English called simply &quot;The Girls&quot;.

In 2009, New York Review Books returned Montherlant to print in English by issuing Kilmartin&#x27;s translation of &quot;Chaos and Night&quot; (1963) with a new introduction by Gary Indiana.

Christophe Malavoy directed and starred in a 1997 television movie adaption of &quot;La Ville dont le prince est un enfant&quot;.

== Illustrated works ==
Some works of Henry de Montherlant were published in illustrated editions. Examples include &quot;Pasiphaé&quot;, illustrated by Henri Matisse, &quot;Les Jeunes Filles&quot;, illustrated by Mariette Lydis, and others illustrated by Jean Cocteau, , Édouard Georges Mac-Avoy, and Pierre-Yves Tremois.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
*H. Perruchot - &quot;Montherlant&quot; (French and European Publications ), 1963
*J. Cruikshank - &quot;Montherlant&quot; (Oliver &amp; Boyd ), 1964
*I. Hedges, Staging History from the Shoah to Palestine: Three Plays and Essays on WWII and its Aftermath (ISBN 978-3-030-84009-9), 2021, pp. 80–81.

== External links ==
* Henry de Montherlant site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q379956" start="0" end="58" title="Henry de Montherlant" label="Henry Marie Joseph Frédéric Expedite Millon de Montherlant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35760" start="110" end="118" title="essayist" label="essayist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="120" end="128" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="134" end="143" title="dramatist" label="dramatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="167" end="185" title="Académie française" label="Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249603" start="273" end="279" title="Picardy" label="Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431541" start="311" end="333" title="Lycée Janson de Sailly" label="Lycée Janson de Sailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q48958" start="374" end="391" title="Neuilly-sur-Seine" label="Neuilly-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173457" start="478" end="492" title="Dreyfus Affair" label="Dreyfus Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="555" end="566" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="574" end="583" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q335315" start="887" end="896" title="Quo Vadis (novel)" label="Quo Vadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41502" start="906" end="924" title="Henryk Sienkiewicz" label="Henryk Sienkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="964" end="976" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1006" end="1011" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184940" start="1075" end="1087" title="bullfighting" label="bullfighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213825" start="2166" end="2203" title="La Ville dont le prince est un enfant (play)" label="La Ville dont le prince est un enfant"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2849" end="2858" title="World War I" label="Great War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2885" end="2901" title="Art competitions at the 1924 Summer Olympics#Literature" label="literature event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088945" start="2909" end="2924" title="Art competitions at the 1924 Summer Olympics" label="art competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8132" start="2932" end="2952" title="1924 Summer Olympics" label="1924 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443637" start="3083" end="3092" title="tetralogy" label="tetralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3235" end="3240" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q715596" start="3283" end="3296" title="Juan Belmonte" label="Juan Belmonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3299" end="3304" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="3310" end="3317" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q551783" start="4092" end="4108" title="Roger Peyrefitte" label="Roger Peyrefitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077666" start="4318" end="4332" title="Peter Quennell" label="Peter Quennell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686316" start="4531" end="4538" title="Vertigo (medical)" label="vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="4670" end="4684" title="suicide" label="self-inflicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="4730" end="4737" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q849241" start="4847" end="4865" title="Temple of Portunus" label="Temple of Portunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387008" start="4916" end="4930" title="Pierre Sipriot" label="Pierre Sipriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443637" start="5125" end="5134" title="tetralogy" label="tetralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128" start="5391" end="5397" title="Louis Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q315072" start="5399" end="5407" title="Georges Bernanos" label="Bernanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q151164" start="5413" end="5420" title="Andre Malraux" label="Malraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197" start="5549" end="5567" title="Simone de Beauvoir" label="Simone de Beauvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q470098" start="5628" end="5642" title="The Second Sex" label="The Second Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662575" start="5788" end="5797" title="Malatesta (play)" label="Malatesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="6419" end="6428" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="6482" end="6499" title="Fall of France" label="conquered in 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="6559" end="6573" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173457" start="6627" end="6641" title="Dreyfus Affair" label="Dreyfus Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q217708" start="6729" end="6753" title="Georges V Hotel in Paris" label="Georges V Hotel in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q76727" start="6790" end="6802" title="Ernst Jünger" label="Ernst Jünger"/>
<link wikidata="Q272" start="6804" end="6815" title="Paul Morand" label="Paul Morand"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="6820" end="6832" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241719" start="6848" end="6864" title="Gaston Gallimard" label="Gaston Gallimard"/>
<link wikidata="Q77148" start="6892" end="6904" title="Carl Schmitt" label="Carl Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q611491" start="6961" end="6969" title="La Gerbe" label="La Gerbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q373251" start="7036" end="7061" title="Alphonse de Châteaubriant" label="Alphonse de Châteaubriant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213825" start="7140" end="7177" title="La Ville dont le prince est un enfant (play)" label="La Ville dont le prince est un enfant"/>
<link wikidata="Q551783" start="7351" end="7367" title="Roger Peyrefitte" label="Roger Peyrefitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635878" start="7386" end="7411" title="Les Amitiés particulières" label="Les Amitiés particulières"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7490" end="7504" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114796" start="7776" end="7830" title="Grand prix de littérature de l&amp;#x27;Académie française" label="Grand prix de littérature de l&amp;#x27;Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7856" end="7873" title="Northcliffe Prize" label="Northcliffe Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="7923" end="7941" title="Académie française" label="Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q326584" start="7981" end="7996" title="André Siegfried" label="André Siegfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="8050" end="8092" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="Ordre national de la Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173471" start="8120" end="8132" title="Jean Mauriac" label="Jean Mauriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q47162" start="8134" end="8148" title="Romain Rolland" label="Romain Rolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q224029" start="8150" end="8162" title="André Maurois" label="Andre Marois"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484" start="8164" end="8174" title="André Gide" label="Andre Gide"/>
<link wikidata="Q315072" start="8180" end="8196" title="Georges Bernanos" label="Georges Bernanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q163118" start="8287" end="8307" title="Marguerite Yourcenar" label="Marguerite Yourcenar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44426" start="8453" end="8477" title="Rainer Werner Fassbinder" label="Rainer Werner Fassbinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979315" start="8579" end="8591" title="Satan&amp;#x27;s Brew" label="Satansbraten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701935" start="9018" end="9035" title="Terence Kilmartin" label="Terence Kilmartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666426" start="9065" end="9074" title="C. K. Scott Moncrieff" label="Moncrieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="9090" end="9096" title="Proust" label="Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013935" start="9294" end="9315" title="New York Review Books" label="New York Review Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525290" start="9462" end="9474" title="Gary Indiana" label="Gary Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966368" start="9477" end="9495" title="Christophe Malavoy" label="Christophe Malavoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213826" start="9562" end="9599" title="La Ville dont le prince est un enfant (film)" label="La Ville dont le prince est un enfant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="9761" end="9774" title="Henri Matisse" label="Henri Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293034" start="9822" end="9836" title="Mariette Lydis" label="Mariette Lydis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="9864" end="9876" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579861" start="9880" end="9904" title="Édouard Georges Mac-Avoy" label="Édouard Georges Mac-Avoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361497" start="9910" end="9929" title="Pierre-Yves Tremois" label="Pierre-Yves Tremois"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816617" wikidata="Q7108620" url="?curid=816617" title="Other ranks">
<text>Other ranks (ORs) in the Royal Marines (RM), the British Army, and the Royal Air Force (RAF), along with the navies, armies, and air forces of many other Commonwealth countries and Ireland, are those personnel who are not commissioned officers, but usually include non-commissioned officers (NCOs). In the Royal Navy (RN), these personnel are called &quot;ratings&quot; rather than &quot;other ranks&quot;. &quot;Non-commissioned member&quot; (NCM) is the equivalent term in the Canadian Armed Forces, and &quot;enlisted rank&quot; is used in the United States and elsewhere.

The term &quot;other ranks&quot; is often considered to exclude warrant officers (WO), and occasionally in some militaries also excludes NCOs. Formally, a regiment consists of the &quot;officers, warrant officers, non-commissioned officers, and men&quot;, or the &quot;officers, warrant officers, and other ranks&quot;.

==British other ranks==
===Notes===
==See also==

*Royal Navy other rank insignia
*British Army other ranks rank insignia
*RAF other ranks
*Ranks and insignia of NATO

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7108620" start="0" end="11" title="Other ranks" label="Other ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108620" start="13" end="16" title="Other ranks" label="ORs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="25" end="38" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="49" end="61" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="71" end="86" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="109" end="115" title="Navy" label="navies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37726" start="117" end="123" title="Army" label="armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q61883" start="129" end="138" title="air force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="154" end="166" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="181" end="188" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="222" end="243" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="commissioned officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="265" end="289" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="306" end="316" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q337902" start="356" end="363" title="Naval rating" label="ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314178" start="413" end="436" title="Non-commissioned member" label="Non-commissioned member"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="479" end="500" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379090" start="512" end="525" title="enlisted rank" label="enlisted rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="641" end="656" title="warrant officer" label="warrant officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="732" end="740" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374560" start="949" end="979" title="Royal Navy other rank insignia" label="Royal Navy other rank insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969482" start="981" end="1019" title="British Army other ranks rank insignia" label="British Army other ranks rank insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774109" start="1021" end="1036" title="RAF other ranks" label="RAF other ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q654899" start="1038" end="1064" title="Ranks and insignia of NATO" label="Ranks and insignia of NATO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816643" wikidata="Q1972058" url="?curid=816643" title="Robert Hertz">
<text>Robert Hertz (22 June 1881 in Saint-Cloud, Hauts-de-Seine – 13 April 1915 in Marchéville, Meuse) was a French sociologist who was killed in active service during World War I.

Hertz was a student at the École Normale Supérieure, from which he aggregated in philosophy in 1904, finishing first in his class. After a brief period of study in England at the British Museum he returned to France, where he began doctoral work with Émile Durkheim and Marcel Mauss. An important member of the Annee Sociologique team, his specialty was the sociology of religion.

Hertz is most known for his early papers &quot;A Contribution to the Study of the Collective Representation of Death&quot; (1907) and &quot;The Pre-Eminence of the Right Hand: a Study in Religious Polarity&quot; (1909); both later translated into English &quot;as Death and the Right Hand&quot; by Rodney and Claudia Needham (in 1960). Hertz&#x27;s work influenced Edward Evan Evans-Pritchard, and many consider it to be a precursor to Claude Lévi-Strauss&#x27;s structuralism. The following quote from &quot;Death and the Right Hand&quot; often appears in anthropological articles even today, such as Richard Robbins&#x27;s &quot;The Cultural Construction of Social Hierarchy&quot; (1997):

Every social hierarchy claims to be founded on the nature of things. It thus accords itself eternity; it escapes change and the attacks of innovators. Aristotle justified slavery by the ethnic superiority of the Greeks over the barbarians; and today the man who is annoyed by feminist claims alleges that woman is &quot;naturally&quot; inferiorHertz&#x27;s uncompleted doctoral dissertation was entitled &quot;Sin and Expiation in Primitive Societies&quot;. Sections of it, along with his articles for the &quot;L&#x27;Année&quot; and his correspondence with his wife Alice (née Bauer), have been published. He also published an article (1913) on the festival of Saint Besse, which some consider to be the first anthropological contribution to the study of the Alps.

Hertz was killed by German forces whilst leading his section against German forces at Marcheville. He was posthumously awarded the Croix de Chevalier (Légion d&#x27;honneur) for his part in the action.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1972058" start="0" end="12" title="Robert Hertz" label="Robert Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q189153" start="30" end="41" title="Saint-Cloud" label="Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q12543" start="43" end="57" title="Hauts-de-Seine" label="Hauts-de-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139969" start="77" end="88" title="Marchéville" label="Marchéville"/>
<link wikidata="Q12631" start="90" end="95" title="Meuse (department)" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="162" end="173" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83259" start="203" end="227" title="École Normale Supérieure" label="École Normale Supérieure"/>
<link wikidata="Q397610" start="243" end="253" title="agrégation" label="aggregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="257" end="267" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="340" end="347" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="355" end="369" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="427" end="441" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Émile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q295393" start="446" end="458" title="Marcel Mauss" label="Marcel Mauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638544" start="487" end="505" title="Annee Sociologique" label="Annee Sociologique"/>
<link wikidata="Q461659" start="534" end="555" title="sociology of religion" label="sociology of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438232" start="856" end="882" title="Rodney Needham" label="Rodney and Claudia Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q150379" start="923" end="950" title="Edward Evan Evans-Pritchard" label="Edward Evan Evans-Pritchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="994" end="1013" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="1021" end="1034" title="structuralism" label="structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1067" end="1091" title="Death and the Right Hand" label="Death and the Right Hand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1160" end="1175" title="Richard Robbins (sociologist)" label="Richard Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1189" end="1234" title="The Cultural Construction of Social Hierarchy" label="The Cultural Construction of Social Hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2794179" start="1913" end="1924" title="Saint Bessus" label="Saint Besse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="2007" end="2015" title="Alps" label="the Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q216806" start="2104" end="2115" title="Marchéville-en-Woëvre" label="Marcheville"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="2149" end="2191" title="Legion of Honour" label="Croix de Chevalier (Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816648" wikidata="Q433752" url="?curid=816648" title="ATC code A05">
<text>==A05A Bile therapy==

===A05AA Bile acids and derivatives===
:A05AA01 Chenodeoxycholic acid
:A05AA02 Ursodeoxycholic acid
:A05AA03 Cholic acid
:A05AA04 Obeticholic acid
:A05AA05 Ursodoxicoltaurine

===A05AB Preparations for biliary tract therapy===
:A05AB01 Nicotinyl methylamide

===A05AX Other drugs for bile therapy===
:A05AX01 Piprozolin
:A05AX02 Hymecromone
:A05AX03 Cyclobutyrol
:A05AX04 Maralixibat chloride
:A05AX05 Odevixibat
:A05AX06 Elafibranor
:A05AX07 Seladelpar
:QA05AX90 Menbutone

==A05B Liver therapy, lipotropics==

===A05BA Liver therapy===
:A05BA01 Arginine glutamate
:A05BA03 Silymarin
:A05BA04 Citiolone
:A05BA05 Epomediol
:A05BA06 Ornithine oxoglutarate
:A05BA07 Tidiacic arginine
:A05BA08 Glycyrrhizic acid (glycyrrhizin)
:A05BA09 Metadoxine
:A05BA10 Phospholipids
:QA05BA90 Methionine

==A05C Drugs for bile therapy and lipotropics in combination==
:&quot;Empty group&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q419028" start="71" end="92" title="Chenodeoxycholic acid" label="Chenodeoxycholic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q241374" start="102" end="122" title="Ursodeoxycholic acid" label="Ursodeoxycholic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q287415" start="132" end="143" title="Cholic acid" label="Cholic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708271" start="153" end="169" title="Obeticholic acid" label="Obeticholic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688907" start="179" end="197" title="Ursodoxicoltaurine" label="Ursodoxicoltaurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q744041" start="259" end="280" title="Nicotinyl methylamide" label="Nicotinyl methylamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197510" start="332" end="342" title="Piprozolin" label="Piprozolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q904431" start="352" end="363" title="Hymecromone" label="Hymecromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q601419" start="373" end="385" title="Cyclobutyrol" label="Cyclobutyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q27291628" start="395" end="415" title="Maralixibat chloride" label="Maralixibat chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q76415200" start="425" end="435" title="Odevixibat" label="Odevixibat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15409440" start="445" end="456" title="Elafibranor" label="Elafibranor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27268037" start="466" end="476" title="Seladelpar" label="Seladelpar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="487" end="496" title="Menbutone" label="Menbutone"/>
<link wikidata="Q288119" start="570" end="588" title="Arginine glutamate" label="Arginine glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q425702" start="598" end="607" title="Silymarin" label="Silymarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15408416" start="617" end="626" title="Citiolone" label="Citiolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383801" start="636" end="645" title="Epomediol" label="Epomediol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103624" start="655" end="677" title="Ornithine oxoglutarate" label="Ornithine oxoglutarate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800905" start="687" end="704" title="Tidiacic arginine" label="Tidiacic arginine"/>
<link wikidata="Q418705" start="714" end="731" title="Glycyrrhizic acid" label="Glycyrrhizic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344013" start="756" end="766" title="Metadoxine" label="Metadoxine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186915" start="776" end="788" title="Phospholipid" label="Phospholipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q180341" start="800" end="810" title="Methionine" label="Methionine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816677" wikidata="Q2316780" url="?curid=816677" title="Panama–California Exposition">
<text>The Panama–California Exposition was a world exposition held in San Diego, California, between January 1, 1915, and January 1, 1917. The exposition celebrated the opening of the Panama Canal, and was meant to tout San Diego as the first United States port of call for ships traveling north after passing westward through the canal. The fair was held in San Diego&#x27;s large urban Balboa Park. The park held a second Panama-California exposition in 1935.

==Proposal and formation==
In 1909, San Diego&#x27;s Chamber of Commerce president and local businessman Gilbert Aubrey Davidson proposed an exposition to commemorate the completion of the Panama Canal. San Diego&#x27;s population in 1910 was 37,578, and it would be the least populated city to ever host an international exposition. In contrast, San Francisco had a population nearly 10 times larger and would ultimately be supported by politicians in California and Washington, D.C. for the official Panama Canal exposition, the Panama–Pacific International Exposition. Although representatives from San Francisco urged San Diego to end its planning, San Diego pressed forward for a simultaneous exposition. Several San Franciscans persuaded both members of Congress and President William Howard Taft to deny support for San Diego&#x27;s exposition in exchange for pledged political support for Taft&#x27;s campaign against Republicans. With no federal and little state government funding, San Diego&#x27;s exposition would be on a smaller scale with fewer states and countries participating.

The Panama–California Exposition Company was formed in September 1909 and its board of directors was soon led by President Ulysses S. Grant Jr. and Vice President John D. Spreckels. After Grant resigned in November 1911, real estate developer &quot;Colonel&quot; D. C. Collier, was made president of the exposition. He was responsible for selecting both the location in the city park and the Pueblo Revival and Mission Revival architectural styles. Collier was tasked with steering the exposition in &quot;the proper direction,&quot; ensuring that every decision made reflected his vision of what the exposition could accomplish. Collier once stated &quot;The purpose of the Panama–California Exposition is to illustrate the progress and possibility of the human race, not for the exposition only, but for a permanent contribution to the world&#x27;s progress.&quot; The exposition&#x27;s leadership changed again in early March 1914, when Collier encountered personal financial issues and resigned. He was replaced by Davidson, who was also joined by several new vice presidents.

By March 1910, $1 million ($ today) was raised for the expo by the Panama–California Exposition Company through selling subscriptions. A bond measure later that year provided an additional $1 million solely for improving permanent fixtures in the park. Funding for the California State Building was provided through appropriation bills totaling $450,000 ($ today) signed by Governor Hiram Johnson in 1911 and 1913.

==Design==

Fair officials first sought architect John Galen Howard as their supervisory architect. With Howard unavailable, on January 27, 1911, they chose New York architect Bertram Goodhue and appointed Irving Gill to assist him. By September 1911 Gill had resigned and was replaced by Carleton Winslow of Goodhue&#x27;s office. The original landscape architects, the Olmsted Brothers, likewise left the project, and were replaced by fair official Frank P. Allen Jr.

===Exposition site===
The exposition was held in Balboa Park, which spanned . For the first few decades of its existence, &quot;City Park&quot; remained mostly open space; lacking trees and covered in native wildflowers, the park was home to bobcats, rattlesnakes, coyotes, and other wildlife. Numerous proposals, some altruistic, some profit-driven, were brought forward for the development and use of the land during this time. During construction of the exposition facilities in 1910, a contest was held that renamed the park after Vasco Núñez de Balboa, the first European to cross Central America and see the Pacific Ocean.

===Spanish Colonial Revival architecture===
Goodhue and Winslow advocated a design that turned away from the more modest, indigenous, horizontally oriented Pueblo Revival and Mission Revival, towards a more ornate and urban Spanish Baroque. Contrasting with bare walls, rich Mexican and Spanish Churrigueresque decoration would be used, with influences from the Islamic and Persian styles in Moorish Revival architecture. For American world&#x27;s fairs, this was a novelty. The design was an intentional contrast to most previous Eastern U.S. and European expositions, which had been done in neoclassical and Beaux-Arts styles, with large formal buildings around large symmetric spaces; San Francisco&#x27;s Panama–Pacific International Exposition was largely Beaux-Arts style. Goodhue had already experimented with Spanish Baroque in Havana, at the 1905 La Santisima Trinidad pro-cathedral, and the Hotel Colon in Panama. Some of his specific stylistic sources for San Diego are the Giralda Tower at the Seville Cathedral, the Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral, and the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption, Oaxaca.

Goodhue personally designed the largest and most ornate building on the site, the California Building, with its historical iconography; he sketched two other buildings, provided Winslow and Allen with his photographs and drawings from examples in Spain and Mexico, and reviewed their developed designs. The original ensemble of buildings featured various stylistic and period references. Taken together, they constituted something like a recapitulated history of Spanish colonial in North America, from Renaissance Europe sources, to Spanish colonial, to Mexican Baroque, to the vernacular styles adopted by the Franciscan missions up the California coast. The Botanical Building was designed by Winslow with help from Allen and Thomas B. Hunter in the style of a Spanish Renaissance greenhouse. This mix of influences is representative of Spanish Colonial Revival architecture, which the Exposition popularized in the United States. Prior to the exposition, San Diego had predominately featured Victorian architecture with some elements of classical styles. The popularity of the expo led to more emphasis on mission architecture within the city.

After the Exposition, Goodhue moved on to other national projects, while Winslow stayed on in southern California, continuing to produce his own variations of the style at the Bishop&#x27;s School in La Jolla and the 1926 Carthay Circle Theatre in Los Angeles. Winslow was also instrumental in persuading the city of Santa Barbara to adopt Spanish Colonial Revival as the officially mandated civic style after its 1925 earthquake.

The temporary installations, decoration, and landscapes of Balboa Park were created with some large spaces and numerous paths, small spaces, and courtyard Spanish gardens. The location was also moved from a small hillock to a larger and more open area, most of which was intended to be reclaimed by the park as gardens.

==Construction==
The groundbreaking ceremony for the site of the expo was held on July 19, 1911. To make room for the exposition planned layout, several city buildings, machine shops, and a gunpowder magazine were moved offsite. The first building to begin construction was the Administration Building, which started in November 1911 and completed in March 1912. Visitors interested in watching the ongoing construction before the exposition&#x27;s official opening were charged admission of $0.25 ($ today).

==Layout==

The layout of the expo was contained by three entrances on the west, north, and east.

The East Gateway was approached by drive and San Diego Electric Railway trolley cars winding up from the city through the southern portion of the park.

From the west, the Cabrillo Bridge&#x27;s entrance was marked with blooming giant century plants and led straight to the dramatic West Gate (or City Gate), with the city&#x27;s coat-of-arms at its crown. The archway was flanked by engaged Doric orders supporting an entablature, with figures symbolizing the Atlantic and Pacific oceans joining waters together, in commemoration of the opening of the Panama Canal. These figures were the work of Furio Piccirilli.

While the west gateway was part of the Fine Arts Building, the east gateway was designed to be the formal entrance for the California State Building. The East or State Gateway carried the California state coat-of-arms over the arch. The spandrels over the arch were filled with glazed colored tile commemorating the 1769 arrival of Spain and the 1846 State Constitutional Convention at Monterey.

Near a large parking lot, the North gate led to the &#x27;Painted Desert&#x27; and long Isthmus street. The Santa Fe Railway-sponsored &#x27;Painted Desert&#x27; (called &quot;Indian Village&quot; by guests), a , 300-person exhibit populated by seven Native American tribes including the Apache, Navajo, and Tewa. The &#x27;Painted Desert&#x27;, which design and construction was supervised by the Southwestern archeologist Jesse L. Nusbaum, had the appearance of a rock structure but was actually wire frames covered in cement.

The Isthmus was surrounded by concessions, amusement rides and games, a replica gem mine, an ostrich farm, and a replica of the Panama Canal. One of the concessions along the isthmus was a &quot;China Town&quot;.

===Permanent structures===
From the start, the Cabrillo Bridge, the domed-and-towered California State Building and the low-lying Fine Arts Building were intended to be permanent additions to the park; the latter two are now part of the National Register of Historic Places-listed California Quadrangle. The Botanical Building would protect heat-loving plants, while the Spreckels Organ Pavilion would assist open-air concerts in its auditorium. The Botanical Building was completed for $53,400 ($ today).

The Cabrillo Bridge was built to span the canyon, and its long horizontal stretch ending in a great upright pile of fantasy buildings would be the crux of the whole composition.

The focus of the fair was the Plaza de California (California Quadrangle), an arcaded enclosure often containing Spanish dancers and singers, where both the approach bridge and El Prado terminate. The California State Building and the Fine Arts Building framed the plaza, which was surrounded on three sides by exhibition halls set behind an arcade on the lower story. Those three sides, following the heavy massiveness and crude simplicity of the California mission adobe style, were without ornamentation. This contrasted with the front facade of the California State Building, &#x27;wild&#x27; with Churrigueresque complex lines of mouldings and dense ornamentation. Next to the frontispiece, at one corner of the dome, rose the tower of the California Building, which was echoed in the less prominent turrets of the Southern California counties and the Science and Education buildings. The style of the frontispiece was repeated around the fair.

===Temporary buildings===

The architecture of the &quot;temporary buildings&quot; was recognized, as Goodhue described, as &quot;being essentially of the fabric of a dream—not to endure but to produce a merely temporary effect. It should provide, after the fashion that stage scenery provides—illusion rather than reality.&quot;

The &quot;temporary buildings&quot; were formally and informally set on either side of the wide, tree-lined central avenue. El Prado extended along the axis of the bridge and was lined with trees and streetlights, with the front of most buildings lined with covered arcades or &quot;portales&quot;. The Prado was intended to become the central path of a great and formally designed public garden. The fair&#x27;s pathways, pools, and watercourses were supposed to remain while the cleared building sites would become garden. Goodhue emphasized that &quot;only by thus razing all of the Temporary Buildings will San Diego enter upon the heritage that is rightfully hers&quot;. However, many of the &quot;temporary&quot; buildings were retained and reused for the 1935 fair. Four of them were demolished and rebuilt in their original style toward the end of the 20th century; they are now called the House of Charm, the House of Hospitality, Casa del Prado, and Casa de Balboa, and are included in the National Register of Historic Places-listed El Prado Complex.

===Transportation===

One of the main considerations for San Diego leaders concerning the Panama–California Exposition was transportation. At the request of John D. Spreckels and his San Diego Electric Railway Company, the park&#x27;s layout design incorporated an electric railway that ran near the east gate of the park. To service the large number of people that were to attend the exposition, streetcars were built that could handle the traffic of the event as well as the growing population of San Diego. The routes ultimately spanned from Ocean Beach, through Downtown, Mission Hills, Coronado, North Park, Golden Hill, and Kensington, even briefly serving as a link to the U.S.–Mexico border. Today, only three of the original twenty-four Class 1 streetcars remain in existence.

At the beginning of the exposition, 200 small wicker motorized chairs, known as electriquettes, were available for rent by visitors. Constructed by the Los Angeles Exposition Motor Chair Company, these slow-speed transports held two to three people and were used for traveling throughout the majority of the exhibition. Electriquette replicas returned for the centennial celebration in 2015.

===Other features===
Additional elements of the exposition included an aviary, rose gardens, and animal pens. Throughout the exposition grounds there were over two million plants of 1,200 different types. Peacocks and pheasants freely wandered through the fairgrounds, and pigeons were frequently fed by guests.

The exposition did not initially feature any buildings representing foreign countries, though a handful of U.S states held exhibits: Kansas, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Washington, and Utah. In contrast, the San Francisco Panama-Pacific Exposition featured exhibits from 22 countries and 28 U.S. states. Various countries participated in the exposition&#x27;s 1916 extension.

The United States Marines, Army, and Navy were featured at the expo, with exhibits, onsite tent cities, parades, band concerts, and live mock battles.

==Opening ==
At midnight on December 31, 1914, President Woodrow Wilson ceremoniously pushed a telegraph button in Washington, D.C. to open the expo by turning on the power and lights at the park. In addition, a lit balloon located 1,500 feet above the park further brightened the exposition. Guns at the nearby Fort Rosecrans and on Navy ships in San Diego Bay also were fired to signal the opening.

Admission for adults was $0.50 ($ today) and $0.25 ($ today) for children. Based on varying sources, the opening day&#x27;s attendance was between 31,836 and 42,486. By the end of the first month, daily attendance decreased, with an average number of attendees at 4,783 a day, which decreased to 4,360 by February. However, the expo made ($ today) profit in its first three months. By May, the average daily attendance had increased to 5,800 and in July the total attendance had reached a million visitors.
Notable visitors to the expo included Vice President Thomas R. Marshall, Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of the Navy and future President Franklin D. Roosevelt, former presidents William Howard Taft and Theodore Roosevelt, inventor Thomas Edison, and automobile businessman Henry Ford. The attempt to &quot;put San Diego on the map&quot; with national attention was successful. Even Pennsylvania&#x27;s Liberty Bell made a brief three-day appearance in November 1915. At the end of 1915, total visitors reached over two million and the expo had turned a small profit of $56,570 ($ today).

===Extension===
Prior to the end of 1915, plans began circulating for extending the exposition for another year. Most of the board of directors, however, were not able to continue into the new year and resigned. Funding for the 1916 addition came from Los Angeles, local businessman, proceeds from the 1915 expo, leftover funding from the Panama–Pacific International Exposition, and chambers of commerce outside of San Diego. On March 18, 1916, Secretary of the Navy Josephus Daniels pushed a button in Washington, D.C. that sounded a gong in the Plaza de Panama to commemorate &quot;Exposition Dedication Day&quot;. The fair was rechristened the Panama–California International Exposition. By this point, international exhibitors from the recently closed San Francisco exhibition had arrived in San Diego, and the expo had exhibits from Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Russia, and Switzerland. Some of these exhibitors were unable to return to Europe due to World War I which had been raging since 1914. Additional exhibits included an ice rink, an alligator farm, and performance shows. Some of the original buildings from the prior year were repurposed for new exhibits.

In November 1916, Gilbert Davidson asked the Park Board for an additional three-month extension into 1917, but the expo was concluded on January 1, 1917. Events on the final day included a military parade in the Plaza de Panama, a mock military battle, and an opera ceremony at the organ pavilion. At midnight, the lights were turned off and pyrotechnics above the organ spelled &quot;WORLD PEACE–1917&quot;. The total attendance for the second year was just under 1.7 million people. Over the two years a slight profit was earned over the total cost of organizing and hosting the expo.

==Legacy==
The Exposition left a permanent mark in Balboa Park, which had been mostly open space before the fair. Former President Theodore Roosevelt spoke to San Diegans at the Spreckels Organ Pavilion in July 1915, urging San Diego to keep the exhibition buildings permanently. Even before the end of the first year of the expo, an organization was established to determine how the temporary buildings could be developed for museum use. The exposition also led to the eventual establishment of the San Diego Zoo in the park, which grew out of abandoned exotic animal exhibitions from the Isthmus portion of the expo.

Buildings from the exposition still standing include:

* Botanical Building, one of the largest lath-covered structures then in existence, contained a rare collection of tropical and semitropical plants. It is well back from the Prado behind the long pool, &quot;La Laguna de Las Flores&quot;.
* Cabrillo Bridge (completed April 12, 1914)
* California Bell Tower, completed 1914, feet tall to the top of the iron weathervane, which is in the form of a Spanish ship; one of the most recognizable sights in San Diego as &quot;San Diego&#x27;s Icon&quot;.
* California State Building, completed October 2, 1914, which now houses the Museum of Us. The design was inspired by the church of San Diego in Guanajuato, Mexico. 
* Chapel of St. Francis of Assisi (south side of Fine Arts Building); now the Saint Francis Chapel operated by the Museum of Us.
* Fine Arts Building (on south side of Plaza of California), now part of the Museum of Us.
* Spreckels Organ Pavilion (dedicated December 31, 1914).


During the expo, Franklin D. Roosevelt, then Assistant Secretary of the Navy, told reporters that San Diego would become a Navy port. This declaration would gradually result in multiple Navy installations in and around San Diego that continue today. Shortly after the end of the expo, the Army and Marines temporarily used several empty expo buildings until nearby bases were completed.

The Exposition was the setting for a 1915 comedy film &quot;Fatty and Mabel at the San Diego Exposition&quot; starring Roscoe Arbuckle and Mabel Normand.

==Later exposition and rebuilding==
The California Pacific International Exposition at the same site in 1935 was so popular that some buildings were rebuilt to be made more permanent. Many buildings (original or reconstructed) remain in use today, and are used by several museums and theaters in Balboa Park.

In the early 1960s destruction of a few of the buildings and replacement by modern, architecturally clashing buildings created an uproar in San Diego. In 1967, citizens formed A Committee of One Hundred to protect and preserve the park buildings. They convinced the City Council to require new buildings to be built in Spanish Colonial Revival Style and worked with various government agencies to have the remaining buildings declared National Historic Landmarks in 1977. In the late 1990s, the most deteriorated buildings and burned buildings were rebuilt, preserving the original style.

==Centennial==
The City of San Diego held a major observation for the 2015 centennial of the Exposition, with numerous events and exhibits. A proposal to remove vehicle traffic and parking from the central plazas proved controversial and was eventually scrapped.

==Map==
==References==
;Bibliography
*
*

==Further reading==
*Bokovoy, Matthew R. &quot;The San Diego World&#x27;s Fairs and Southwestern Memory, 1880–1940.&quot; University of New Mexico Press, 2005. 

*Kropp, Phoebe S. &quot;California Vieja: Culture and Memory in a Modern American Past.&quot; Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2006. 
*Marshall, David AIA. &quot;San Diego&#x27;s Balboa Park.&quot; Arcadia Publishing, 2007, 
*McClain, Molly. &quot;A Room of Their Own: The Contribution of Women to the Panama-California Exposition, 1915.&quot; &quot;The Journal of San Diego History&quot;, 61, no. 1 (Winter 2015). 
*&quot;The Official Guide Book of the Panama California Exposition San Diego 1915.&quot;
* Redman, Samuel J. &quot;Bone Rooms: From Scientific Racism to Human Prehistory in Museums.&quot; Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 2016. 

==External links==

*&quot;The Making of the Panama-California Exposition, 1909–1915&quot;, &quot;The Journal of San Diego History&quot; 36:1 (Winter 1990), by Richard W. Amero
*&quot;The Southwest on Display at the Panama-California Exposition, 1915&quot;, &quot;The Journal of San Diego History&quot; 36:4 (Fall 1990), by Richard W. Amero
*&quot;Safeguarding the Innocent: Travelers&#x27; Aid at the Panama-California Exposition, 1915&quot;, &quot;The Journal of San Diego History&quot; 61:3&amp;4 (Summer/Fall 2015), by Eric C. Cimino
*Panama-California Exposition Digital Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2316780" start="4" end="32" title="Panama–California Exposition" label="Panama–California Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="39" end="55" title="World&amp;#x27;s fair" label="world exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="64" end="73" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="178" end="190" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q804697" start="382" end="393" title="Balboa Park (San Diego)" label="Balboa Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q250578" start="988" end="1027" title="Panama–Pacific International Exposition" label="Panama–Pacific International Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="1240" end="1259" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880938" start="1676" end="1696" title="Ulysses S. Grant Jr." label="Ulysses S. Grant Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6228322" start="1716" end="1733" title="John D. Spreckels" label="John D. Spreckels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232313" start="1796" end="1829" title="David Charles Collier" label="&amp;quot;Colonel&amp;quot; D. C. Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258468" start="1945" end="1959" title="Pueblo Revival architecture" label="Pueblo Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700522" start="1964" end="1979" title="Mission Revival Style architecture" label="Mission Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q143644" start="3018" end="3031" title="Hiram Johnson" label="Hiram Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234722" start="3101" end="3118" title="John Galen Howard" label="John Galen Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q325325" start="3227" end="3242" title="Bertram Goodhue" label="Bertram Goodhue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154610" start="3257" end="3268" title="Irving Gill" label="Irving Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041260" start="3340" end="3356" title="Carleton Winslow" label="Carleton Winslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021081" start="3422" end="3438" title="Olmsted Brothers" label="Olmsted Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q804697" start="3571" end="3582" title="Balboa Park (San Diego)" label="Balboa Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19080" start="4057" end="4078" title="Vasco Núñez de Balboa" label="Vasco Núñez de Balboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573157" start="4376" end="4391" title="Spanish Baroque architecture" label="Spanish Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q954879" start="4447" end="4462" title="Churrigueresque" label="Churrigueresque"/>
<link wikidata="Q74156" start="4544" end="4572" title="Moorish Revival architecture" label="Moorish Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="4745" end="4757" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="4762" end="4772" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q834479" start="5137" end="5150" title="Giralda" label="Giralda Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q231606" start="5158" end="5175" title="Seville Cathedral" label="Seville Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q610961" start="5181" end="5215" title="Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral" label="Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942237" start="5225" end="5272" title="Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption, Oaxaca" label="Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption, Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020893" start="5357" end="5376" title="California Quadrangle" label="California Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q12069738" start="5809" end="5825" title="Spanish Colonial architecture" label="Spanish colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q27704699" start="5936" end="5954" title="Botanical Building" label="Botanical Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816273" start="6004" end="6020" title="Thomas B. Hunter" label="Thomas B. Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q430167" start="6039" end="6058" title="Spanish Renaissance" label="Spanish Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645460" start="6115" end="6152" title="Spanish Colonial Revival architecture" label="Spanish Colonial Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="6271" end="6293" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="6316" end="6332" title="Classical architecture" label="classical styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718171" start="6596" end="6620" title="The Bishop&amp;#x27;s School (La Jolla)" label="the Bishop&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940590" start="6646" end="6668" title="Carthay Circle Theatre" label="Carthay Circle Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6838" end="6853" title="History of Santa Barbara, California#1925 earthquake" label="1925 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q309250" start="7001" end="7010" title="courtyard" label="courtyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584228" start="7011" end="7025" title="Spanish garden" label="Spanish garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413639" start="7831" end="7857" title="San Diego Electric Railway" label="San Diego Electric Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380233" start="7958" end="7973" title="Cabrillo Bridge" label="Cabrillo Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q161115" start="8021" end="8034" title="century plant" label="century plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="8178" end="8189" title="Doric order" label="Doric order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509545" start="8384" end="8400" title="Furio Piccirilli" label="Furio Piccirilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q196195" start="8754" end="8774" title="California Constitution" label="State Constitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="8908" end="8924" title="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway" label="Santa Fe Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="9088" end="9094" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="9096" end="9102" title="Navajo people" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974818" start="9108" end="9112" title="Tewa" label="Tewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q64821368" start="9224" end="9240" title="Jesse L. Nusbaum" label="Jesse L. Nusbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977385" start="9781" end="9817" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in San Diego County, California" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020893" start="9825" end="9846" title="California Quadrangle" label="California Quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580302" start="9915" end="9939" title="Spreckels Organ Pavilion" label="Spreckels Organ Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020893" start="10281" end="10302" title="California Quadrangle" label="California Quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895577" start="10678" end="10696" title="Architecture of the California missions" label="California mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="10697" end="10702" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q954879" start="10832" end="10847" title="Churrigueresque" label="Churrigueresque"/>
<link wikidata="Q503958" start="11712" end="11723" title="streetlight" label="streetlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="11946" end="11957" title="watercourse" label="watercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q27859352" start="12452" end="12466" title="Casa del Prado" label="Casa del Prado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977385" start="12512" end="12548" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in San Diego County, California" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5822937" start="12556" end="12572" title="El Prado Complex" label="El Prado Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070530" start="13120" end="13131" title="Ocean Beach, San Diego, California" label="Ocean Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038344" start="13141" end="13149" title="Downtown San Diego" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q593933" start="13151" end="13164" title="Mission Hills, San Diego, California" label="Mission Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q828753" start="13166" end="13174" title="Coronado, California" label="Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344149" start="13176" end="13186" title="North Park, San Diego, California" label="North Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070502" start="13188" end="13199" title="Golden Hill, San Diego, California" label="Golden Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391415" start="13205" end="13215" title="Kensington, San Diego, California" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q129302525" start="13442" end="13455" title="electriquette" label="electriquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="14201" end="14207" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="14209" end="14216" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="14218" end="14224" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="14226" end="14236" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="14238" end="14248" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="14254" end="14258" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="14655" end="14669" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="14693" end="14702" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981762" start="14910" end="14924" title="Naval Base Point Loma" label="Fort Rosecrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219470" start="14946" end="14959" title="San Diego Bay" label="San Diego Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q299001" start="15560" end="15578" title="Thomas R. Marshall" label="Thomas R. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="15599" end="15621" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="15623" end="15644" title="United States Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="15666" end="15687" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="15707" end="15726" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="15731" end="15749" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="15760" end="15773" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="15802" end="15812" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q390306" start="15931" end="15943" title="Liberty Bell" label="Liberty Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093714" start="16586" end="16602" title="Josephus Daniels" label="Josephus Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q28649297" start="16666" end="16681" title="Plaza de Panama" label="Plaza de Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17103" end="17114" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580302" start="18085" end="18109" title="Spreckels Organ Pavilion" label="Spreckels Organ Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q818395" start="18407" end="18420" title="San Diego Zoo" label="San Diego Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092965" start="18623" end="18627" title="lath" label="lath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380233" start="18823" end="18838" title="Cabrillo Bridge" label="Cabrillo Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q524738" start="18940" end="18951" title="weathervane" label="weathervane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020893" start="19082" end="19107" title="California Quadrangle" label="California State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q676968" start="19157" end="19169" title="Museum of Us" label="Museum of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q61306" start="19225" end="19235" title="Guanajuato, Guanajuato" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19258" end="19279" title="St. Francis of Assisi" label="St. Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580302" start="19468" end="19492" title="Spreckels Organ Pavilion" label="Spreckels Organ Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438012" start="19974" end="20017" title="Fatty and Mabel at the San Diego Exposition" label="Fatty and Mabel at the San Diego Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q315202" start="20033" end="20048" title="Roscoe Arbuckle" label="Roscoe Arbuckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q235918" start="20053" end="20066" title="Mabel Normand" label="Mabel Normand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020738" start="20109" end="20152" title="California Pacific International Exposition" label="California Pacific International Exposition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816706" wikidata="Q285900" url="?curid=816706" title="ATC code A06">
<text>==A06A Drugs for constipation==

===A06AA Softeners, emollients===
:A06AA01 Liquid paraffin
:A06AA02 Docusate sodium
:A06AA51 Liquid paraffin, combinations

===A06AB Contact laxatives===
:A06AB01 Oxyphenisatine
:A06AB02 Bisacodyl
:A06AB03 Dantron
:A06AB04 Phenolphthalein
:A06AB05 Castor oil
:A06AB06 Senna glycosides
:A06AB07 Cascara
:A06AB08 Sodium picosulfate
:A06AB09 Bisoxatin
:A06AB20 Contact laxatives in combination
:A06AB30 Contact laxatives in combination with belladonna alkaloids
:A06AB52 Bisacodyl, combinations
:A06AB53 Dantron, combinations
:A06AB56 Senna glycosides, combinations
:A06AB57 Cascara, combinations
:A06AB58 Sodium picosulfate, combinations

===A06AC Bulk-forming laxatives===
:A06AC01 Ispaghula (psylla seeds)
:A06AC02 Ethulose
:A06AC03 Sterculia
:A06AC05 Linseed
:A06AC06 Methylcellulose
:A06AC07 Triticum (wheat fibre)
:A06AC08 Polycarbophil calcium
:A06AC51 Ispaghula, combinations
:A06AC53 Sterculia, combinations
:A06AC55 Linseed, combinations

===A06AD Osmotically acting laxatives===
:A06AD01 Magnesium carbonate
:A06AD02 Magnesium oxide
:A06AD03 Magnesium peroxide
:A06AD04 Magnesium sulfate
:A06AD10 Mineral salts in combination
:A06AD11 Lactulose
:A06AD12 Lactitol
:A06AD13 Sodium sulfate
:A06AD14 Pentaerithrityl
:A06AD15 Macrogol
:A06AD16 Mannitol
:A06AD17 Sodium phosphate
:A06AD18 Sorbitol
:A06AD19 Magnesium citrate
:A06AD21 Sodium tartrate
:A06AD61 Lactulose, combinations
:A06AD65 Macrogol, combinations

===A06AG Enemas===
:A06AG01 Sodium phosphate
:A06AG02 Bisacodyl
:A06AG03 Dantron, including combinations
:A06AG04 Glycerol
:A06AG06 Oil
:A06AG07 Sorbitol
:A06AG10 Docusate sodium, including combinations
:A06AG11 Sodium lauryl sulfoacetate, including combinations
:A06AG20 Combinations

===A06AH Peripheral opioid receptor antagonists===
:A06AH01 Methylnaltrexone bromide
:A06AH02 Alvimopan
:A06AH03 Naloxegol
:A06AH04 Naloxone
:A06AH05 Naldemedine

===A06AX Other drugs for constipation===
:A06AX01 Glycerol
:A06AX02 Carbon dioxide producing drugs
:A06AX03 Lubiprostone
:A06AX04 Linaclotide
:A06AX05 Prucalopride
:A06AX06 Tegaserod
:A06AX07 Plecanatide
:A06AX08 Tenapanor
:A06AX09 Elobixibat

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217972" start="7" end="29" title="Laxative" label="Drugs for constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006091" start="53" end="62" title="emollient" label="emollient"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557471" start="76" end="91" title="Liquid paraffin (medicinal)" label="Liquid paraffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815334" start="101" end="116" title="Docusate sodium" label="Docusate sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116108" start="196" end="210" title="Oxyphenisatine" label="Oxyphenisatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q417874" start="220" end="229" title="Bisacodyl" label="Bisacodyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221244" start="239" end="246" title="Dantron" label="Dantron"/>
<link wikidata="Q187921" start="256" end="271" title="Phenolphthalein" label="Phenolphthalein"/>
<link wikidata="Q337492" start="281" end="291" title="Castor oil" label="Castor oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q502327" start="301" end="317" title="Senna glycosides" label="Senna glycosides"/>
<link wikidata="Q15540797" start="327" end="334" title="Rhamnus purshiana" label="Cascara"/>
<link wikidata="Q410265" start="344" end="362" title="Sodium picosulfate" label="Sodium picosulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918383" start="372" end="381" title="Bisoxatin" label="Bisoxatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156091" start="471" end="481" title="Atropa belladonna" label="belladonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q417874" start="501" end="510" title="Bisacodyl" label="Bisacodyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221244" start="534" end="541" title="Dantron" label="Dantron"/>
<link wikidata="Q502327" start="565" end="581" title="Senna glycosides" label="Senna glycosides"/>
<link wikidata="Q15540797" start="605" end="612" title="Rhamnus purshiana" label="Cascara"/>
<link wikidata="Q410265" start="636" end="654" title="Sodium picosulfate" label="Sodium picosulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q430675" start="714" end="723" title="Ispaghula" label="Ispaghula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404436" start="748" end="756" title="Ethulose" label="Ethulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478297" start="766" end="775" title="Sterculia" label="Sterculia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="785" end="792" title="Linseed" label="Linseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q416312" start="802" end="817" title="Methylcellulose" label="Methylcellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="827" end="835" title="Triticum" label="Triticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226181" start="859" end="880" title="Polycarbophil calcium" label="Polycarbophil calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q430675" start="890" end="899" title="Ispaghula" label="Ispaghula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478297" start="923" end="932" title="Sterculia" label="Sterculia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="956" end="963" title="Linseed" label="Linseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q407931" start="1029" end="1048" title="Magnesium carbonate" label="Magnesium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214769" start="1058" end="1073" title="Magnesium oxide" label="Magnesium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419379" start="1083" end="1101" title="Magnesium peroxide" label="Magnesium peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q18212318" start="1111" end="1128" title="Medical uses of magnesium sulfate" label="Magnesium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422689" start="1176" end="1185" title="Lactulose" label="Lactulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q415020" start="1195" end="1203" title="Lactitol" label="Lactitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q211737" start="1213" end="1227" title="Sodium sulfate" label="Sodium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189334" start="1237" end="1252" title="Pentaerithrityl" label="Pentaerithrityl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500889" start="1262" end="1270" title="Macrogol" label="Macrogol"/>
<link wikidata="Q407646" start="1280" end="1288" title="Mannitol" label="Mannitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249706" start="1298" end="1314" title="Sodium phosphate" label="Sodium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="1324" end="1332" title="Sorbitol" label="Sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q45044" start="1342" end="1359" title="Magnesium citrate" label="Magnesium citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q283499" start="1369" end="1384" title="Sodium tartrate" label="Sodium tartrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422689" start="1394" end="1403" title="Lactulose" label="Lactulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500889" start="1427" end="1435" title="Macrogol" label="Macrogol"/>
<link wikidata="Q194517" start="1460" end="1465" title="Enema" label="Enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q409501" start="1479" end="1495" title="Trisodium phosphate" label="Sodium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q417874" start="1505" end="1514" title="Bisacodyl" label="Bisacodyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221244" start="1524" end="1531" title="Dantron" label="Dantron"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="1565" end="1573" title="Glycerol" label="Glycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="1583" end="1586" title="Oil" label="Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="1596" end="1604" title="Sorbitol" label="Sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815334" start="1614" end="1629" title="Docusate sodium" label="Docusate sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275949" start="1663" end="1689" title="Sodium lauryl sulfoacetate" label="Sodium lauryl sulfoacetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q70884724" start="1746" end="1784" title="Peripherally acting μ-opioid receptor antagonist" label="Peripheral opioid receptor antagonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q59904170" start="1797" end="1821" title="Methylnaltrexone bromide" label="Methylnaltrexone bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738021" start="1831" end="1840" title="Alvimopan" label="Alvimopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708351" start="1850" end="1859" title="Naloxegol" label="Naloxegol"/>
<link wikidata="Q282902" start="1869" end="1877" title="Naloxone" label="Naloxone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960846" start="1887" end="1898" title="Naldemedine" label="Naldemedine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="1950" end="1958" title="Glycerol" label="Glycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="1968" end="1982" title="Carbon dioxide" label="Carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6695342" start="2008" end="2020" title="Lubiprostone" label="Lubiprostone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832559" start="2030" end="2041" title="Linaclotide" label="Linaclotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q68484" start="2051" end="2063" title="Prucalopride" label="Prucalopride"/>
<link wikidata="Q44944" start="2073" end="2082" title="Tegaserod" label="Tegaserod"/>
<link wikidata="Q28559278" start="2092" end="2103" title="Plecanatide" label="Plecanatide"/>
<link wikidata="Q17122912" start="2113" end="2122" title="Tenapanor" label="Tenapanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367035" start="2132" end="2142" title="Elobixibat" label="Elobixibat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816714" wikidata="Q7595759" url="?curid=816714" title="Stable belt">
<text>A stable belt is a striped coloured belt worn at times by the armed forces of the United Kingdom, other Commonwealth countries, and a few other countries including Denmark, Brazil and Lebanon. The stripes vary by regiment and corps, identifying the wearer&#x27;s unit. In Brazil and Lebanon they are known as gymnastic belts.

The term &quot;stable belt&quot; originates from when UK cavalrymen would place the surcingle around the waist when cleaning the stables and tending to their horses. In the 1950s they spread to all branches of the armed forces, adding a splash of colour and individuality to the drab khaki working uniforms. Initially they were resisted by many senior officers, who saw them as too individualistic, but they soon became accepted throughout the UK forces, and spread to the forces of a number of other countries. The &quot;gymnastic belt&quot; of some countries has a similar appearance and purpose, with a name reflecting its origin in physical training equipment. Sword belts of similar appearance are used on ceremonial occasions by some military forces.

==Australia==
The Australian Army adopted the stable belt in the late 1970s, however they were removed from service in 1995.

==Brazil==
In Brazil, the gymnastic belt () is one of the most traditional elements of the uniforms of the Military Firefighters Corps. It has been used with few modifications since 1887. Made of cotton and leather, earlier examples were reinforced to serve as climbing harnesses. Modern gymnastic belts are of lighter construction and only worn as ceremonial item.
There are two versions of the gymnastics belt:
:For Officers:
:The belt is red with a horizontal stripe in blue, with silver-coloured metal buckles. In the 1960s, the leather components were white.
:For other ranks (sergeants, corporals, and privates):
:The belt is red, with gold-coloured metal buckles.
==Denmark==
The Danish Army, Home Guard, and Air Force all use stable belts. The Danish Defence&#x27;s close co-operation with the British Army of the Rhine in the 1950s created the interest in a similar belt for the Guard Hussar Regiment, which was introduced in 1968. In the late 1970s it was decided to allow stable belts for all regiments in Denmark. The design of the belt would be based on the colours of the regiment, and a colour to signify their role. To show the transition between role and regiment colours, a thin line was introduced, there is however no system with these.
*Red: Combat troops
*Blue: Signal troops
*Gray: HMAK

The Danish armed forces have had a total of 43 different stable belts, of which about sixteen remain in use. Only the standard black stable belt is issued, other belts have to be purchased individually, so are neither regulation nor compulsory.

===In use===
===Disbanded regiments===
==Lebanon==
Lebanese firefighters (الدفاع المدني, i.e. &quot;Civil Defense&quot;) use the same type of gymnastic belt as used by firefighters in Brazil.

==New Zealand==
The various Corps and Regiments of the New Zealand Army wear stable belts. Most corps wear the same patterns of belt as their counterparts in the British Army

===Corps and regiments===
;Queen Alexandra&#x27;s Mounted Rifles;

The QAMR belt is black with a central amber stripe as used by the original Queen Alexandra&#x27;s Mounted Rifles, they are also the colours of the Taranaki, where the unit&#x27;s foundations were laid in the early 1860s.
;Royal New Zealand Infantry Regiment;

Personnel of the Royal New Zealand Infantry Regiment, with the exception of those serving in Territorial Force battalion groups, wear the regimental belt of the Durham Light Infantry, being rifle green with two thin red stripes. The belt was adopted as the RNZIR Corps belt in 1970. The Durham Light Infantry regimental belt was given to the 1st Battalion, Royal New Zealand Infantry Regiment when it relieved the 1st Battalion, Durham Light Infantry at Sarawak, Borneo in May 1966.

;New Zealand Special Air Service;

Originates from belt worn by the British Special Air Service. It was first worn in 1965 by 1 Detachment, 1 Ranger Squadron NZSAS. The colours originate from a concept by David Stirling integrating the Oxford Blue and Cambridge Blue.

;Royal New Zealand Army Logistic Regiment;

The Royal New Zealand Army Logistic Regiment stable belt is blue with a silver buckle displaying the regimental badge surrounded by the regimental motto &quot;Ma Nga Hua Tu-Tangata&quot; (By our actions we are known).

===Reserve Infantry Battalions===
The reserve battalions of the Royal New Zealand Infantry Regiment retain their own patterns of stable belt. In 2013 the reserve battalions were amalgamated, reducing their number from six to three. No decision was made on the future of the various battalions&#x27; belts.


;2nd (Canterbury, and Nelson-Marlborough and West Coast) Battalion;

Rifle green, as worn by the Battalions Allied Regiment, The Royal Irish Rangers.

;3rd (Auckland (Countess of Ranfurly&#x27;s Own) and Northland) Battalion;

Two sets of thin red and white stripes on a black background, adopted in 1995. Originally the belt consisted of three evenly-sized stripes of red, black, and white, and were based on the regiment&#x27;s colours.

;4th (Otago and Southland) Battalion;

The Otago and Southland Regimental belt is that of Queen&#x27;s Own Highlanders, and is the pattern of the McKenzie tartan.

;5th (Wellington West Coast and Taranaki) Battalion;

Two separate belts are worn; officers and warrant officers wear a black belt with central stripes of red, green, yellow, mauve, and red, while soldiers below the rank of warrant officer wear a black belt with central stripes of yellow, red, green, and mauve. The belts adopted in 1973 were based on the Royal Hampshire Regiment with colours stemming from the regimental colours and the colours of the lace and facings on the uniforms of the 37th (North Hampshire) Regiment of Foot and 67th (South Hampshire) Regiment.

;6th (Hauraki) Battalion;

Thames blue with a gold strip in the middle, derived from the old Royal Warwickshire Regiment which in turn is derived from the old 6th Regiment of Foot. The 6th Foot were once charged with guarding the Crown Jewels in the Tower of London; hence the blue of the belt represents the Thames river and the gold stripe, the crown jewels. The belt was introduced in 1975 and has a buckle in worn centre which has the Regiments badge mounted.

;7th (Wellington (City of Wellington&#x27;s Own) and Hawke&#x27;s Bay) Battalion;

The 7th Wellington (City of Wellington&#x27;s Own) and Hawke&#x27;s Bay Battalion Group inherited the York and Lancaster Regiment stable belt. The belt is composed of maroon bands at the top and bottom (16mm wide), with a centre stripe of black (18mm wide) with a silver stripe above and gold stripe (each 6mm wide) below the centre strip. The York and Lancaster Regiment was allied to the Wellington Regiment in 1913 in recognition of the York and Lancs (65th of Foot) 19 year participation in the New Zealand Wars.

==United Kingdom==
A stable belt is a wide webbing belt comprising a single solid colour or horizontally striped in two or more different colours. The original cavalry regiment stable belts buckled at the side using leather straps in order to both avoid chafing the wearer&#x27;s stomach while undertaking stable work and avoid marking or catching upon the horse&#x27;s harness. Many contemporary stable belts now secure at the front using a metal clip or metal plate bearing a regimental/service emblem. Whilst a limited number of army regiments, including the Light Infantry, secure their stable belts at the front using the original two leather straps, generally those belts fitted with leather straps are secured on the left-hand side. 

The belt is worn around the waist and in the case of PCS is fitted through the trouser belt loops. In the British Army and Royal Marines, when worn with barrack dress, the belt is placed either through the belt loops of trousers or a skirt, or over a jersey. In the Royal Air Force (RAF), it is worn with service working dress (No. 2 dress) either covering the top of the trousers (or skirt) and the lower part of the shirt, or through the belt loops if able to accommodate the belt&#x27;s width. Unlike the Army, the RAF do not wear the belt over the jersey. (The former Royal Observer Corps conformed to RAF dress regulations). Historically, the Royal Navy rarely wore stable belts unless working in a tri-service environment. However, these are now available as part of the new Royal Navy uniform RNPCS, replacing the old No. 4 Dress. 

Stable belts are worn with most styles of informal dress, but not with full dress, service dress or mess dress. Every regiment and corps of the British Army has its own stable belt and, as is the case throughout the UK armed services, belts are not issued but purchased by individual service personnel at their own expense and are therefore optional items of uniform/equipment. However, their widespread use effectively renders them a standard uniform item.

The following belt patterns are shown in cross section, the stripes actually being horizontal as worn, and are actually considerably wider than shown, although the stripes are shown in correct proportion. Where belts are asymmetric, the left-hand side of the illustration is the uppermost as worn.

===Cavalry/armoured regiments===
===Infantry regiments (current)===

===Corps===
===Sub-units===

===Training units===
===Other services===
===Cadet units===
===Other organisations===
===Former cavalry regiments===
===Former Yeomanry regiments===
Many of these belts are still worn by sub-units.

===Former infantry regiments===
===Former volunteer infantry regiments===
These stable belts may still be worn by sub-units.
===Former corps===
===Former sub-units===

===Former training units===

===Former civil defence organisations===
==References==
===Sources===
* &quot;Materiel Regulations for The Army&quot;, Volume 3, Pamphlet No.16, &quot;Optional items of dress&quot;, Ministry of Defence, London, 1995

==External links==
*Stable Belts
*Society of the Military Horse</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7595759" start="2" end="13" title="Stable belt" label="stable belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="62" end="74" title="armed forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="104" end="116" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="213" end="221" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="226" end="231" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595759" start="309" end="324" title="Stable belt" label="gymnastic belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="384" end="391" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645518" start="411" end="420" title="surcingle" label="surcingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214252" start="456" end="462" title="stable" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="485" end="490" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q650770" start="611" end="616" title="khaki" label="khaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="992" end="1002" title="Sword belt" label="Sword belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="1103" end="1118" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394077" start="1318" end="1345" title="Military Firefighters Corps (Brazil)" label="Military Firefighters Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q284523" start="1472" end="1490" title="climbing harnesses" label="climbing harnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627975" start="1560" end="1570" title="ceremonial" label="ceremonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="1629" end="1637" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="Officers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1780" end="1791" title="Military Firefighters Corps#Rank insignia" label="other ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="1793" end="1802" title="sergeants" label="sergeants"/>
<link wikidata="Q17378201" start="1804" end="1812" title="corporal" label="corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q158668" start="1819" end="1827" title="Private (rank)" label="privates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575188" start="1898" end="1909" title="Danish Army" label="Danish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239061" start="1911" end="1921" title="Danish Home Guard" label="Home Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q431059" start="1927" end="1936" title="Danish Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q654842" start="2013" end="2038" title="British Army of the Rhine" label="British Army of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q225959" start="2099" end="2120" title="Guard Hussar Regiment (Denmark)" label="Guard Hussar Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794180" start="2516" end="2520" title="Army Materiel Command (Denmark)" label="HMAK"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="2868" end="2881" title="Civil Defense" label="Civil Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q66084790" start="2989" end="3008" title="List of New Zealand Army Corps" label="Corps and Regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630039" start="3016" end="3032" title="New Zealand Army" label="New Zealand Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="4024" end="4043" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q519183" start="4153" end="4167" title="David Stirling" label="David Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374574" start="4265" end="4305" title="Royal New Zealand Army Logistic Regiment" label="Royal New Zealand Army Logistic Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q298742" start="6312" end="6324" title="crown jewels" label="crown jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545405" start="7012" end="7028" title="New Zealand Wars" label="New Zealand Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490558" start="7074" end="7081" title="webbing" label="webbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978683" start="7082" end="7086" title="webbed belt" label="belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7593" end="7607" title="Light infantry#United Kingdom" label="Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170484" start="7826" end="7829" title="Personal Clothing System" label="PCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="7879" end="7891" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="7896" end="7909" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687904" start="8024" end="8030" title="jersey (clothing)" label="jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="8039" end="8054" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8078" end="8113" title="Uniforms of the Royal Air Force#Service working dress" label="service working dress (No. 2 dress)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374637" start="8345" end="8365" title="Royal Observer Corps" label="Royal Observer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="8421" end="8431" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374565" start="8554" end="8572" title="Royal Navy uniform" label="Royal Navy uniform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8684" end="8694" title="Western dress codes#Full dress, half dress, and undress" label="full dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455683" start="8696" end="8709" title="Service Dress (British Army)" label="service dress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8713" end="8723" title="Mess dress uniform#United Kingdom" label="mess dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="8731" end="8739" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="8744" end="8749" title="corps" label="corps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816717" wikidata="Q827382" url="?curid=816717" title="Günter Müller">
<text>Günter Müller (born October 20, 1954) is a German sound artist who originally performed as a percussionist and drummer, active primarily in free improvisation. He was born in Munich, West Germany, but has lived in Switzerland since 1966.

==Background==
Originally a drummer in various jazz ensembles, Müller grew interested in free improvisation and began utilizing various extended techniques. He used contact microphones to amplify his drum set, and has incorporated various electronic effects, sometimes using an iPod or MiniDisc recorder to loop or otherwise process his performances. Increasingly since about 2000 Müller has emphasized electronics, sometimes entirely forgoing percussion. Critic Brian Olewnick describes him as &quot;one of the most fascinating collaborators in contemporary improvised music [...] tending to create subtly modulated sounds of an almost palliative nature; often with an elastically liquid rhythmic sense.&quot;

Müller was a founding member of the groups Nachtluft, poire z and Taste Tribes, and has collaborated with Gastr Del Sol, Christian Marclay, Keith Rowe, Voice Crack, Alfred Harth, Kurt Liedwart and others. He founded the record label for4ears.

==References==
== External links ==
* Müller&#x27;s homepage
* An interview with Müller
* the Bagatellen interview
* Interview at addlimb.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q827382" start="0" end="13" title="Günter Müller" label="Günter Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744327" start="50" end="62" title="Sound Art" label="sound artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="93" end="106" title="percussionist" label="percussionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q386854" start="111" end="118" title="drummer" label="drummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q592060" start="140" end="158" title="free improvisation" label="free improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="175" end="181" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="183" end="195" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="214" end="225" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="286" end="290" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q592060" start="328" end="346" title="free improvisation" label="free improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q946962" start="375" end="393" title="extended technique" label="extended technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="412" end="422" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="439" end="447" title="drum set" label="drum set"/>
<link wikidata="Q9479" start="517" end="521" title="iPod" label="iPod"/>
<link wikidata="Q275079" start="525" end="533" title="MiniDisc" label="MiniDisc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="994" end="1003" title="Nachtluft" label="Nachtluft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208412" start="1005" end="1012" title="poire z" label="poire z"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1017" end="1029" title="Taste Tribes" label="Taste Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472145" start="1057" end="1070" title="Gastr Del Sol" label="Gastr Del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q923306" start="1072" end="1089" title="Christian Marclay" label="Christian Marclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q348449" start="1091" end="1101" title="Keith Rowe" label="Keith Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q352646" start="1103" end="1114" title="Voice Crack" label="Voice Crack"/>
<link wikidata="Q479190" start="1116" end="1128" title="Alfred Harth" label="Alfred Harth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1130" end="1143" title="Kurt Liedwart" label="Kurt Liedwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="1171" end="1183" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1184" end="1192" title="for4ears" label="for4ears"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816732" wikidata="Q1046482" url="?curid=816732" title="Xilinx">
<text>Xilinx, Inc. ( ) was an American technology and semiconductor company that primarily supplied programmable logic devices. The company is renowned for inventing the first commercially viable field-programmable gate array (FPGA). It also pioneered the first fabless manufacturing model.

Xilinx was co-founded by Ross Freeman, Bernard Vonderschmitt, and James V Barnett II in 1984. The company went public on the Nasdaq in 1990. In October 2020, AMD announced its acquisition of Xilinx, which was completed on February 14, 2022, through an all-stock transaction valued at approximately $60 billion. Xilinx remained a wholly owned subsidiary of AMD until the brand was phased out in June 2023, with Xilinx&#x27;s product lines now branded under AMD.

==Company overview==

Xilinx was founded in Silicon Valley in 1984 and is headquartered in San Jose, United States. The company also has offices in Longmont, United States; Dublin, Ireland; Singapore; Hyderabad, India; Beijing, China; Shanghai, China; Brisbane, Australia, Tokyo, Japan and Yerevan, Armenia.

According to Bill Carter, former CTO and current fellow at Xilinx, the choice of the name Xilinx refers to the chemical symbol for silicon Si. The &quot;linx&quot; represents programmable links that connect programmable logic blocks together. The &#x27;X&#x27;s at each end represent the programmable logic blocks.

Xilinx sold a broad range of field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), and complex programmable logic devices (CPLDs), design tools, intellectual property, and reference designs. Xilinx customers represent just over half of the entire programmable logic market, at 51%. Altera is Xilinx&#x27;s strongest competitor with 34% of the market. Other key players in this market are Actel (now subsidiary of Microsemi) and Lattice Semiconductor.

==History==

===Early history===
Ross Freeman, Bernard Vonderschmitt, and James V Barnett II—all former employees of Zilog, an integrated circuit and solid-state device manufacturer—co-founded Xilinx in 1984 with headquarters in San Jose, USA.

While working for Zilog, Freeman wanted to create chips that acted like a blank tape, allowing users to program the technology themselves. &quot;The concept required lots of transistors and, at that time, transistors were considered extremely precious—people thought that Ross&#x27;s idea was pretty far out&quot;, said Xilinx Fellow Bill Carter, hired in 1984 to design ICs as Xilinx&#x27;s eighth employee.

It was at the time more profitable to manufacture generic circuits in massive volumes than specialized circuits for specific markets. FPGAs promised to make specialized circuits profitable.

Freeman could not convince Zilog to invest in FPGAs to chase a market then estimated at $100 million, so he and Barnett left to team up with Vonderschmitt, a former colleague. Together, they raised $4.5 million in venture funding to design the first commercially viable FPGA. They incorporated the company in 1984 and began selling its first product by 1985.

By late 1987, the company had raised more than $18 million in venture capital (equivalent to $ million in ) and was making nearly $14 million a year.

===Expansion===
From 1988 to 1990, the company&#x27;s revenue grew each year, from $30 million to $100 million. During this time, Monolithic Memories Inc. (MMI), the company which had been providing funding to Xilinx, was purchased by AMD. As a result, Xilinx dissolved the deal with MMI and went public on the Nasdaq in 1989. The company also moved to a plant in San Jose, California, to handle increasingly large orders from HP, Apple Inc., IBM and Sun Microsystems.

Other FPGA makers emerged in the mid-1990s. By 1995, the company reached $550 million in revenue. Over the years, Xilinx expanded operations to India, Asia and Europe.

Xilinx&#x27;s sales rose to $2.53 billion by the end of its fiscal year 2018. Moshe Gavrielov – an EDA and ASIC industry veteran who was appointed president and CEO in early 2008 – introduced targeted design platforms that combine FPGAs with software, IP cores, boards and kits to address focused target applications. These platforms provide an alternative to costly application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) and application-specific standard products (ASSPs).

On January 4, 2018, Victor Peng, the company&#x27;s COO, replaced Gavrielov as CEO.

===Recent history===
In 2011, the company introduced the Virtex-7 2000T, the first product based on 2.5D stacked silicon (based on silicon interposer technology) to deliver larger FPGAs than could be built using standard monolithic silicon. Xilinx then adapted the technology to combine formerly separate components in a single chip, first combining an FPGA with transceivers based on heterogeneous process technology to boost bandwidth capacity while using less power.

According to former Xilinx CEO Moshe Gavrielov, the addition of a heterogeneous communications device, combined with the introduction of new software tools and the Zynq-7000 line of 28nm SoC devices that combine an ARM core with an FPGA, are part of shifting its position from a programmable logic device supplier to one delivering “all things programmable”.

In addition to Zynq-7000, Xilinx product lines include the Virtex, Kintex and Artix series, each including configurations and models optimized for different applications. In April 2012, the company introduced the Vivado Design Suite - a next-generation SoC-strength design environment for advanced electronic system designs. In May, 2014, the company shipped the first of the next generation FPGAs: the 20nm UltraScale.

In September 2017, Amazon and Xilinx started a campaign for FPGA adoption. This campaign enables AWS Marketplace&#x27;s Amazon Machine Images (AMIs) with associated Amazon FPGA Instances created by partners. The two companies released software development tools to simplify the creation of FPGA technology. The tools create and manage the machine images created and sold by partners.

In July 2018, Xilinx acquired DeepPhi Technology, a Chinese machine learning startup founded in 2016. In October 2018, the Xilinx Virtex UltraScale+ FPGAs and NGCodec&#x27;s H.265 video encoder were used in a cloud-based video coding service using the High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC). The combination enables video streaming with the same visual quality as that using GPUs, but at 35%-45% lower bitrate.

In November 2018, the company&#x27;s Zynq UltraScale+ family of multiprocessor system-on-chips was certified to safety integrity level (SIL) 3 HFT1 of the IEC 61508 specification. With this certification, developers are able to use the MPSoC platform in AI-based safety applications of up to SIL 3, in industrial 4.0 platforms of automotive, aerospace, and AI systems. In January 2019, ZF Friedrichshafen AG (ZF) worked with Xilinx&#x27;s Zynq to power its ProAI automotive control unit, which is used to enable automated driving applications. Xilinx&#x27;s platform overlooks the aggregation, pre-processing, and distribution of real-time data, and accelerates the AI processing of the unit.

In November 2018, Xilinx migrated its defense-grade XQ UltraScale+ products to TSMC&#x27;s 16nm FinFET process. The products included the industry&#x27;s first defense-grade heterogeneous multi-processor SoC devices and encompassed the XQ Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoCs and RFSoCs as well as XQ UltraScale+ Kintex and Virtex FPGAs. That same month the company expanded its Alveo data center accelerator cards portfolio with the Alveo U280. The initial Alveo line included the U200 and U250, which featured 16 nm UltraScale+ Virtex FPGAs and DDR4 SDRAM. Those two cards were launched in October 2018 at the Xilinx Developer Forum. At the Forum, Victor Peng, CEO of semiconductor design at Xilinx, and AMD CTO Mark Papermaster, used eight Alveo U250 cards and two AMD Epyc 7551 server CPUs to set a new world record for inference throughput at 30,000 images per second.

Also in November 2018, Xilinx announced that Dell EMC was the first server vendor to qualify its Alveo U200 accelerator card, used to accelerate key HPC and other workloads with select Dell EMC PowerEdge servers. The U280 included support for high-bandwidth memory (HBM2) and high-performance server interconnect. In August 2019, Xilinx launched the Alveo U50, a low-profile adaptable accelerator with PCIe Gen4 support. The U55C accelerator card was launched in November 2021, designed for HPCC and big data workloads by incorporating the RoCE v2-based clustering solution, allowing for FPGA-based HPCC clustering to be integrated into existing data center infrastructures.

In January 2019 K&amp;L Gates, a law firm representing Xilinx sent a DMCA cease and desist letter to an EE YouTuber claiming trademark infringement for featuring the Xilinx logo next to Altera&#x27;s in an educational video. Xilinx refused to reply until a video outlining the legal threat was published, after which they sent an apology e-mail.

In January 2019, Baidu announced that its new edge acceleration computing product, EdgeBoard, was powered by Xilinx. Edgeboard is a part of the Baidu Brain AI Hardware Platform Initiative, which encompasses Baidu&#x27;s open computing services, and hardware and software products for its edge AI applications. Edgeboard is based on the Xilinx Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC, which uses real-time processors together with programmable logic. The Xilinx-based Edgeboard can be used to develop products like smart-video security surveillance solutions, advanced-driver-assistance systems, and next-generation robots.

In February 2019, the company announced two new generations of its Zynq UltraScale+ RF system on chip (RFSoC) portfolio. The device covers the entire sub-6 GHz spectrum, which is necessary for 5G, and the updates included: an extended millimeter wave interface, up to 20% power reduction in the RF data converter subsystem compared to the base portfolio, and support of 5G New Radio. The second generation release covered up to 5 GHz, while the third went up to 6 GHz. As of February, the portfolio was the only adaptable radio platform single chip that had been designed to address the industry&#x27;s 5G network needs. The second announcement revealed that Xilinx and Samsung Electronics performed the world&#x27;s first 5G New Radio (NR) commercial deployment in South Korea. The two companies developed and deployed 5G massive multiple-input, multiple-output (m-MIMO) and millimeter wave (mmWave) products using Xilinx&#x27;s UltraScale+ platform. The capabilities are essential for 5G commercialization. The companies also announced collaboration on Xilinx&#x27;s Versal adaptable compute acceleration platform (ACAP) products that will deliver 5G services. In February 2019, Xilinx introduced an HDMI 2.1 IP subsystem core, which enabled the company&#x27;s devices to transmit, receive, and process up to 8K (7680 x 4320 pixels) UHD video in media players, cameras, monitors, LED walls, projectors, and kernel-based virtual machines.

In April 2019, Xilinx entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Solarflare Communications, Inc. Xilinx became a strategic investor in Solarflare in 2017. The companies have been collaborating since then on advanced networking technology, and in March 2019 demonstrated their first joint solution: a single-chip FPGA-based 100G NIC. The acquisition enables Xilinx to combine its FPGA, MPSoC and ACAP solutions with Solarflare&#x27;s NIC technology. In August 2019, Xilinx announced that the company would be adding the world&#x27;s largest FPGA - the Virtex Ultrascale+ VU19P, to the 16nm Virtex Ultrascale+ family. The VU19P contains 35 billion transistors.

In June 2019, Xilinx announced that it was shipping its first Versal chips. Using ACAP, the chips’ hardware and software can be programmed to run almost any kind of AI software. On October 1, 2019, Xilinx announced the launch of Vitis, a unified free and open source software platform that helps developers take advantage of hardware adaptability.

In 2019, Xilinx exceeded $3 billion in annual revenues for the first time, announcing revenues of $3.06 billion, up 24% from the prior fiscal year. Revenues were $828 million for the fourth quarter of the fiscal year 2019, up 4% from the prior quarter and up 30% year over year. Xilinx&#x27;s communications sector represented 41% of the revenue; the industrial, aerospace and defense sectors represented 27%; the data center and test, measurement &amp; emulation (TME) sectors accounted for 18%; and the automotive, broadcast and consumer markets contributed 14%.

In August 2020, Subaru announced the use of one of Xilinx&#x27;s chips as processing power for camera images in its driver-assistance system. In September 2020, Xilinx announced its new chipset, the T1 Telco Accelerator card, that can be used for units running on an open RAN 5G network.

On October 27, 2020, AMD reached an agreement to acquire Xilinx in a stock-swap deal, valuing the company at $35 billion. The deal was expected to close by the end of 2021. Their stockholders approved the acquisition on April 7, 2021. The deal was completed on February 14, 2022. Since the acquisition was completed, all Xilinx products are co-branded as &quot;AMD Xilinx&quot;; started in June 2023, all Xilinx&#x27;s products are now being consolidated under AMD&#x27;s branding.

In December 2020, Xilinx announced they were acquiring the assets of Falcon Computing Systems to enhance the free and open source Vitis platform, a design software for adaptable processing engines to enable highly optimized domain specific accelerators.

In April 2021, Xilinx announced a collaboration with Mavenir to boost cell phone tower capacity for open 5G networks. That same month, the company unveiled the Kria portfolio, a line of small form factor system-on-modules (SOMs) that come with a pre-built software stack to simplify development. In June, Xilinx announced it was acquiring German software developer Silexica, for an undisclosed amount.

==Technology==
Xilinx designs and develops programmable logic products, including integrated circuits (ICs), software design tools, predefined system functions delivered as intellectual property (IP) cores, design services, customer training, field engineering and technical support. Xilinx sells both FPGAs and CPLDs for electronic equipment manufacturers in end markets such as communications, industrial, consumer, automotive and data processing.

Xilinx&#x27;s FPGAs have been used for the ALICE (A Large Ion Collider Experiment) at the CERN European laboratory on the French-Swiss border to map and disentangle the trajectories of thousands of subatomic particles. Xilinx has also engaged in a partnership with the United States Air Force Research Laboratory&#x27;s Space Vehicles Directorate to develop FPGAs to withstand the damaging effects of radiation in space, which are 1,000 times less sensitive to space radiation than the commercial equivalent, for deployment in new satellites. Xilinx FPGAs can run a regular embedded OS (such as Linux or vxWorks) and can implement processor peripherals in programmable logic. The Virtex-II Pro, Virtex-4, Virtex-5, and Virtex-6 FPGA families, which include up to two embedded PowerPC cores, are targeted to the needs of system-on-chip (SoC) designers.

Xilinx&#x27;s IP cores include IP for simple functions (BCD encoders, counters, etc.), for domain specific cores (digital signal processing, FFT and FIR cores) to complex systems (multi-gigabit networking cores, the MicroBlaze soft microprocessor and the compact Picoblaze microcontroller). Xilinx also creates custom cores for a fee.

The main design toolkit Xilinx provides engineers is the Vivado Design Suite, an integrated design environment (IDE) with a system-to-IC level tools built on a shared scalable data model and a common debug environment. Vivado includes electronic system level (ESL) design tools for synthesizing and verifying C-based algorithmic IP; standards based packaging of both algorithmic and RTL IP for reuse; standards based IP stitching and systems integration of all types of system building blocks; and the verification of blocks and systems. A free version WebPACK Edition of Vivado provides designers with a limited version of the design environment.

Xilinx&#x27;s Embedded Developer&#x27;s Kit (EDK) supports the embedded PowerPC 405 and 440 cores (in Virtex-II Pro and some Virtex-4 and -5 chips) and the Microblaze core. Xilinx&#x27;s System Generator for DSP implements DSP designs on Xilinx FPGAs. A freeware version of its EDA software called ISE WebPACK is used with some of its non-high-performance chips. Xilinx is the only (as of 2007) FPGA vendor to distribute a native Linux freeware synthesis toolchain.

Xilinx announced the architecture for a new ARM Cortex-A9-based platform for embedded systems designers, that combines the software programmability of an embedded processor with the hardware flexibility of an FPGA. The new architecture abstracts much of the hardware burden away from the embedded software developers&#x27; point of view, giving them an unprecedented level of control in the development process. With this platform, software developers can leverage their existing system code based on ARM technology and utilize vast off-the-shelf open-source and commercially available software component libraries. Because the system boots an OS at reset, software development can get under way quickly within familiar development and debug environments using tools such as ARM&#x27;s RealView development suite and related third-party tools, Eclipse-based IDEs, GNU, the Xilinx Software Development Kit and others. In early 2011, Xilinx began shipping the Zynq-7000 SoC platform immerses ARM multi-cores, programmable logic fabric, DSP data paths, memories and I/O functions in a dense and configurable mesh of interconnect. The platform targets embedded designers working on market applications that require multi-functionality and real-time responsiveness, such as automotive driver assistance, intelligent video surveillance, industrial automation, aerospace and defense, and next-generation wireless.

Following the introduction of its 28nm 7-series FPGAs, Xilinx revealed that several of the highest-density parts in those FPGA product lines will be constructed using multiple dies in one package, employing technology developed for 3D construction and stacked-die assemblies. The company&#x27;s stacked silicon interconnect (SSI) technology stacks several (three or four) active FPGA dies side by side on a silicon interposer – a single piece of silicon that carries passive interconnect. The individual FPGA dies are conventional, and are flip-chip mounted by microbumps on to the interposer. The interposer provides direct interconnect between the FPGA dies, with no need for transceiver technologies such as high-speed SerDes. In October 2011, Xilinx shipped the first FPGA to use the new technology, the Virtex-7 2000T FPGA, which includes 6.8 billion transistors and 20 million ASIC gates. The following spring, Xilinx used 3D technology to ship the Virtex-7 HT, the industry&#x27;s first heterogeneous FPGAs, which combine high bandwidth FPGAs with a maximum of sixteen 28 Gbit/s and seventy-two 13.1 Gbit/s transceivers to reduce power and size requirements for key Nx100G and 400G line card applications and functions.

In January 2011, Xilinx acquired design tool firm AutoESL Design Technologies and added System C high-level design for its 6- and 7-series FPGA families. The addition of AutoESL tools extended the design community for FPGAs to designers more accustomed to designing at a higher level of abstraction using C, C++ and System C.

In April 2012, Xilinx introduced a revised version of its toolset for programmable systems, called Vivado Design Suite. This IP and system-centric design software supports newer high capacity devices, and speeds the design of programmable logic and I/O. Vivado provides faster integration and implementation for programmable systems into devices with 3D stacked silicon interconnect technology, ARM processing systems, analog mixed signal (AMS), and many semiconductor intellectual property (IP) cores.

In July 2019, Xilinx acquired NGCodec, developers of FPGA accelerated video encoders for video streaming, cloud gaming and cloud mixed reality services. NGCodec video encoders include support for H.264/AVC, H.265/HEVC, VP9 and AV1, with planned future support for H.266/VVC and AV2.

In May 2020, Xilinx installed its first Adaptive Compute Cluster (XACC) at ETH Zurich in Switzerland. The XACCs provide infrastructure and funding to support research in adaptive compute acceleration for high performance computing (HPC). The clusters include high-end servers, Xilinx Alveo accelerator cards, and high speed networking. Three other XACCs will be installed at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA); the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign (UIUC); and the National University of Singapore (NUS).

==Family lines of products==
Before 2010, Xilinx offered two main FPGA families: the high-performance Virtex series and the high-volume Spartan series, with a cheaper EasyPath option for ramping to volume production. The company also provides two CPLD lines: the CoolRunner and the 9500 series. Each model series has been released in multiple generations since its launch. With the introduction of its 28nm FPGAs in June 2010, Xilinx replaced the high-volume Spartan family with the Kintex family and the low-cost Artix family.

Xilinx&#x27;s newer FPGA products use a High-K Metal Gate (HKMG) process, which reduces static power consumption while increasing logic capacity. In 28nm devices, static power accounts for much and sometimes most of the total power dissipation. Virtex-6 and Spartan-6 FPGA families are said to consume 50 percent less power, and have up to twice the logic capacity compared to the previous generation of Xilinx FPGAs.

In June 2010, Xilinx introduced the Xilinx 7 series: the Virtex-7, Kintex-7, and Artix-7 families, promising improvements in system power, performance, capacity, and price. These new FPGA families are manufactured using TSMC&#x27;s 28nm HKMG process. The 28nm series 7 devices feature a 50 percent power reduction compared to the company&#x27;s 40nm devices and offer capacity of up to 2 million logic cells. Less than one year after announcing the 7 series 28nm FPGAs, Xilinx shipped the world&#x27;s first 28nm FPGA device, the Kintex-7. In March 2011, Xilinx introduced the Zynq-7000 family, which integrates a complete ARM Cortex-A9 MPCore processor-based system on a 28nm FPGA for system architects and embedded software developers. In May 2017, Xilinx expanded the 7 Series with the production of the Spartan-7 family.

In Dec, 2013, Xilinx introduced the UltraScale series: Virtex UltraScale and Kintex UltraScale families. These new FPGA families are manufactured by TSMC in its 20nm planar process. At the same time it announced an UltraScale SoC architecture, called Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC, in TSMC 16nm FinFET process.

In March 2021, Xilinx announced a new cost-optimized portfolio with Artix and Zynq UltraScale+ devices, fabricated on TSMC&#x27;s 16nm process.

===Virtex family===

The Virtex series of FPGAs have integrated features that include FIFO and ECC logic, DSP blocks, PCI-Express controllers, Ethernet MAC blocks, and high-speed transceivers. In addition to FPGA logic, the Virtex series includes embedded fixed function hardware for commonly used functions such as multipliers, memories, serial transceivers and microprocessor cores. These capabilities are used in applications such as wired and wireless infrastructure equipment, advanced medical equipment, test and measurement, and defense systems.

The Virtex 7 family, is based on a 28nm design and is reported to deliver a two-fold system performance improvement at 50 percent lower power compared to previous generation Virtex-6 devices. In addition, Virtex-7 doubles the memory bandwidth compared to previous generation Virtex FPGAs with 1866 Mbit/s memory interfacing performance and over two million logic cells.

In 2011, Xilinx began shipping sample quantities of the Virtex-7 2000T &quot;3D FPGA&quot;, which combines four smaller FPGAs into a single package by placing them on a special silicon interconnection pad (called an interposer) to deliver 6.8 billion transistors in a single large chip. The interposer provides 10,000 data pathways between the individual FPGAs — roughly 10 to 100 times more than would usually be available on a board – to create a single FPGA. In 2012, using the same 3D technology, Xilinx introduced initial shipments of their Virtex-7 H580T FPGA, a heterogeneous device, so called because it comprises two FPGA dies and one 8-channel 28 Gbit/s transceiver die in the same package.

The Virtex-6 family is built on a 40nm process for compute-intensive electronic systems, and the company claims it consumes 15 percent less power and has 15 percent improved performance over competing 40nm FPGAs.

The Virtex-5 LX and the LXT are intended for logic-intensive applications, and the Virtex-5 SXT is for DSP applications. With the Virtex-5, Xilinx changed the logic fabric from four-input LUTs to six-input LUTs. With the increasing complexity of combinational logic functions required by SoC designs, the percentage of combinational paths requiring multiple four-input LUTs had become a performance and routing bottleneck. The six-input LUT represented a tradeoff between better handling of increasingly complex combinational functions, at the expense of a reduction in the absolute number of LUTs per device. The Virtex-5 series is a 65nm design fabricated in 1.0V, triple-oxide process technology.

Legacy Virtex devices (Virtex, Virtex-II, Virtex-II Pro, Virtex 4) are still available, but are not recommended for use in new designs.

===Kintex===

The Kintex-7 family is the first Xilinx mid-range FPGA family that the company claims delivers Virtex-6 family performance at less than half the price while consuming 50 percent less power. The Kintex family includes high-performance 12.5 Gbit/s or lower-cost optimized 6.5 Gbit/s serial connectivity, memory, and logic performance required for applications such as high volume 10G optical wired communication equipment, and provides a balance of signal processing performance, power consumption and cost to support the deployment of Long Term Evolution (LTE) wireless networks.

In August 2018, SK Telecom deployed Xilinx Kintex UltraScale FPGAs as their artificial intelligence accelerators at their data centers in South Korea. The FPGAs run SKT&#x27;s automatic speech-recognition application to accelerate Nugu, SKT&#x27;s voice-activated assistant.

In July, 2020 Xilinx made the latest addition to their Kintex family, &#x27;KU19P FPGA&#x27; which delivers more logic fabric and embedded memory

===Artix===

The Artix-7 family delivers 50 percent lower power and 35 percent lower cost compared to the Spartan-6 family and is based on the unified Virtex-series architecture. The Artix family is designed to address the small form factor and low-power performance requirements of battery-powered portable ultrasound equipment, commercial digital camera lens control, and military avionics and communications equipment. With the introduction of the Spartan-7 family in 2017, which lack high-bandwidth transceivers, the Artix-7&#x27;s was clarified as being the &quot;transceiver optimized&quot; member.

===Zynq===

The Zynq-7000 family of SoCs addresses high-end embedded-system applications, such as video surveillance, automotive-driver assistance, next-generation wireless, and factory automation. Zynq-7000 integrate a complete ARM Cortex-A9 MPCore-processor-based 28nm system. The Zynq architecture differs from previous marriages of programmable logic and embedded processors by moving from an FPGA-centric platform to a processor-centric model. For software developers, Zynq-7000 appear the same as a standard, fully featured ARM processor-based system-on-chip (SoC), booting immediately at power-up and capable of running a variety of operating systems independently of the programmable logic. In 2013, Xilinx introduced the Zynq-7100, which integrates digital signal processing (DSP) to meet emerging programmable systems integration requirements of wireless, broadcast, medical and military applications.

The new Zynq-7000 product family posed a key challenge for system designers, because Xilinx ISE design software had not been developed to handle the capacity and complexity of designing with an FPGA with an ARM core. Xilinx&#x27;s new Vivado Design Suite addressed this issue, because the software was developed for higher capacity FPGAs, and it included high level synthesis (HLS) functionality that allows engineers to compile the co-processors from a C-based description.

The AXIOM, the world&#x27;s first digital cinema camera that is open source hardware, contains a Zynq-7000.

===Spartan family===

The Spartan series targets low cost, high-volume applications with a low-power footprint e.g. displays, set-top boxes, wireless routers and other applications.

The Spartan-6 family is built on a 45nm, 9-metal layer, dual-oxide process technology. The Spartan-6 was marketed in 2009 as a low-cost option for automotive, wireless communications, flat-panel display and video surveillance applications.

The Spartan-7 family, built on the same 28nm process used in the other 7-Series FPGAs, was announced in 2015, and became available in 2017. Unlike the Artix-7 family and the &quot;LXT&quot; members of the Spartan-6 family, the Spartan-7 FPGAs lack high-bandwidth transceivers.

===EasyPath===
Because EasyPath devices are identical to the FPGAs that customers are already using the parts can be produced faster and more reliably from the time they are ordered compared to similar competing programs.

===Versal===
Versal is Xilinx&#x27;s 7nm architecture that targets heterogeneous computing needs in datacenter acceleration applications, in artificial intelligence acceleration at the edge, Internet of things (IoT) applications and embedded computing.

The Everest program focuses on the Versal Adaptive Compute Acceleration Platform (ACAP), a product category combining a traditional FPGA fabric with an ARM system on chip and a set of coprocessors, connected through a network on a chip. Xilinx&#x27;s goal was to reduce the barriers to adoption of FPGAs for accelerated compute-intensive datacenter workloads. They are designed for a wide range of applications in the fields of big data and machine learning, including video transcoding, database querying, data compression, search, AI inferencing, machine vision, computer vision, autonomous vehicles, genomics, computational storage and network acceleration.

On April 15, 2020, it was announced that Xilinx would supply its Versal chips to Samsung Electronics for 5G networking equipment. In July 2021, Xilinx debuted the Versal HBM, which combines the network interface of the platform with HBM2e memory to alleviate data bottlenecking.

==See also==

* AI accelerator
* Altera
* High speed serial link

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1046482" start="0" end="12" title="Xilinx" label="Xilinx, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="48" end="61" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063837" start="94" end="119" title="programmable logic device" label="programmable logic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="190" end="219" title="field-programmable gate array" label="field-programmable gate array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191383" start="256" end="277" title="fabless manufacturing" label="fabless manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369353" start="311" end="323" title="Ross Freeman" label="Ross Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893714" start="325" end="346" title="Bernard Vonderschmitt" label="Bernard Vonderschmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q57313564" start="352" end="370" title="James V. Barnett II" label="James V Barnett II"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="411" end="417" title="Nasdaq" label="Nasdaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="444" end="447" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="628" end="638" title="subsidiary" label="subsidiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="656" end="661" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="792" end="806" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="839" end="847" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q988283" start="896" end="904" title="Longmont" label="Longmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="921" end="927" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="938" end="947" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="949" end="958" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="967" end="974" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="983" end="991" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="1000" end="1008" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="1021" end="1026" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="1038" end="1045" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287861" start="1090" end="1093" title="Chief technology officer" label="CTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="1168" end="1183" title="chemical symbol" label="chemical symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="1188" end="1195" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="1402" end="1431" title="field programmable gate array" label="field programmable gate array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063858" start="1446" end="1479" title="complex programmable logic device" label="complex programmable logic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="1504" end="1525" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q438294" start="1641" end="1647" title="Altera" label="Altera"/>
<link wikidata="Q240333" start="1747" end="1752" title="Actel" label="Actel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545076" start="1772" end="1781" title="Microchip Technology" label="Microsemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q747207" start="1787" end="1808" title="Lattice Semiconductor" label="Lattice Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369353" start="1844" end="1856" title="Ross Freeman" label="Ross Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893714" start="1858" end="1879" title="Bernard Vonderschmitt" label="Bernard Vonderschmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q57313564" start="1885" end="1903" title="James V Barnett II" label="James V Barnett II"/>
<link wikidata="Q203262" start="1928" end="1933" title="Zilog" label="Zilog"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="1938" end="1956" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="2040" end="2048" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="2230" end="2241" title="transistors" label="transistors"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="2600" end="2605" title="Field-programmable gate array" label="FPGAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="2871" end="2878" title="Venture capital" label="venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055890" start="2879" end="2886" title="funding" label="funding"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="3079" end="3094" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="3222" end="3229" title="revenue" label="revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="3403" end="3406" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="3595" end="3597" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="HP"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="3599" end="3609" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="3611" end="3614" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="3619" end="3635" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3782" end="3787" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="3789" end="3793" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3798" end="3804" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194864" start="3906" end="3909" title="Electronic design automation" label="EDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="3914" end="3918" title="Application-specific integrated circuit" label="ASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="4049" end="4057" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="4216" end="4221" title="ASICs" label="ASICs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20741011" start="4418" end="4426" title="Virtex (FPGA)" label="Virtex-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056418" start="4492" end="4510" title="Interposer" label="silicon interposer"/>
<link wikidata="Q954187" start="4724" end="4735" title="transceiver" label="transceiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="4859" end="4862" title="Chief executive officer" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="4973" end="4981" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="5019" end="5022" title="System on a chip" label="SoC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560350" start="5047" end="5055" title="ARM core" label="ARM core"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="5064" end="5068" title="Field-programmable gate array" label="FPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q20741011" start="5251" end="5257" title="Virtex (FPGA)" label="Virtex"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220741" start="5405" end="5424" title="Xilinx Vivado" label="Vivado Design Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="5445" end="5448" title="System on a chip" label="SoC"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="5597" end="5599" title="Nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="5632" end="5638" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q456157" start="5710" end="5713" title="Amazon Web Services" label="AWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740861" start="5733" end="5753" title="Amazon Machine Image" label="Amazon Machine Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6050" end="6057" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="6058" end="6074" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="6075" end="6082" title="Startup company" label="startup"/>
<link wikidata="Q43664" start="6250" end="6278" title="High Efficiency Video Coding" label="High Efficiency Video Coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q595445" start="6519" end="6541" title="safety integrity level" label="safety integrity level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060017" start="6562" end="6571" title="IEC 61508" label="IEC 61508"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="6643" end="6648" title="Multi-processor system-on-chip" label="MPSoC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="6661" end="6663" title="Artificial intelligence" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q33114556" start="7197" end="7203" title="FinFET" label="FinFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q846651" start="7289" end="7304" title="multi-processor" label="multi-processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="7357" end="7363" title="MPSoC" label="MPSoCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189682" start="7635" end="7645" title="DDR4 SDRAM" label="DDR4 SDRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769151" start="7802" end="7818" title="Mark Papermaster" label="Mark Papermaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q33083031" start="7856" end="7864" title="Epyc" label="AMD Epyc"/>
<link wikidata="Q877536" start="8008" end="8016" title="Dell EMC" label="Dell EMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723936" start="8206" end="8227" title="High Bandwidth Memory" label="high-bandwidth memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635573" start="8454" end="8458" title="HPCC" label="HPCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276238" start="8503" end="8510" title="RDMA over Converged Ethernet" label="RoCE v2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6322401" start="8655" end="8668" title="K&amp;amp;L Gates" label="K&amp;amp;L Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q753379" start="8708" end="8712" title="DMCA" label="DMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q31726" start="8713" end="8729" title="cease and desist" label="cease and desist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="8743" end="8745" title="electrical engineering" label="EE"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="8746" end="8753" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q98091506" start="8764" end="8786" title="trademark infringement" label="trademark infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q438294" start="8825" end="8831" title="Altera" label="Altera"/>
<link wikidata="Q14772" start="9003" end="9008" title="Baidu" label="Baidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337692" start="9032" end="9036" title="Edge computing" label="edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="9279" end="9281" title="Artificial intelligence" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="9786" end="9788" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q62029351" start="9963" end="9975" title="5G NR" label="5G New Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="10263" end="10282" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62029351" start="10316" end="10328" title="5G NR" label="5G New Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="10359" end="10370" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456907" start="10904" end="10906" title="8K resolution" label="8K"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="11002" end="11008" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="11015" end="11030" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165233" start="11366" end="11369" title="Network interface controller" label="NIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="11944" end="11973" title="Free and open-source software" label="free and open source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q172741" start="12629" end="12635" title="Subaru" label="Subaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060280" start="12729" end="12753" title="Advanced driver-assistance systems" label="driver-assistance system"/>
<link wikidata="Q182656" start="12799" end="12806" title="chipset" label="chipset"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="12923" end="12926" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091455" start="12971" end="12981" title="stock swap" label="stock-swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="13494" end="13514" title="Free and open-source software" label="free and open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q54437388" start="13693" end="13700" title="Mavenir" label="Mavenir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="13745" end="13747" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015580" start="13844" end="13861" title="System on module" label="system-on-modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="14423" end="14437" title="communications" label="communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q22855" start="14451" end="14459" title="consumer" label="consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="14461" end="14471" title="automotive" label="automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="14476" end="14491" title="data processing" label="data processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q294437" start="14537" end="14542" title="A Large Ion Collider Experiment" label="ALICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="14584" end="14588" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="14616" end="14622" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="14623" end="14628" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q177013" start="14692" end="14711" title="subatomic particles" label="subatomic particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="14763" end="14786" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572686" start="14895" end="14913" title="space radiation" label="radiation in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="15089" end="15094" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q757165" start="15098" end="15105" title="vxWorks" label="vxWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="15270" end="15277" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="15314" end="15328" title="system-on-chip" label="system-on-chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="15403" end="15406" title="Binary-coded decimal" label="BCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="15461" end="15486" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="15488" end="15491" title="Fast Fourier transform" label="FFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893366" start="15496" end="15499" title="Free ideal ring" label="FIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="15620" end="15635" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220741" start="15740" end="15759" title="Xilinx Vivado" label="Vivado Design Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="15764" end="15793" title="Integrated development environment" label="integrated design environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="16404" end="16411" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644704" start="16488" end="16498" title="Microblaze" label="Microblaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997451" start="16843" end="16856" title="ARM Cortex-A9" label="ARM Cortex-A9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335007" start="17087" end="17104" title="embedded software" label="embedded software"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="17443" end="17445" title="Operating system" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="17574" end="17577" title="ARM architecture family" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="17862" end="17865" title="Input/output" label="I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056418" start="18622" end="18632" title="interposer" label="interposer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510662" start="18929" end="18935" title="SerDes" label="SerDes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="19740" end="19741" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="19743" end="19746" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220741" start="19861" end="19880" title="Xilinx Vivado" label="Vivado Design Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654284" start="20217" end="20252" title="Semiconductor intellectual property core" label="semiconductor intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="20319" end="20323" title="FPGA" label="FPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q600158" start="20324" end="20335" title="Hardware acceleration" label="accelerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q559856" start="20355" end="20370" title="Video hosting service" label="video streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102629" start="20372" end="20384" title="cloud gaming" label="cloud gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758389" start="20395" end="20408" title="mixed reality" label="mixed reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q212633" start="20462" end="20471" title="H.264/MPEG-4 AVC" label="H.264/AVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43664" start="20473" end="20483" title="HEVC" label="H.265/HEVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815169" start="20485" end="20488" title="VP9" label="VP9"/>
<link wikidata="Q26046105" start="20493" end="20496" title="AV1" label="AV1"/>
<link wikidata="Q55517509" start="20530" end="20539" title="Versatile Video Coding" label="H.266/VVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="20929" end="20966" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="20979" end="21021" title="University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign" label="University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q738236" start="21038" end="21070" title="National University of Singapore" label="National University of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q20741011" start="21181" end="21187" title="Virtex (FPGA)" label="Virtex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063858" start="21326" end="21330" title="Complex programmable logic device" label="CPLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q132013" start="21648" end="21665" title="High-κ dielectric" label="High-K Metal Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q713418" start="22247" end="22251" title="TSMC" label="TSMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997451" start="22650" end="22663" title="ARM Cortex-A9" label="ARM Cortex-A9"/>
<link wikidata="Q713418" start="23002" end="23006" title="TSMC" label="TSMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="23121" end="23126" title="MPSoC" label="MPSoC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20741011" start="23328" end="23334" title="Virtex (FPGA)" label="Virtex"/>
<link wikidata="Q515636" start="23389" end="23393" title="FIFO (computing and electronics)" label="FIFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q206924" start="23421" end="23432" title="PCI-Express" label="PCI-Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="23446" end="23454" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20484" start="23455" end="23458" title="MAC address" label="MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056418" start="24444" end="24454" title="interposer" label="interposer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="25791" end="25801" title="Semiconductor device fabrication" label="fabricated"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347103" start="26374" end="26377" title="10G" label="10G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="26530" end="26549" title="Long Term Evolution" label="Long Term Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="27307" end="27317" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q221329" start="27382" end="27390" title="avionics" label="avionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="27641" end="27645" title="System on a chip" label="SoCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997451" start="27834" end="27847" title="ARM Cortex-A9" label="ARM Cortex-A9"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="28135" end="28138" title="ARM architecture family" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="28155" end="28175" title="System on a chip" label="system-on-chip (SoC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="28363" end="28388" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220741" start="28753" end="28772" title="Xilinx Vivado" label="Vivado Design Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754574" start="28873" end="28893" title="high level synthesis" label="high level synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="28972" end="28973" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148939" start="28998" end="29003" title="AXIOM (camera)" label="AXIOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145694" start="29028" end="29049" title="digital cinema camera" label="digital cinema camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q159172" start="29058" end="29078" title="open source hardware" label="open source hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="29219" end="29227" title="displays" label="displays"/>
<link wikidata="Q842729" start="29229" end="29242" title="set-top boxes" label="set-top boxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407440" start="29244" end="29259" title="wireless router" label="wireless router"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="29569" end="29571" title="nanometer" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111997" start="30095" end="30118" title="heterogeneous computing" label="heterogeneous computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="30169" end="30192" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337692" start="30213" end="30217" title="edge computing" label="edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="30219" end="30237" title="Internet of things" label="Internet of things"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="30261" end="30279" title="embedded computing" label="embedded computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="30434" end="30437" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="30438" end="30452" title="system on chip" label="system on chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q859595" start="30466" end="30477" title="coprocessor" label="coprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q339554" start="30500" end="30517" title="network on a chip" label="network on a chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q858810" start="30710" end="30718" title="big data" label="big data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="30723" end="30739" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30815" end="30829" title="inference#Inference engines" label="AI inferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425977" start="30831" end="30845" title="machine vision" label="machine vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q844240" start="30847" end="30862" title="computer vision" label="computer vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569610" start="30864" end="30883" title="vehicular automation" label="autonomous vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q222046" start="30885" end="30893" title="genomics" label="genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="31025" end="31044" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723936" start="31177" end="31182" title="High Bandwidth Memory" label="HBM2e"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895600" start="31240" end="31254" title="AI accelerator" label="AI accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q438294" start="31257" end="31263" title="Altera" label="Altera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920845" start="31266" end="31288" title="High speed serial link" label="High speed serial link"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816738" wikidata="Q412430" url="?curid=816738" title="Virginia City (disambiguation)">
<text>Virginia City is a city located in Storey County, Nevada.

Virginia City may also refer to:
* Virginia City, Montana
* Virginia City, Texas
* &quot;Virginia City&quot; (film), a 1940 film starring Errol Flynn
* Virginia City Hybrid Energy Center, a power plant in St. Paul, Virginia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q987262" start="0" end="13" title="Virginia City" label="Virginia City"/>
<link wikidata="Q955580" start="94" end="116" title="Virginia City, Montana" label="Virginia City, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934185" start="119" end="139" title="Virginia City, Texas" label="Virginia City, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q643220" start="142" end="174" title="Virginia City (film)" label="&amp;quot;Virginia City&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55316118" start="211" end="245" title="Virginia City Hybrid Energy Center" label="Virginia City Hybrid Energy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989543" start="264" end="282" title="St. Paul, Virginia" label="St. Paul, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816756" wikidata="Q4722471" url="?curid=816756" title="Alfred Comyn Lyall">
<text>Sir Alfred Comyn Lyall (4 January 1835 – 10 April 1911) was a British civil servant, literary historian and poet.

==Early life==
Alfred Lyall was born in Coulsdon, Surrey, the second son of Alfred Lyall and Mary Drummond Broadwood, daughter of James Shudi Broadwood. He was educated at Eton College. His elder brother, James Broadwood Lyall, was already serving in India, and this may have influenced him towards a career in that direction. He attended Haileybury College with that purpose in mind. In 1862 he married Cora Cloete, daughter of Peter Cloete. He died while on a sojourn to Farringford House, the family home of Alfred, Lord Tennyson, in Freshwater, Isle of Wight.

==Indian career==
After Eton and Haileybury, Lyall joined the Indian Civil Service in 1856, and served a long career in India. He landed at Calcutta in January 1856. After four months of training he was posted as an Assistant Magistrate at Bulandshahr in the North-West Provinces. He was there when the Indian Rebellion of 1857 occurred: his house was burned down and he was nearly killed when fleeing as his horse was shot from under him. He joined the Khaki Risala of Volunteers, an irregular European cavalry unit. He helped &quot;pacify&quot; Bulandshahr. In May 1858 he was transferred to Shahjehanpur where he helped &quot;restore order&quot;. In April 1861 he returned to England for about eighteen months. On his return to India he was appointed Assistant Magistrate at Agra. In 1864 he was appointed district manager of Nagpur at Hoshungabad in the Central Provinces, before being appointed commissioner in Berar in 1867. He was now earning £3,000 a year. He went on to become Home Secretary to the Government of India in 1873 and the governor-general&#x27;s agent in the state of Rajputana the following year. His next post was as Foreign Secretary to Government of India from 1878 to 1881 (during this period he helped negotiate peace and a monarchy in Afghanistan). He was then appointed Lieutenant-Governor of North-West Provinces, and Chief Commissioner of Oudh (North-West Provinces) from 1882 to 1887 (he introduced a degree of local self-government to that area). He also founded the University of Allahabad and became its first chancellor. He was made an honorary fellow of King&#x27;s College, Cambridge, in 1893. He was made a member of the Privy Council in 1902, having served on the India Council from 1888 to 1902.

Lyall&#x27;s ideas regarding the development and organisation of society in India were developed principally during the time he spent working in the Central Provinces, Berar and Rajputana between 1865 and 1878. He was, in the opinion of Crispin Bates, &quot;one of the more programmatic of nineteenth century writers on Indian history&quot; and his writings on the subject are &quot;somewhat dubious&quot;. Another historian, Clive Dewey, believes that 

==Awards and honours==
Lyall was made a Knight Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire (KCIE) in 1887, Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath (KCB) in 1881, and Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire (GCIE) in 1896. He was appointed a Privy Counsellor on 11 August 1902, following an announcement of the King&#x27;s intention to make this appointment in the 1902 Coronation Honours list published in June that year. In Bulandshahr, a water tank was erected opposite Colvin Gate, and named after Lyall.

==Literary==
His &quot;Verses Written in India&quot; was published in 1889. He wrote a number of other books on poetry. He wrote also books on Indian history, Warren Hastings, and Alfred Lord Tennyson. His literary achievements brought him advanced degrees, a D.C.L. from Oxford (1889) and an LL.D. from Cambridge (1891), an Honorary Fellow of King&#x27;s College, Cambridge (1893), and membership in the British Academy (1902).

A more comprehensive list of his known publications is given below:
*&quot;The Rise and Expansion of the British Dominion in India&quot;. (John Murray. London, 1893)
*&quot;Warren Hastings&quot; (English Men of Action Series). (Macmillan &amp; Co. London, 1889)
*&quot;Verses Written in India&quot;. (Kegan Paul, Trench. London, 1889)
*&quot;Tennyson&quot; (English Men of Letters series). (Macmillan &amp; Co. London, 1902)
*&quot;The Life of the Marquis of Dufferin and Ava&quot;, 2 vols. (John Murray. London, 1905)
*&quot;Etudes sur les moeurs religieuses et socials de l&#x27;Extrême-Orient&quot;. (French translation of Asiatic Studies, First &amp; Second Series: Fontemoing, Paris. 1907–1908)
*&quot;Studies in Literature and History&quot;. (published posthumously by John Murray. London, 1915)

==Family==
Lyall married Cornelia Arnoldina Cloete (c. 1836 – 1913) at Stoke-by-Clare, Suffolk on 12 November 1862. They had four children (two sons and two daughters). Their second daughter Mary Evelina (1868–1948) married the Indian civil servant John Ontario Miller (1857–1943). Lyall was also guardian to Malcolm Lyall Darling, who was subsequently knighted.

Lyall&#x27;s uncles included George Lyall (1779–1853), a chairman of the East India Company, and William Rowe Lyall (1788–1857), a dean of Canterbury (1845–1857). His brother James Broadwood Lyall (1838–1916) also served in the Indian Civil Service, becoming Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab. His sister Mary Sybilla (1836–1891) was married to Francis James Holland (1828–1907) Canon at Canterbury Cathedral.

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4722471" start="0" end="22" title="Alfred Comyn Lyall" label="Sir Alfred Comyn Lyall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661231" start="70" end="83" title="Indian Civil Service" label="civil servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463831" start="155" end="163" title="Coulsdon" label="Coulsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723094" start="191" end="203" title="Alfred Lyall (traveller)" label="Alfred Lyall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143140" start="245" end="266" title="James Shudi Broadwood" label="James Shudi Broadwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="287" end="299" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130248" start="320" end="341" title="James Broadwood Lyall" label="James Broadwood Lyall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639263" start="454" end="472" title="Haileybury and Imperial Service College" label="Haileybury College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436294" start="588" end="605" title="Farringford House" label="Farringford House"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="626" end="647" title="Tennyson" label="Alfred, Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428909" start="652" end="677" title="Freshwater, Isle of Wight" label="Freshwater, Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661231" start="742" end="762" title="Indian Civil Service" label="Indian Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="820" end="828" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q861248" start="920" end="931" title="Bulandshahr" label="Bulandshahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q138521" start="939" end="959" title="North-West Provinces" label="North-West Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="983" end="1007" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078241" start="1274" end="1286" title="Shahjehanpur" label="Shahjehanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="1458" end="1462" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513" start="1509" end="1515" title="Nagpur" label="Nagpur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1519" end="1530" title="Hoshungabad" label="Hoshungabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q521864" start="1538" end="1555" title="Central Provinces" label="Central Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983297" start="1596" end="1601" title="Berar Province" label="Berar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929733" start="1770" end="1779" title="Rajputana" label="Rajputana"/>
<link wikidata="Q18129046" start="2051" end="2055" title="Oudh" label="Oudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005647" start="2181" end="2204" title="University of Allahabad" label="University of Allahabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="2272" end="2302" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="2341" end="2354" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176421" start="2385" end="2398" title="India Council" label="India Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q93710" start="2914" end="2964" title="Knight Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire" label="Knight Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="2981" end="3022" title="Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath" label="Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q93710" start="3042" end="3098" title="Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire" label="Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="3134" end="3150" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Counsellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507474" start="3257" end="3280" title="1902 Coronation Honours" label="1902 Coronation Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q75647902" start="3365" end="3376" title="Elliott Colvin (died 1883)" label="Colvin Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q333994" start="3561" end="3576" title="Warren Hastings" label="Warren Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="3582" end="3602" title="Alfred Tennyson, 1st Baron Tennyson" label="Alfred Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378327" start="4190" end="4219" title="English Men of Letters series" label="English Men of Letters series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251282" start="4884" end="4903" title="John Ontario Miller" label="John Ontario Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q48200224" start="4944" end="4965" title="Malcolm Lyall Darling" label="Malcolm Lyall Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541887" start="5028" end="5040" title="George Lyall, Snr" label="George Lyall"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="5072" end="5090" title="Honourable East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014800" start="5096" end="5114" title="William Rowe Lyall" label="William Rowe Lyall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246595" start="5130" end="5148" title="dean of Canterbury" label="dean of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130248" start="5174" end="5195" title="James Broadwood Lyall" label="James Broadwood Lyall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516453" start="5258" end="5277" title="Lieutenant-Governor" label="Lieutenant-Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629708" start="5285" end="5291" title="Punjab Province (British India)" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481465" start="5344" end="5365" title="Francis James Holland" label="Francis James Holland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816761" wikidata="Q1539553" url="?curid=816761" title="Patrouille de France">
<text>The &#x27; (, &quot;French Acrobatic Patrol&quot;), also known as the &#x27; (PAF), is the precision aerobatics demonstration unit of the French Air and Space Force, officially commissioned in 1953.

Using the French Aerial Aerobatics () unit of the French Air and Space Force, the mission is to represent it and lead the ambassadorship role of French aeronautics overseas. Stationed at Aerial Base 701 Salon-de-Provence in Bouches-du-Rhône, it is the oldest (active since 1931) and considered one of the best in the world. Comprising 9 pilots and 35 mechanics, the patrol (&quot;La Patrouille&quot;) splits its time between winter season (&quot;saison hivernale&quot;) training and summer season (&quot;saison estivale&quot;) aerial displays.

The unit traditionally opens the Bastille Day military parade in Paris with 9 Alpha Jets, presenting a twenty-minute demonstration of formation changes and crossovers narrated by the director of the French Air Force presentation team, also a jet pilot as well as the public relations officer. Each maneuver is filmed by a photo and video specialist, as a pilot is also usually present (often the replacement pilot), supervising the communications between the PAF and the controller for flight safety.

==History==
===Early beginnings===
In 1931, the first aerial demonstration (&quot;démonstration aérienne&quot;) in patrol (&quot;En Patrouille&quot;) took place at Étampes-Mondésir Airport. The demonstration was executed by instructors of the Piloting Perfection School, on Morane-Saulnier MS.230. The formation was composed of three aircraft. Between 1932 and 1939, under the command of Captain Pierre Fleurquin, the Patrouille d&#x27;Étampes received an encouraging success and entered in posterity. Accordingly, the Patrol was chosen to represent France during international meetings. In 1935, the Patrouille d&#x27;Étampes was converted on MS.225 and developed capability to pass to five equipment (1936). In 1937, the unit joined Salon-de-Provence; it was designated Patrouille de l&#x27;École de l&#x27;Air. The Second World War interrupted different activities.

===Birth of the Patrouille de France===

In 1947, the Minister of Air created an escadrille of representation for the French Air Force. The presentation unit was directed by Capitaine Pierre, former pilot of the Patrouille d&#x27;Étampes and accordingly equipped with twelve Stampe SV-4. In front of the ongoing ascending success of presentations, diverse formations were put in place at the corps of the French Air Force. In 1952, Commandant Pierre Delachenal, pilot of the 3e Escadre, stationed at Aerial Base 112 Reims-Champagne, formed an escadrille of four Republic F-84G. During an aerial meeting on 17 May on the field of Maison-Blanche (White House) in Algeria, the pilot show commentator of the escadrille and journalist Jacques Nœtinger, overwhelmingly shocked with the spectacle which he had just witnessed, baptised France&#x27;s Patrol officially as Patrouille de France. The general staff headquarters of the French Air Force accordingly confirmed this appellation on 14 September 1953.

===Recent developments===

During the ten following years, four Escadres of the French Air Force (the 12e Escadre of Aerial Base 103 Cambray-Épinoy, the 4e Escadres of Aerial Base 136 Bremgarten; the 2e Escadre of Aerial Base 102 Dijon-Longvic and the 4e Escadre of Aerial Base 133 Nancy-Ochey) perpetuated one after the other (&quot;tour à tour&quot;) the traditions of the Patrouille de France and contributed to patrol&#x27;s international success. Nevertheless, in 1964, following budgetary restrictions, the patrol of Dassault Mystère IV was dissolved. Anxious not to have the designation of Patrouille de France disappear, the Minister of the Armies decided accordingly a couple of months later to adopt the Patrouille de l&#x27;École de l&#x27;Air.

The six Fouga Magister of the Aerial Base of Salon-de-Provence became the torch of French Aerial Aerobatics () during sixteen years. The last presentation of Fouga Magister, which the number was nine, was held on 16 September 1980 at Salon-de-Provence. The Dassault/Dornier Alpha Jet became the steel spear of the Patrouille de France in 1981 with 7 aircraft. This number was increased to 8 as of 1982. A historical display took place in 1986 above New York City. On 25 November 2009, for the first time in the world, an aerobatic team was commanded by a woman, when Commandant of the French Air Force Virginie Guyot became leader of the Patrouille de France.

During the France segment of the 2020 Summer Olympics closing ceremony, the Patrouille de France performed a flyby over Paris, passing the Eiffel Tower as Tokyo passed the Olympics on to the French capital for the 2024 Games.

The Patroulle performed for their 70th anniversary and Kleine Brogel base in Belgium Air Force Days 2023.

== Pilots ==
Three pilots integrate the &quot;Patrouille&quot; each year. The new entering patrollers are chosen amongst the hunter pilots () of the French Air Force, which come forth voluntarily. They have to retain the qualification of a patrol chief and totalize at least 1500 hours of flying on a reaction aircraft in order to apply.

From the principle of cooperation, the pilots chose the three future pilots of the &quot;Patrouille&quot;.

The 2009–2010 season was marked by the arrival, for a first time, of a female pilot : Commandant Virginie Guyot.

The radio code of the &quot;Patrouille&quot; is &quot;Athos&quot;:

*The Leader - Le Leader
**&quot;Athos 1&quot; remains on post for a period of one year, the leader is the only indispensable pilot in the &quot;Patrouille&quot; and cannot be replaced. Orchestra Chief of the &quot;Patrouille&quot;, the leader determines with his team the figures and formations which the patrol will form and paint. 
*The interiors - Les intérieurs
**Respectively &quot;Athos 2&quot; and &quot;Athos 3&quot;. They are in their first year in the Patrouille and evolve a side the leader during the manifestations of flight formations. 
*The scavenger ()
** &quot;Athos 4&quot;, known for the position : placed behind the leader, &quot;Athos 4&quot; literary swallows all the smoke and takes the leader&#x27;s place the following year. 
* The solos - Les solos
** &quot;Athos 5&quot; (solo leader) and &quot;Athos 6&quot; (second solo) conduct crossings and percussions during the « synchronisation », second part of the program. 
*The exteriors - Les extérieurs
** &quot;Athos 7&quot; and &quot;Athos 8&quot; are part of the equipment the furthest from the leader. Their respective places at the corps of formations demand from them a great deal of anticipation and concentration in order to hold formation of the aerial fort. 
*The replacement - Le remplaçant
** &quot;Athos 9&quot; is the oldest pilot of the &quot;Patrouille&quot;, since Athos 9 occupied the post of &quot;interior&quot;, second of solo and leader solo the previous years. Athos 9 has to be capable in replacing any of the patrollers. He cannot however replace the &quot;leader&quot;.

== Mechanics ==

The Patrouille de France is first a team.

They are 32 mechanics to put in place, maintain and repair the 12 Alphajet assigned to the unit.

Placed under the orders of technical services chief, the mechanics are also chosen by cooptation amongst the mechanics of the French Air and Space Force. They are all volunteers and worker often late at night to assure the mission of the following day. They are mainly two teams.

* The Troubleshooting Team 
Charged with troubleshooting the necessary immobilization of an aircraft, or the utilization of specific tools, the troubleshooting team guarantees equally the consistency of programmed operations. 
This team is stationary on an Aerial Base, and ensures the base&#x27;s back-up support, or when the &quot;Patrouille&quot; returns from meeting. 
* The field/meeting Team 
Based on the tradition, the field mechanic chooses the pilot. The mechanic accompanies the pilot during the appropriate season on all &quot;meetings&quot;, and navigates in the rear for all transit flights. In a particular uniform, the latter ensures the effect placement of each flight departure and return. The confidence between the mechanic and pilot is absolute/total.

* The Transall Accompaniment

A Transall C-160 accompanies the &quot;Patrouille de France&quot; to each displacement. The accompaniment revolves around ensuring the necessary logistics support, in transporting a dozen tons of materials, in addition to the required personnel in concern for the mission. The accompaniment is capable of conducting rotations to main base from any lieu in case the situation was of a requirement.

The Transall and crew which participate to the mission of the &quot;Patrouille&quot;, hail from the transport squadrons of the French Air and Space Force.

== Formations ==

The program of the &quot;Patrouille de France&quot; is renewed each year. Each program, designated a &quot;series&quot;, is determined by the leader in accordance with all members of the team.

This program is proposed to be validated by security flight commission, before being validated, similarly to all demonstration pilots, by the Chief of Staff of the French Air Force during the spring on an Aerial Base.

The series for the year is divided in two parts, the &quot;ruban&quot; (8 Alphajet evolve in a tight quarter formation and change formation) and the &quot;synchro&quot; (the &quot;Patrouille&quot; is divided into two formations and conducts alternatively figures of 2, 4, or 6 aircraft). The chains of maneuvers must be perfectly synchronized between the leader and the leader solo in order to avoid dead time for the public, and avoid equally the superposition of two figures.

The emblematic figure of the &quot;Patrouille&quot; is the heart (balance in Y at 6 cut by an arrow realized by the two solos).

The pilots fly at speeds between 300 and 800 km/h, while being only spaced from each other by 2 or 3 meters.

The base formation of the &quot;Patrouille de France&quot; is the &quot;Diamant&quot; (Diamond); however, the repertoire includes numerous other formations, and can be orchestrated into a series. The repertoire of the &quot;Patrouille de France&quot; consists of at least 20 different formations.

== Aircraft ==
* Republic F-84 G Thunderjet (1953–1954)
* Dassault Ouragan (1954–1957)
* Dassault Mystère IV (1957–1964)
* Fouga Magister (1964–1981)
* Dassault-Breguet/Dornier Alpha Jet (since 1981)

Each aircraft is painted blue-white-red, with the gun placement replaced with a smoke generator. Search lights are installed on the aircraft nose, and the viewfinder has been removed to improve visibility.

==Accidents==

*1935 - Death of Chief Warrant Officer () Carlier following an accident.
*1967 - At the egress of the final usual burst (), the Fouga Magister of Captain Didier Duthoit, commandant in second of the PAF, crashed in the proximity of a grandstand. The pilot was killed. 
*1980 - Two Fougas collided while executing a synchronized maneuver. The two pilots were killed. 
*1981 - An Alpha Jet piloted by the commandant crashed in the north of Aix-en-Provence. The pilot did not eject and was killed. 
* 1982 - An Athos 8 crashed during a rehearsal at Salon-de-Provence Air Base. The pilot was killed. 
* 1983 - Two aircraft collided in mid-air while conducting a maneuver over Niort. The aircraft were part of two groups of four aircraft each, practising a 4 vs 4 crossover. Of the two pilots, one, Lieutenant Vuillamy, was killed, while the other survived.
* 1987 - The two solos collided during a meeting at Annemasse. Neither pilot was injured. 
* 1991 - The two solos collided. One pilot was killed, while the other ejected and sustained injuries. 
* 1992 - The second solo crashed during a training flight at Salon-de-Provence Air Base. The pilot narrowly avoided a highway, activated the ejection seat too late and was killed. 
* 1993 - During a training flight, one of the Alpha Jet solos crashed near Cameri Air Base in Italy. The two pilots ejected and sustained injuries.
* 2002 - While returning to Salon-de-Provence Air Base after a training mission, an Alpha Jet crashed on a turn before landing. The pilot, Captain Daniel Marchand, attempted to eject too late, and was killed.
* 2010 - While conducting a solo maneuver during a training mission, one of the solo Alpha Jets crashed near the Orange Plan de Dieu Airport (fr) near Orange, Vaucluse. The pilot, Captain Sylvain Courtot, ejected 10 meters from the ground and landed meters from the crashed aircraft. He suffered from fractures and retook flights in 2011. The &quot;replacement&quot; 2009 made his come back in the Patrouille to perform the 2010 season.
*2019 - On 25 July, an Alpha Jet overran the runway at Perpignan Airport. The pilot ejected.

== Patron ==

The &quot;Patrouille de France&quot; (PAF) has many encounters with notable figures, but few have been awarded the official title of &quot;Patron/Godfather or Godmother&quot; () (Patron can designate a Godfather &quot;parrain&quot; or Godmother &quot;marraine&quot;). For example, Nicolas Hulot, victim of a &quot;voile noir&quot; on board of a &quot;Patrouille de France&quot; aircraft, was never awarded the title.

The first Patron/Godfather of the &quot;Patrouille de France&quot; was Alain Delon, in 1988. He came for the first time to Salon-de-Provence Air Base, with Yves Mourousi, then flew on a flight directly to Journal de 13 heures of TF1, a journey which took 30 minutes. His &quot;renommée&quot; (designation) generated much conversation about the French Air Force and reinforced the relation between the French Air Force and France. The pilots at the time were Commandant Velluz (leader), Lieutenant (☨)Bossert, Lieutenant Girbe, Captain Hendel, Captain Weber, Lieutenant Mougel, Captain Bonin, Lieutenant Manzo and Captain Bro.

In 1990, Michel Drucker accepted to be the Godfather/Patron of the &quot;Patrouille de France&quot;. A journalist with a passion for aeronautics, he came for the first time to the Salon-de-Provence Air Base on 26 March 1990, and took his first flight on 26 April. Two days later, the display team appeared on the TV program &quot;Champs-Élysées&quot; (). The appearance allowed the audience to observe French Air Force personnel behind-the-scenes. In 2010, at the 20th anniversary of the &quot;Patrouille de France&quot;, the team appeared on the TV program &quot;Vivement Dimanche&quot; () for a special program. The pilots were Commandant (☨)Festas, Lieutenant Chantereau, Captain (☨)Lenne, Captain Barou, Lieutenant Girbe, Lieutenant Lagrange, Captain (☨)Bossert, Captain Louis and Lieutenant Manzo.

In 1991, the &quot;Patrouille de France&quot; chose Jean-Claude Killy, triple Olympic champion at the 1968 Winter Olympics held in Grenoble. Killy was the co-organizer of the 1992 Winter Olympics held in Albertville, where the PAF performed. The pilots were Commandant Barou, Captain Reyre, Captain Manzo, Captain (☨)Bossert, Captain Girbe, Captain Lagrange, Captain Chantereau, Captain Pittie and Lieutenant Gourhan.

In 1993, on the 40th anniversary of the formation of the PAF, Albert II, Prince of Monaco became the Godfather/Patron. The pilots were Commandant Connan, Captain Kurtz, Captain Manzo, Captain Laloix, Captain Gourhan, Captain Chicha, Captain Huillier and Lieutenant Perret.

In 2001, the Judo champion David Douillet became Godfather/Patron. Douillet conducted a flight in front of the &quot;Patrouille de France&quot; on board the Transall transport aircraft with the door open. The pilots were Commandant Giraud, Commandant Girard, Captain Mateo, Captain Boillot, Captain Boulay, Captain Talichet, Captain Fricker, Captain Lespade and Captain Espinet.

In 2010, Carla Bruni, wife of the President of France Nicolas Sarkozy, became the first Patron/Godmother. The pilots were Commandant Guyot, Commandant Tranchon, Captain Guy, Captaine Hauser, Captain Castaing, Captain Wallaert, Captain Pillet, Captain Courtot, Captain Monhée and Captain Bourgeon.

In 2012, the rugby player Thierry Dusautoir became the Patron/Godfather for the running year. The pilots were Commandant Gauthier Dewas, Captain Vincent Plantier, Captain William Leroy, Commandant Raphaël Nal, Captain Jean-Noël Guy, Captain Guillaume Smets, Captain Antoine Hauser, Captain Philippe Castagnet, Captain Sylvain Pillet.

In 2014, the French Air Force celebrated its 80th anniversary and for the first time in history, the &quot;Patrouille de France&quot; counted two Patrons: Jean-Loup Chrétien and Patrick Baudry, who conducted two flights during the year. The 2014 team composed of Commandant Herpin, Commandant Béthoux, Captain Michel, Captain Chanat, Captain Plantier, Captain Blanc-Tailleur, Captain Leroy, Captain Aubert and Captain Castagnet.

== See also ==

*Major (France)
*Chief of Staff of the French Air Force
*List of French Air and Space Force aircraft squadrons
*List of Escadres of the French Air Force
*Escadrille Lafayette

==References==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* Lela Presse, 60 ans de la Patrouille de France en images, Avions Hors-série n°35, Sébastien Guillemin, Jean-Louis Gaynecoetche &amp; Humbert Charve, 2013, pages 100 
* EPA, La Patrouille de France, Vincent Perrot, 2009, pages 184, , 
*

==External links==

* Official website
* &quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot; article about the &quot;Patrouille&quot; performances in China (2004)
* &quot;The Patrouille de France crash&quot;
* &quot;Patrouille visit to Stewart Airport, Newburgh, NY, as part of their 2017 US Tour&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q373557" start="91" end="111" title="Aerobatics" label="precision aerobatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q117464905" start="138" end="164" title="French Air and Space Force" label="French Air and Space Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886512" start="387" end="420" title="Salon-de-Provence Air Base" label="Aerial Base 701 Salon-de-Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240" start="424" end="440" title="Bouches-du-Rhône" label="Bouches-du-Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043180" start="778" end="806" title="Bastille Day military parade" label="Bastille Day military parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q313740" start="823" end="833" title="Dassault/Dornier Alpha Jet" label="Alpha Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732114" start="1521" end="1543" title="Morane-Saulnier MS.230" label="Morane-Saulnier MS.230"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1797" end="1803" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q39937" start="1891" end="1897" title="Morane-Saulnier M.S.225" label="MS.225"/>
<link wikidata="Q232567" start="1982" end="1999" title="Salon-de-Provence" label="Salon-de-Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577870" start="2040" end="2059" title="École de l&amp;#x27;air" label="École de l&amp;#x27;Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2065" end="2081" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251849" start="2171" end="2186" title="Minister of Air (France)" label="Minister of Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q617774" start="2392" end="2403" title="Stampe-Vertongen SV.4" label="Stampe SV-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q117464905" start="2522" end="2538" title="French Air and Space Force" label="French Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724252" start="2592" end="2602" title="List of Escadres of the French Air Force" label="3e Escadre"/>
<link wikidata="Q160853" start="2679" end="2692" title="Republic F-84 Thunderjet" label="Republic F-84"/>
<link wikidata="Q59419" start="2746" end="2760" title="Dar El Beïda" label="Maison-Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="2778" end="2785" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961991" start="3006" end="3056" title="Chief of Staff of the French Air Force" label="general staff headquarters of the French Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724252" start="3183" end="3191" title="List of Escadres of the French Air Force" label="Escadres"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724252" start="3221" end="3232" title="List of Escadres of the French Air Force" label="12e Escadre"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724252" start="3272" end="3283" title="List of Escadres of the French Air Force" label="4e Escadres"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724252" start="3319" end="3329" title="List of Escadres of the French Air Force" label="2e Escadre"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724252" start="3371" end="3381" title="List of Escadres of the French Air Force" label="4e Escadre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8353996" start="3642" end="3661" title="Dassault Mystère IV" label="Dassault Mystère IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q169438" start="3884" end="3898" title="Fouga Magister" label="Fouga Magister"/>
<link wikidata="Q313740" start="4133" end="4159" title="Dassault/Dornier Alpha Jet" label="Dassault/Dornier Alpha Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4325" end="4338" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560743" start="4478" end="4492" title="Virginie Guyot" label="Virginie Guyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153981" start="4570" end="4607" title="2020 Summer Olympics closing ceremony" label="2020 Summer Olympics closing ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="4657" end="4662" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="4676" end="4688" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="4751" end="4761" title="2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857706" start="4819" end="4832" title="Kleine Brogel Air Base" label="Kleine Brogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q618694" start="5003" end="5008" title="Fighter pilot" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560743" start="5415" end="5429" title="Virginie Guyot" label="Virginie Guyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q643820" start="8316" end="8330" title="Transall C-160" label="Transall C-160"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249514" start="8822" end="8865" title="List of French Air and Space Force aircraft squadrons" label="squadrons of the French Air and Space Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961991" start="9222" end="9260" title="Chief of Staff of the French Air Force" label="Chief of Staff of the French Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q160853" start="10332" end="10345" title="F-84 Thunderjet" label="Republic F-84"/>
<link wikidata="Q513060" start="10373" end="10389" title="Dassault Ouragan" label="Dassault Ouragan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8353996" start="10404" end="10423" title="Dassault Mystère IV" label="Dassault Mystère IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q169438" start="10438" end="10452" title="Fouga Magister" label="Fouga Magister"/>
<link wikidata="Q313740" start="10467" end="10501" title="Dassault-Breguet/Dornier Alpha Jet" label="Dassault-Breguet/Dornier Alpha Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q351346" start="10755" end="10776" title="Chief Warrant Officer" label="Chief Warrant Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47465" start="11175" end="11190" title="Aix-en-Provence" label="Aix-en-Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886512" start="11283" end="11309" title="Salon-de-Provence Air Base" label="Salon-de-Provence Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q184159" start="11409" end="11414" title="Niort" label="Niort"/>
<link wikidata="Q212901" start="11642" end="11651" title="Annemasse" label="Annemasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q22129" start="12041" end="12047" title="Cameri" label="Cameri"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12465" end="12467" title=":fr:Aérodrome d&amp;#x27;Orange Plan de Dieu" label="fr"/>
<link wikidata="Q187796" start="12474" end="12490" title="Orange, Vaucluse" label="Orange, Vaucluse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432351" start="12815" end="12832" title="Perpignan Airport" label="Perpignan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q982005" start="13149" end="13162" title="Nicolas Hulot" label="Nicolas Hulot"/>
<link wikidata="Q106529" start="13357" end="13368" title="Alain Delon" label="Alain Delon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573871" start="13442" end="13455" title="Yves Mourousi" label="Yves Mourousi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186828" start="13491" end="13511" title="13 heures" label="Journal de 13 heures"/>
<link wikidata="Q214683" start="13515" end="13518" title="TF1" label="TF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q933434" start="13922" end="13936" title="Michel Drucker" label="Michel Drucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11485" start="14769" end="14786" title="Jean-Claude Killy" label="Jean-Claude Killy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9642" start="14819" end="14839" title="1968 Winter Olympics" label="1968 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9660" start="14892" end="14912" title="1992 Winter Olympics" label="1992 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159469" start="14921" end="14932" title="Albertville" label="Albertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910" start="15198" end="15225" title="Albert II, Prince of Monaco" label="Albert II, Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q725694" start="15437" end="15451" title="David Douillet" label="David Douillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q143945" start="15799" end="15810" title="Carla Bruni" label="Carla Bruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q329" start="15844" end="15859" title="Nicolas Sarkozy" label="Nicolas Sarkozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560743" start="15923" end="15928" title="Virginie Guyot" label="Guyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349233" start="16114" end="16131" title="Thierry Dusautoir" label="Thierry Dusautoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q434205" start="16578" end="16596" title="Jean-Loup Chrétien" label="Jean-Loup Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q254058" start="16601" end="16615" title="Patrick Baudry" label="Patrick Baudry"/>
<link wikidata="Q48965718" start="16870" end="16884" title="Major (France)" label="Major (France)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961991" start="16886" end="16924" title="Chief of Staff of the French Air Force" label="Chief of Staff of the French Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249514" start="16926" end="16979" title="List of French Air and Space Force aircraft squadrons" label="List of French Air and Space Force aircraft squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724252" start="16981" end="17021" title="List of Escadres of the French Air Force" label="List of Escadres of the French Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q371917" start="17023" end="17043" title="Escadrille Lafayette" label="Escadrille Lafayette"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816767" wikidata="Q6497929" url="?curid=816767" title="Officer cadet">
<text>Officer cadet is a rank held by military cadets during their training to become commissioned officers. In the United Kingdom, the rank is also used by members of University Service Units such as the University Officers&#x27; Training Corps.

The term officer trainee is used interchangeably in some countries.

== Australia ==
The Australian Defence Force follows the same usage as the British military system, using the rank of officer cadet (for the Australian Army (OCDT) and the Royal Australian Air Force (OFFCDT)), for personnel undergoing initial officer training. Unlike midshipmen in the Royal Australian Navy and officer cadets in the Royal Australian Air Force who hold a commission, officer cadets in the Australian Army do not yet hold a permanent commission, and are not saluted or referred to as &quot;sir&quot; or &quot;ma&#x27;am&quot;. They do however hold probationary commissions. Officer cadets in the Australian Army are subordinate to warrant officers and officers and address them as &quot;sir&quot; or &quot;ma&#x27;am&quot;. As officer cadets are appointed to their positions, they are technically superior to some other ranks, although they will typically not have direct subordinates.

Initial officer training can occur through either single-service institutions, such as the Royal Australian Naval College, Royal Military College, Duntroon, or the Officers&#x27; Training School RAAF, or through the tri-service Australian Defence Force Academy (ADFA). The ranks of officer cadet, staff cadet, and midshipman are primarily found at these establishments. However, RAAF officer trainees are often appointed to a higher rank while undergoing their initial training course at OTS if they have prior military experience, either as officer cadets prior to their initial officer course, or at airman rank. Officer cadets are also appointed to the Australian Army Reserve where training is conducted on a part-time basis at various University Regiments around the country.

Australian Army Reserve officer cadets must pass various training courses (conducted at different barracks around Australia) throughout their training with the final module completed at the Royal Military College, Duntroon before being commissioned.

At ADFA, upon completion of all academic training through the &quot;UNSW@ADFA&quot;, military training and subsequent training at other military establishments, officer cadets from the RAAF are promoted to a higher junior officer rank, while those from the Australian Army spend another year at the Royal Military College, Duntroon before being commissioned.

Pilots, air traffic controllers and air combat officers joining the RAAF directly through the Officers&#x27; Training School (without going to ADFA) also start their career as an officer cadet. Once they have completed their employment training (2FTS, SATC and SAW respectively), they are promoted. 
This will change however, as of May 2018, where all graduates from OTS will graduate with a minimum rank of PLTOFF. This will mean that the OFFCDT rank will be used only during initial military training.

== Canada ==
In the Canadian Armed Forces, the rank of officer cadet (OCdt), or in French, is held by beginning officers, as well as students attending the Royal Military College of Canada in Kingston, Ontario, the Royal Military College Saint-Jean, Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, Quebec, or a civilian university through the Regular Officer Training Plan. The Royal Canadian Navy uses the equivalent rank, naval cadet (NCdt), or in French, in lieu of officer cadet.

Some officer cadets, who are going through Regular Officer Training Plan, are highly qualified in their military occupation. However, those officers are ineligible to receive a commission until holding a university degree.

Naval cadets and officer cadets in the Canadian Armed Forces are subordinate officers, but generally billet or mess with commissioned officers. They have yet to be granted the King&#x27;s commission which would make them commissioned officers, and as such are not to be saluted by non-commissioned members.

The rank insignia for the Royal Canadian Navy is a narrow gold braid (6 mm; note difference with standard braid size). This gives rise to the somewhat derogatory term &#x27;quarter-inch admiral&#x27;. In the Canadian Army, the rank insignia is one pip on a white band. A narrow pearl grey braid (6 mm) is used in the Royal Canadian Air Force, which is worn on the cuff of the service dress jacket, and on the slip-ons of all other uniforms. Cap insignia are limited to the Canadian Armed Forces brass badge earned through the Basic Military Officer Qualification course, the Royal Military College badge for students enrolled at one of the two colleges, or the appropriate badge representing the personnel branch or regiment for officer cadets with prior service as non-commissioned members.

== France ==

In the French Armed Forces, the posting, named « &quot;élève officer&quot; » or &#x27;student officer&#x27; in French, is generally given to officers in training in their first months of education. They are eventually promoted to the rank of aspirant or officer candidate. While both positions are quite comparable, aspirant is an actual rank, meaning the officer-in-training can hold effective authority, if ordered, on non-commissioned members of the military.

== Indonesia ==

In the Indonesian service academies (military, naval, air force), there is a ranking system associated to the cadets training and studying in the academy. The length term is 4 years and is divided into 5 grades of the cadet&#x27;s rank, starting from the lowest:

* &quot;Prajurit Taruna/Kadet/Karbol&quot; (Cadet Private), 1st year (4 months)
* &quot;Kopral Taruna/Kadet/Karbol&quot; (Cadet Corporal), 1st year (8 months)
* &quot;Sersan Taruna/Kadet/Karbol&quot; (Cadet Sergeant), 2nd year
* &quot;Sersan Mayor Dua Taruna/Kadet/Karbol&quot; (Cadet Second Sergeant Major), 3rd year
* &quot;Sersan Mayor Satu Taruna/Kadet/Karbol&quot; (Cadet First Sergeant Major), 4th year

&quot;Taruna&quot; refers to cadets in the military academy, &quot;Kadet&quot; refers to cadets in the naval academy, and &quot;Karbol&quot; refers to cadets in the air force academy, respectively.

== Pakistan ==

In the Pakistan Army, potential servicemen training to be officers at the Pakistan Military Academy (PMA) are known as Gentlemen Cadets. Gentlemen Cadets join PMA Kakul either as a direct entry from civilian colleges or from Military Cadet colleges after going through an InterServices Selection Board.

GCs undergo a two-year military training program at PMA Kakul, equally divided into four semesters. The Academic Degree program for Gentlemen Cadets at PMA is a 4-year BS Engineering Sciences which compromises of 8 semesters, four of which they complete at PMA and the remaining four they study as second lieutenants at Human Resource Development Centres after the Grant of Commission from PMA.

== Singapore ==
In the Singapore Armed Forces, potential servicemen training to be officers are known as officer cadets in the Army and Air Force, while those in the Navy are known as midshipmen. All officer cadets and midshipmen receive tri-service initial training in Officer Cadet School before being sent to the appropriate training schools. They return to Officer Cadet School for their commissioning parade.

Officer cadets and midshipmen wear one, two, or three white stripes on their shoulderboards to denote their seniority. The graduating class of officer cadets wear peaked caps and berets depending on their vocations, and are accorded the privilege of being addressed &quot;sir&quot; by junior officer cadets. At this point, they are given more privileges and responsibilities commensurate with their seniority.

Officer cadets take turns to hold various administrative and exercise appointments. Administrative appointment-holders&#x27; shoulderboards have additional loops and whorls known as &quot;fishes&quot; in addition to their existing one, two or three stripes. Exercise appointment-holders wear yellow rank insignia appropriate to the appointment of the officer cadet. For example, an exercise platoon commander will wear two bars of a lieutenant, and his exercise platoon sergeant will wear a brassard with first sergeant&#x27;s chevrons.

== United Kingdom ==
In the United Kingdom, the rank of officer cadet is held by trainee officers in the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, at Britannia Royal Naval College in Dartmouth, and the Royal Air Force College at RAF Cranwell, as well as students who are part of the Defence Technical Undergraduate Scheme (DTUS) and is also used by personnel of University Royal Naval Units, University Officer Training Corps, and University Air Squadrons.

They are referred to and addressed as, for example, &quot;Mr Smith&quot; or &quot;Miss Smith&quot;, or more formally as &quot;Officer Cadet Smith&quot;. As they do not hold the King&#x27;s commission, they are not saluted.

=== Royal Navy ===
In Britannia Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, the rank is non-substantive and only used in the initial phases of training, after which officers use their substantive rank of Midshipman. Formerly, cadets at the Royal Naval College, Osborne, and Dartmouth, had the substantive rank of &quot;naval cadet&quot;, or &quot;cadet, RN&quot; until passing out of Dartmouth as a midshipman.

Royal Navy officer cadets wear shoulder flashes with a white square after they complete the Militarisation phase of training (15 weeks). Formerly, the insignia was a navy blue patch on both sides of the coat collar, with a white buttonhole and gold button, similar to a midshipman&#x27;s patch. They continue to wear these tabs until they pass out of BRNC at the end of their initial training. The No.1 uniform bears the rank the cadet will hold upon completing initial officer training.

==== Royal Marines ====
In the Royal Marines, the rank is held by those undergoing the Young Officer Training Course, the 15-month training course which is undertaken in various stages at the Commando Training Centre Royal Marines, Britannia Royal Naval College and in the United States.

=== Army ===

The rank of officer cadet is held by those undergoing either the Regular Commissioning Course at Sandhurst or the Army Reserve Commissioning Course holding an AOSB main board pass. The Army Reserve Commissioning Course is administered by Sandhurst but run in modules divided between Sandhurst and Army Reserve Regional Training Centres. Until the Second World War, cadets at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst were referred to as gentlemen cadets.

The rank is also held by members of the University Officers&#x27; Training Corps (UOTC), (an army reserve unit for university students) University students who join UOTC will undertake Reserve Officer training modules. Members of the UOTC are officer cadets and are paid when on duty.

====Rank insignia====
The Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, which trains all British Army officer cadets (and some from overseas militaries), appoints junior under officers (identified by an Austrian knot above a single bar) and senior under officers (SUO) (who wear an Austrian knot above two bars). In practice, senior under officers are not at present appointed.

Cadets in the University Officers&#x27; Training Corps wear zero to three horizontal bars on the rank slide. Under officer is an appointment, not a rank, and outside OTCs they only have the status of ordinary officer cadets.

=== Royal Air Force ===
The rank of officer cadet is held by those undergoing initial officer training at the Royal Air Force College Cranwell. Students undergoing the Foundation Degree course at DCAE Cosford, having been selected for service as engineer officers from the ranks, hold their previous rank while wearing officer cadet rank insignia for the duration, prior to attending initial officer training. The rank is also held by members of University Air Squadrons.

==== Rank insignia ====

Royal Air Force officer cadets wear differing rank tabs displaying each term. No red band is on the rank tab during the first 10-week term at RAF College Cranwell, a single red band is adopted in term two. Two red bands are worn in term three. &#x27;A&#x27; Squadron is currently the home of the E Flight/Section (injuries flight), Aircrew cadets (NCA), Specialist Entrants and Re Entrants Course (SERE) and DELTA flight (additional leadership and officer qualities training flight). Non-commissioned aircrew graduate as sergeant aircrew, not officers; this status is denoted by an eagle and the phrase Aircrew Cadet on their otherwise plain rank tab and the RAF airman&#x27;s cap badge with a white patch behind. Members of all squadrons who are injured are moved to E Flight/Section and wear a white band on the rank tab.

On the service dress and mess dress uniforms, RAF officer cadets wear the braid of the rank they will hold on graduation. However, gorget patches (rectangular white tabs with one triangular end) are worn on both lapels. The only exception to this is the female mess dress, where they are worn on the sleeve. The only other distinctive identifiers are on headdress – a white patch on the beret behind the badge. The cap badge is the same as that worn by a commissioned officer (between the ranks of pilot officer and group captain), but with a white band around the cap. This band is removed on graduation.

A blue band on the white background is also used to denote officer cadets of the University Air Squadrons (UASs) who are receiving Bursaries from the Royal Air Force. UAS cadets who are not in receipt of scholarships wear just the white band with no coloured band. UAS officer cadets wear airmen&#x27;s headdress with a white band.

== United States ==
The United States Army, Coast Guard and Air Force use the rank &quot;cadet&quot; for officer candidates in the Army and Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) programs at civilian colleges and universities and for cadets at the United States Military Academy (USMA), United States Air Force Academy (USAFA), United States Coast Guard Academy (USCGA), and Air Force Officer Training School (OTS). The United States Navy uses the rank of &quot;midshipman&quot; for officer candidates in the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps at civilian colleges or universities or United States Naval Academy (USNA) who are pursuing commissions as officers in both the Navy and the Marine Corps, as well as those enrolled in the United States Merchant Marine Academy, the latter at USMMA typically being commissioned as Reserve officers for service in either the active duty Navy or in the Navy Reserve.

High school students who, with few exceptions, are under the age of 18 in the Junior Reserve Officers&#x27; Training Corps in U.S. high schools and preparatory schools, the United States Naval Sea Cadet Corps, and the Cadet Program of the Civil Air Patrol are also addressed as cadet, but have no actual military status.

The term &quot;officer candidate&quot; is used for others seeking a commission as an officer. The term &quot;officer candidate&quot; is generally used for officer candidates who are seeking their commission by means other than ROTC or a service academy, such as through Army, Navy, Marine Corps or Coast Guard Officer Candidate School (OCS). This includes civilian college and university students in the Marine Corps&#x27; Platoon Leader Class (PLC) program, the Coast Guard&#x27;s Student Pre-Commissioning Initiative (CSPI) where students attend those services&#x27; respective officer candidate schools. It also previously included the Navy&#x27;s since discontinued Aviation Officer Candidate School (AOCS) for civilian college and university graduates and its Aviation Reserve Officer Candidate Program (AVROC) program for college/university seniors and college graduates, the latter having been embedded in the AOCS program. Another term, &quot;officer trainee&quot;, was previously used by the Air Force&#x27;s OTS program until that term was changed to cadet in 2015.

Officers commissioned in to the Space Force are typically accessed via USAF commissioning programs such as the U.S. Air Force Academy, Air Force ROTC, and Air Force Officer Training School.

The term &quot;cadet&quot; may also be used generally to refer to students at a private military academy, or members of a youth group associated with the military who are receiving preliminary training with the intention of possibly joining the military, sometimes at a younger age than they would be able to do otherwise.

Officer cadets are generally paid below the standard pay rates for junior officers, but receive some of the rights and responsibilities of a junior officer during their training. Academy cadets and midshipmen are considered Geneva Conventions Category III personnel, the same as warrant officers and junior officers/company grade officers below the rank of major in the Army, Air Force, Marine Corps and Space Force and below the rank of lieutenant commander in the Navy and Coast Guard.

=== Reserve Officers&#x27; Training Corps ===

Cadets and midshipmen in the ROTC programs generally hold training ranks equivalent to their branch&#x27;s enlisted ranks during their first three years of training and officer-equivalent ranks during their senior year, except in the Air Force where they hold officer-equivalent rank during their junior and senior years. In addition, a small amount of NROTC midshipmen 2/C may hold officer ranks, limited by the amount of available billets. Cadets or midshipmen holding cadet-enlisted rank must salute cadet or midshipman officers within their own branch of the service.

Cadet officer ranks in US Army ROTC are denoted by &quot;pips&quot; – one to three circular insignia denoting the company-grade equivalents, one to three diamond-shaped insignia denoting the field-grade equivalents. For midshipman ranks, both junior and senior officer equivalents wear from one to six 1/4&quot; gold stripes or bars.

US Air Force cadets wear rank shoulder boards or lapel insignia which carry miniature insignia identical to those worn by officer trainees at USAF Officer Training School.

=== Service academies ===
Each U.S. service academy has its own set of insignia, different from their corresponding ROTC program.

==== U.S. Military Academy (West Point) ====

United States Military Academy &quot;class insignia&quot; are worn on the collar and epaulets of certain uniforms. An enameled shield bearing a Greek sword surmounted by the helmet of Pallas, worn on the left collar or above cadet rank stripes/bars on epaulets, is the standard class insignia for third-class (yellow shield), second-class (grey shield), or first-class (black shield) cadets. On traditional &quot;dress grey&quot; and &quot;full dress grey&quot; uniforms and overcoats, the class insignia is indicated by the number of service stripes (one to three) denoting completed years at the academy. These stripes are located on the lower sleeve for the under two classes and on the upper sleeve for the upper two classes. Visitors are sometimes confused to see cadets early in the academic year wearing the insignia of cadet private first class - such cadets are often reduced in rank (for any of a variety of reasons), but have already completed their first year and as such are no longer cadet privates (&quot;plebes&quot;).

Rank within the Corps of Cadets is denoted by collar insignia &quot;railroad tracks&quot;, a number of black enamel bars with silver outline, or epaulet stripes from one (for cadet corporal) to six (for cadet captain in certain command and staff roles) on certain uniforms. On the traditional dress-grey-based uniforms and overcoats, chevrons denote rank in the Corps. A cadet corporal wears two chevrons on the lower sleeve. A cadet sergeant wears two chevrons on the upper sleeve, a cadet lieutenant three, and a cadet captain from four to six chevrons. For cadets in the rank of cadet sergeant and up, various combinations of stars, diamonds, rockers or arcs, and other devices, are used on the sleeves to denote specific positions/jobs. The title of cadet captain is used for all cadets wearing four or more stripes/bars. The brigade commander, also called the first captain, wears six stripes/bars/sleeve chevrons with a gold star 

==== U.S. Air Force Academy ====

The rank of United States Air Force Academy cadets is denoted by the insignia on their shoulderboards in all &quot;blues&quot; uniforms, including &quot;blues&quot;, service dress, overcoats, mess dress and parade dress. All cadet shoulder boards carry the heraldic nebuly device, (commonly referred to as &quot;clouds&quot; by cadets). Third class cadets have one thin bar (ground) underneath the clouds; second and first class cadets wear two thin bars, one each above (horizon) and below the clouds. Additional chevrons denote cadet non-commissioned officer ranks, while additional bars denote cadet officer ranks. An exception to this is the unranked cadets, who are on probation of some kind (academic, athletic, military, honor, etc.). For unranked third class cadets, only ground and cloud are present; for unranked second class cadets only ground, cloud, and horizon are present; for unranked first class cadets only ground, cloud, horizon and one thin bar are present. Vertical diamonds on the boards of second class cadets indicate either squadron or group superintendent positions. Horizontal diamonds on the same indicate squadron first sergeant positions. Stars on first class cadet boards indicate either flight, squadron, or group command positions. If multiple stars are present, the cadet is either the vice wing commander (two stars), or the wing commander (three stars), the senior cadet in the Wing. The only second class cadet rank with a star present is the Wing Command Chief, the senior second class cadet.

On the current Operational Camouflage Pattern, Air Force Academy cadets wear soft spice brown rank insignia on the center of the chest. Formerly, Air Force Academy cadets wore metal blue bars or chevrons on the lapels of the (now retired) Battle Dress Uniform and Airman Battle Uniform to denote their rank. While fourth class cadets wear no insignia on combat uniforms, they are awarded a Prop and Wings after recognition, to be worn on the flight cap and on the lapels of service dress. Third class cadets wear one or two chevrons on each lapel, signifying that they are cadet/staff sergeants or cadet/technical sergeants, respectively. Second class cadets wear three to five chevrons, indicating ranks from cadet/master sergeant to cadet/chief master sergeant. First class cadets function as cadet officers and wear one to six bars on their lapels, corresponding to ranks from cadet/second lieutenant to cadet/colonel.

==== U.S. Naval Academy (Annapolis) and U.S. Merchant Marine Academy (Kings Point) ====

The rank insignia of the United States Naval Academy and the United States Merchant Marine Academy is a combination of sleeve, shoulder and collar insignia, similar to that used by the Naval ROTC units.

==== United States Coast Guard Academy ====
There are two types of insignia used by Coast Guard Academy cadets.

The first is a metal pin-on device. It is a colored shield with a gold anchor with a silver star above it. The color of the background denotes the class. The colors are green for 4/c, red for 3/c, white for 2/c and blue for 1/c. The colors all have historic meanings: red and green represent the running lights on a vessel; white signifies the white lights used as navigation lights, signifying the role as guides for the 4/c; blue represents the blue lights of law enforcement vessels that that 1/c are about to serve aboard.

The second type of insignia is shoulder boards. All cadet shoulder boards have a slightly smaller version of the shield found on officer shoulder boards, and stripes denoting class year or 1/c leadership positions. The 4/c have no stripes, 3/c 1 diagonal stripe, 2/c 2 diagonal stripes, and 1/c 1 horizontal stripe. First class leadership positions have increasing numbers of horizontal stripes, up to six for the Regimental Commander or Summer Battalion Commander, as well as a matching number of sleeve stripes on the Service Dress Blues and Parade Dress Blue uniforms.

== See also ==
* Comparative military ranks
* RAF officer ranks
* Cadet Corps (Russia)

== References ==
== External links ==
* OfficerCadet.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6497929" start="0" end="13" title="Officer cadet" label="Officer cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q56019" start="19" end="23" title="military rank" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q316498" start="41" end="46" title="cadet" label="cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="80" end="100" title="commissioned officer" label="commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="110" end="124" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886442" start="162" end="186" title="University Service Units" label="University Service Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q10607900" start="199" end="239" title="University Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="University Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497929" start="251" end="266" title="Officer cadet" label="officer trainee"/>
<link wikidata="Q625657" start="331" end="355" title="Australian Defence Force" label="Australian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="386" end="409" title="#United Kingdom" label="British military system"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="452" end="467" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="483" end="509" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q741691" start="597" end="618" title="Royal Australian Navy" label="Royal Australian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="761" end="771" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002508" start="1305" end="1335" title="Royal Australian Naval College" label="Royal Australian Naval College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171074" start="1337" end="1369" title="Royal Military College, Duntroon" label="Royal Military College, Duntroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079457" start="1378" end="1413" title="Officers&amp;#x27; Training School RAAF" label="Officers&amp;#x27; Training School RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q371370" start="1442" end="1474" title="Australian Defence Force Academy" label="Australian Defence Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862909" start="1870" end="1893" title="Australian Army Reserve" label="Australian Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q734764" start="2315" end="2319" title="University of New South Wales" label="UNSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="3132" end="3153" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565941" start="3268" end="3300" title="Royal Military College of Canada" label="Royal Military College of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="3304" end="3321" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983872" start="3327" end="3360" title="Royal Military College Saint-Jean" label="Royal Military College Saint-Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631776" start="3864" end="3883" title="subordinate officer" label="subordinate officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="4133" end="4152" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="4315" end="4328" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="4424" end="4448" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q10423740" start="4516" end="4523" title="slip-on" label="slip-on"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866983" start="4633" end="4669" title="Basic Military Officer Qualification" label="Basic Military Officer Qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170688" start="4803" end="4819" title="personnel branch" label="personnel branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q477986" start="4921" end="4940" title="French Armed Forces" label="French Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q737432" start="5156" end="5164" title="aspirant" label="aspirant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5413" end="5430" title="Military academy#Indonesia" label="service academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078095" start="6291" end="6304" title="Pakistan Army" label="Pakistan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q59321" start="6358" end="6383" title="Pakistan Military Academy" label="Pakistan Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074568" start="7007" end="7029" title="Singapore Armed Forces" label="Singapore Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081230" start="7111" end="7115" title="Singapore Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002451" start="7120" end="7129" title="Republic of Singapore Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531890" start="7150" end="7154" title="Republic of Singapore Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="7168" end="7178" title="midshipmen" label="midshipmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874461" start="7254" end="7274" title="Officer Cadet School (Singapore)" label="Officer Cadet School"/>
<link wikidata="Q211718" start="7578" end="7583" title="beret" label="beret"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="8243" end="8253" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12374440" start="8272" end="8288" title="platoon sergeant" label="platoon sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398218" start="8301" end="8309" title="brassard" label="brassard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16711404" start="8315" end="8329" title="first sergeant" label="first sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8376" end="8390" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q575618" start="8453" end="8485" title="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst" label="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795492" start="8490" end="8519" title="Britannia Royal Naval College" label="Britannia Royal Naval College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007083" start="8523" end="8532" title="Dartmouth, Devon" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373601" start="8542" end="8565" title="Royal Air Force College" label="Royal Air Force College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347950" start="8569" end="8581" title="RAF Cranwell" label="RAF Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894911" start="8702" end="8729" title="University Royal Naval Unit" label="University Royal Naval Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10607900" start="8732" end="8765" title="Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="University Officer Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894504" start="8771" end="8794" title="University Air Squadron" label="University Air Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795492" start="9044" end="9073" title="Britannia Royal Naval College" label="Britannia Royal Naval College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="9214" end="9224" title="Midshipman" label="Midshipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103215" start="9250" end="9278" title="Royal Naval College, Osborne" label="Royal Naval College, Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795492" start="9284" end="9293" title="Royal Naval College, Dartmouth" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="9942" end="9955" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152251" start="10103" end="10141" title="Commando Training Centre Royal Marines" label="Commando Training Centre Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="10328" end="10340" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q15189133" start="10373" end="10377" title="AOSB" label="AOSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309174" start="10524" end="10548" title="Regional Training Centre" label="Regional Training Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10561" end="10577" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573631" start="10593" end="10625" title="Royal Military Academy, Woolwich" label="Royal Military Academy, Woolwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020147" start="10634" end="10667" title="Royal Military College, Sandhurst" label="Royal Military College, Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q10607900" start="10747" end="10787" title="University Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="University Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q575618" start="11019" end="11051" title="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst" label="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883124" start="11144" end="11164" title="Under Officer" label="junior under officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619558" start="11184" end="11197" title="Austrian knot" label="Austrian knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883124" start="11222" end="11242" title="Under Officer" label="senior under officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10423740" start="11457" end="11467" title="rank slide" label="rank slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373601" start="11696" end="11728" title="Royal Air Force College Cranwell" label="Royal Air Force College Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120040" start="11782" end="11794" title="DCAE Cosford" label="DCAE Cosford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894504" start="12032" end="12055" title="University Air Squadron" label="University Air Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="12605" end="12613" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975547" start="12761" end="12770" title="cap badge" label="cap badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539356" start="13040" end="13046" title="gorget" label="gorget"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975547" start="13324" end="13333" title="cap badge" label="cap badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="13425" end="13438" title="group captain" label="group captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="13873" end="13891" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="13893" end="13904" title="United States Coast Guard" label="Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="13909" end="13918" title="United States Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="13999" end="14029" title="Reserve Officer Training Corps" label="Reserve Officer Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="14106" end="14136" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="14145" end="14176" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q650935" start="14186" end="14219" title="United States Coast Guard Academy" label="United States Coast Guard Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697932" start="14233" end="14266" title="Air Force Officer Training School" label="Air Force Officer Training School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="14278" end="14296" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="14320" end="14330" title="midshipman" label="midshipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981909" start="14367" end="14403" title="Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps" label="Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="14444" end="14471" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="14532" end="14536" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="14545" end="14557" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806541" start="14592" end="14629" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy" label="United States Merchant Marine Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="14753" end="14765" title="United States Navy Reserve" label="Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362101" start="14846" end="14890" title="Junior Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Junior Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890801" start="14941" end="14976" title="United States Naval Sea Cadet Corps" label="United States Naval Sea Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q781210" start="15007" end="15023" title="Civil Air Patrol" label="Civil Air Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q329741" start="15105" end="15122" title="officer candidate" label="officer candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="15317" end="15321" title="Reserve Officer Training Corps" label="ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15400" end="15424" title="Officer Candidate School#United States" label="Officer Candidate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153892" start="15760" end="15793" title="Officer Candidate School (United States Navy)" label="Aviation Officer Candidate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088961" start="16199" end="16210" title="United States Space Force" label="Space Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18011" end="18027" title="Midshipman#U.S. Navy midshipman class and rank insignia" label="midshipman ranks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18126" end="18138" title="Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps#Cadet Rank" label="US Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697932" start="18273" end="18296" title="Officer Training School" label="Officer Training School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889202" start="20488" end="20534" title="United States Air Force Academy Cadet Insignia" label="rank of United States Air Force Academy cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455748" start="20650" end="20663" title="service dress" label="service dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278236" start="20676" end="20686" title="mess dress" label="mess dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088910" start="20750" end="20756" title="nebuly" label="nebuly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509800" start="22031" end="22061" title="Operational Camouflage Pattern" label="Operational Camouflage Pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q739730" start="22255" end="22275" title="Battle Dress Uniform" label="Battle Dress Uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q408838" start="22280" end="22301" title="Airman Battle Uniform" label="Airman Battle Uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250042" start="22406" end="22420" title="Prop and Wings" label="Prop and Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337825" start="22595" end="22609" title="staff sergeant" label="staff sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692294" start="22620" end="22638" title="technical sergeant" label="technical sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215042" start="22732" end="22747" title="master sergeant" label="master sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q32299913" start="22757" end="22778" title="Chief Master Sergeant (United States)" label="chief master sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="22902" end="22919" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="22929" end="22936" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23032" end="23126" title="Midshipman#United States Naval and Merchant Marine Academies" label="rank insignia of the United States Naval Academy and the United States Merchant Marine Academy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24393" end="24412" title="United States Coast Guard#Uniforms" label="Service Dress Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753609" start="24463" end="24489" title="Comparative military ranks" label="Comparative military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275704" start="24492" end="24509" title="RAF officer ranks" label="RAF officer ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q580056" start="24512" end="24532" title="Cadet Corps (Russia)" label="Cadet Corps (Russia)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816780" wikidata="Q661496" url="?curid=816780" title="Optimist (dinghy)">
<text>The Optimist is a small, single-handed sailing dinghy intended for use by young people up to the age of 15.

The Optimist is one of the two most popular sailing dinghies in the world, with over 150,000 boats officially registered with the class and many more built but never registered. It is sailed in over 120 countries and it is one of only two sailboats as an International Class by World Sailing exclusively for sailors under 16.

==Origin==
The Optimist was designed in 1947 either by American Clark Mills or a Canadian sailor Gordon Reid a member of the Royal Canadian Yacht Club and the Clearwater Optimist Club at the request of the Clearwater Florida Optimist service club following a proposal by Major Clifford McKay to offer low-cost sailing for young people. The Optimist Club ran a soap box derby, but wanted more than a single-day event. Thus they were looking for a low-cost equivalent for sailing. The ultimate design was a simple pram that could be built from two 4&#x27; x 8&#x27; sheets of plywood, that was donated to the Optimists.

The design was slightly modified and introduced to Europe by Axel Damgaard, and spread outwards across Europe from Scandinavia. The design was standardized in 1960 and became a strict one-design in 1995.

The forerunner of the Optimist was the 8&#x27; Sabot (dinghy).

==Description==

===Rig===

The single sail of the Optimist is sprit-rigged. Two battens stiffen the leech. It is secured evenly with ties along the luff to the mast and along the foot to the boom, pulled down tightly by a vang/kicker. The light, slim third spar, the sprit, extends through a loop at the peak of the sail; the bottom rests in the eye of a short cable or string which hangs along the front edge of the mast. Raising and lowering the sprit and adjusting the boom vang and outhaul allow for adaptation of sail trim to a range of wind conditions.

The spars may be made from aluminium or wood, but are invariably aluminium in modern boats.

A monograph-style &quot;IO&quot; insignia (after IODA - the International Optimist Dinghy Association) on the sail is a registered trade-mark and may only be used under licence from the International Optimist Association. Optimists also have a national sail number using the Olympic abbreviation of their country and a sequential numbers. e.g. RSA for South Africa.

===Hull===
The Optimist has a pram hull, originally formed primarily from five pieces of plywood. It was the biggest hull Clark Mills could make from two 4 ft by 8 ft sheets. Just in front of a bulkhead, which partitions the boat nearly in half, is the daggerboard case. Right behind it on the centerline of the hull floor are attached a block and a ratchet block. These anchor the sheet and a block on the boom directly above. At the bow resides a thwart to support the mast which passes through a hole in its centre to the mast step mounted on the centre line of the boat. The painter, a rope used for securing a boat like a mooring line, is usually tied around the mast step.

Buoyancy bags are installed inboard along each side in the front half of the boat and at the stern to provide buoyancy in the event of capsizing. Two straps, known as &quot;hiking straps&quot;, run lengthwise along the floor from the bulkhead to the stern. These and a tiller extension allow a sailor to hang off the side for weight distribution—commonly called &quot;hiking out&quot;. This can be crucial to keeping the boat more upright during heavy air, allowing greater speed through the water.

The vast majority of hulls today are made of fiberglass, although a few wooden hulls are still made.

===Daggerboard and Rudder===
The rudder and daggerboard are made from fibreglass though plywood may be used for training and with wooden hulls.

===Performance===
While younger, lighter sailors begin in Optimists, competitive sailors usually weigh between 35 and 55 kg (or between 80 lbs. and 125 lbs.). Optimists can be sailed by children from age 8 to 15. This wide range of weights which is not typical of most dinghies is made possible by different cuts of sail. Due to its inherent stability, unstayed rig, robust construction and relatively small sail, the Optimist can be sailed in winds of up to 30 knots.

Optimists are manufactured to the same specification by over 20 builders on four continents. There is strong evidence that hulls from different builders are the same speed. Sails and spars of differing qualities enable sailors to upgrade their equipment as they progress.

The Optimist is the slowest dinghy in the world according to the RYA Portsmouth Yardstick scheme, with a Portsmouth number of 1646. Its equivalent rating in the US scheme is a D-PN of 123.6.

==Competition==

The Optimist is the biggest youth racing class in the world. As well as the annual world championship the class also has six continental championships, attended by a total of over 850 sailors a year. Many of the top world Optimist sailors have become world-class Laser Radial or 4.7 sailors after they &quot;age-out&quot; but many also excel in double-handers such as the 420 and 29er.
At the 2020 Olympics at least 75% of the boat skipper medalists were former Optimist world or continental championship sailors.

The first World Championship was held in Great Britain in 1962 and it has grown to over 60 countries participating. The changing pattern of the strongest countries can be seen from the results of the Nations Cup. For the first 20 years, the class was dominated by sailors from the Scandinavian countries, with 13 world champions. In the 1990s Argentina was by far the dominant country but, following standardisation of the boat and improved coaching standards internationally, many countries have excelled as shown in the results below. Recently S.E. Asian countries and the United States have produced strong teams. The Optimist World Championships include Team Racing which is increasingly popular.

Continental Championships are held on each continent (the Oceanian held jointly with the Asian). Results can be found at.

Open Events: With competitive charter boats easily available and low-cost airfares, there are scores of open international regattas. The largest is the Lake Garda Easter Meeting with over 1,000 Optimists participating.
==Manufacture==
In 2017, over 2,200 boats were produced by around 30 builders worldwide; from 2012 to 2017, over 13,500 boats were built.

==Events==
===World Championship===


==See also==
*IceOptimist—iceboat with the Optimist rig

Related development
*El Toro (dinghy)
*Holdfast Trainer
*Naples Sabot
*Sabot (dinghy)
*US Sabot

==References==
==External links==

* International Optimist Dinghy Association
* IODA Results Archive
* World Sailing
* List of National Class Associations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q661496" start="4" end="12" title="Optimist (dinghy)" label="Optimist"/>
<link wikidata="Q106546924" start="39" end="53" title="dinghy sailing" label="sailing dinghy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511280" start="364" end="383" title="International Class" label="International Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q381929" start="387" end="400" title="World Sailing" label="World Sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078965" start="500" end="511" title="Clark Mills (boatbuilder and designer)" label="Clark Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098958" start="661" end="682" title="Optimist International" label="Optimist service club"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634057" start="796" end="810" title="soap box derby" label="soap box derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238231" start="948" end="952" title="pram (boat)" label="pram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307792" start="1239" end="1249" title="one-design" label="one-design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396291" start="1307" end="1321" title="Sabot (dinghy)" label="Sabot (dinghy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999" start="1363" end="1367" title="sail" label="sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304354" start="1387" end="1399" title="spritsail" label="sprit-rigged"/>
<link wikidata="Q352376" start="1405" end="1411" title="Parts of a sail" label="batten"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1425" end="1430" title="Parts of a sail#Non-triangular fore and aft sails" label="leech"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1473" end="1477" title="Parts of a sail#Non-triangular fore and aft sails" label="luff"/>
<link wikidata="Q331744" start="1485" end="1489" title="mast (sailing)" label="mast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1504" end="1508" title="Parts of a sail#Non-triangular fore and aft sails" label="foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q811491" start="1516" end="1520" title="boom (sailing)" label="boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339752" start="1547" end="1558" title="boom vang" label="vang/kicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429522" start="1582" end="1586" title="spar (sailing)" label="spar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1629" end="1633" title="Parts of a sail#Non-triangular fore and aft sails" label="peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238231" start="2375" end="2379" title="Pram (boat)" label="pram"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053830" start="2539" end="2547" title="bulkhead (partition)" label="bulkhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482662" start="2598" end="2609" title="daggerboard" label="daggerboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q742368" start="2683" end="2688" title="block (sailing)" label="block"/>
<link wikidata="Q477494" start="2727" end="2732" title="Sheet (sailing)" label="sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="2780" end="2783" title="bow (ship)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q273062" start="3275" end="3280" title="stern" label="stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="3570" end="3580" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="3660" end="3666" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q478756" start="4580" end="4583" title="Royal Yachting Association" label="RYA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879394" start="4584" end="4604" title="Portsmouth Yardstick" label="Portsmouth Yardstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707322" start="4987" end="4999" title="Laser Radial" label="Laser Radial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827350" start="5003" end="5006" title="Laser 4.7" label="4.7"/>
<link wikidata="Q141531" start="5096" end="5099" title="420 (dinghy)" label="420"/>
<link wikidata="Q221976" start="5104" end="5108" title="29er (boat)" label="29er"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6474" end="6515" title="Iceboat#IceOptimist" label="IceOptimist—iceboat with the Optimist rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5352263" start="6538" end="6554" title="El Toro (dinghy)" label="El Toro (dinghy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879669" start="6556" end="6572" title="Holdfast Trainer" label="Holdfast Trainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964981" start="6574" end="6586" title="Naples Sabot" label="Naples Sabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396291" start="6588" end="6602" title="Sabot (dinghy)" label="Sabot (dinghy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113420602" start="6604" end="6612" title="US Sabot" label="US Sabot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816785" wikidata="Q6634348" url="?curid=816785" title="List of popular science books on evolution">
<text>This is a list of [[popular science]] [[book]]s concerning [[evolution]], sorted by surname of the author.


== B ==

* Paul M. Bingham and Joanne Souza (2009). &quot;Death from a Distance and the Birth of a Humane Universe: Human Evolution, Behavior, History, and Your Future&quot;.

== C ==
* Sean B. Carroll (2006). &quot;The Making of the Fittest: DNA and the Ultimate Forensic Record of Evolution&quot;.
* Sean B. Carroll (2005). &quot;Endless Forms Most Beautiful: The New Science of Evo Devo&quot;.
* Brian Charlesworth and Deborah Charlesworth (2003). &quot;&quot;.
* Matteo Conti (2008). &quot;The Selfish Cell: An evolutionary defeat&quot;.
* Jerry Coyne (2009). &quot;Why Evolution Is True&quot;.

== D ==
* Charles Darwin (1859). &quot;The Origin of Species&quot;.
* Charles Darwin (1871). &quot;The Descent of Man&quot;.
* Richard Dawkins (1976). &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;.
* Richard Dawkins (1982). &quot;The Extended Phenotype&quot;.
* Richard Dawkins (1986). &quot;The Blind Watchmaker&quot;.
* Richard Dawkins (1995). &quot;River out of Eden&quot;.
* Richard Dawkins (1996). &quot;Climbing Mount Improbable&quot;.
* Richard Dawkins (2004). &quot;The Ancestor&#x27;s Tale&quot;.
* Richard Dawkins (2009). &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth: The Evidence for Evolution&quot;.
* Daniel Dennett (1995). &quot;Darwin&#x27;s Dangerous Idea&quot;.
* Daniel Dennett (2003). &quot;Freedom Evolves&quot;.
* Jared Diamond (1991). &quot;The Third Chimpanzee: The Evolution and Future of the Human Animal &quot;
* Theodosius Dobzhansky (1937; 2nd ed 1941; 3rd ed 1951). &quot;Genetics and the Origin of Species&quot;.

== E ==
* Niles Eldredge (2001). &quot;The Triumph of Evolution: and the Failure of Creationism&quot;.

== F ==
* Daniel J. Fairbanks (2007). &quot;Relics of Eden: The Powerful Evidence of Evolution in Human DNA&quot;.

== G ==
* Ann Gibbons (2007). &quot;The First Human: The Race to Discover Our Earliest Ancestors&quot;.
* Stephen Jay Gould (1977). &quot;Ever Since Darwin&quot;.
* Stephen Jay Gould (1989). &quot;Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History&quot;.
* Stephen Jay Gould (1996). &quot;Full House: The Spread of Excellence from Plato to Darwin&quot;.

== H ==
* Marc Hauser (2006). &quot;Moral Minds&quot;.
* Jay Hosler (2011). &quot;&quot;.
*Julian Huxley (1942). &quot;&quot;.
* Thomas Henry Huxley (1863). &quot;Evidence as to Man&#x27;s Place in Nature&quot;.

== J ==
* Donald Johansson (2006). &quot;From Lucy to Language: Revised, Updated, and Expanded&quot;.
* Shaun Johnston (2017). &quot;Re-thinking What it Means We Evolved: A new framework for universal moral values&quot;.
* Shaun Johnston (2020). &quot;Are You wonderful? Good Science Says, Yes: How to tell good science from bad&quot;.
* Alison Jolly (2001). &quot;Lucy&#x27;s Legacy: Sex and Intelligence in Human Evolution&quot;.
* Steve Jones (1995). &quot;The Language of the Genes&quot;.
* David Starr Jordan (1901). &quot;The Blood of the Nation: A Study in the Decay of Races by the Survival of the Unfit&quot;.
* Joseph Jordania (2006). &quot;Who Asked the First Question?: The Origins of Human Choral Singing, Intelligence, Language and Speech&quot;.
* Joseph Jordania (2011). &quot;Why do People Sing? Music in Human Evolution&quot;.

== K ==
* Marc W. Kirschner and John C. Gerhart (2006). &quot;The Plausibility of Life: Resolving Darwin&#x27;s Dilemma&quot;.
* Peter Kropotkin (1902). &quot;Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution&quot;.
* Arik Kershenbaum (2020). &quot;The Zoologist&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy - What Animals on Earth Reveal about Aliens – and Ourselves&quot;.

== L ==
* Nick Lane (2010). &quot;Life Ascending: The Ten Great Inventions of Evolution&quot;.
* Gabriel E. Lasker (1961). &quot;The Evolution of Man: A Brief Introduction to Physical Anthropology&quot;.
* Daniel Levitin (2008). &quot;The World in Six Songs: How the Musical Brain Created Human Nature&quot;.

== M ==
* John Maynard Smith (1958). &quot;The Theory of Evolution&quot;.
* John Maynard Smith (1972). &quot;On Evolution&quot;.
* John Maynard Smith (1978). &quot;The Evolution of Sex&quot;.
* John Maynard Smith (1982). &quot;Evolution and the Theory of Games&quot;.
* John Maynard Smith (1989). &quot;Evolutionary Genetics&quot;.
* John Maynard Smith and Eörs Szathmáry (1995). &quot;The Major Transitions in Evolution&quot;.
* John Maynard Smith and Eörs Szathmáry (1999). &quot;The Origins of Life: From the Birth of Life to the Origin of Language&quot;.
* Ernst Mayr (2002). &quot;What Evolution Is&quot;.
* Ernst Mayr (2007). &quot;One Long Argument: Charles Darwin and the Genesis of Modern Evolutionary Thought&quot;.
* Kenneth R. Miller (2000). &quot;Finding Darwin&#x27;s God: A Scientist&#x27;s Search for Common Ground Between God and Evolution&quot;.
* Kenneth R. Miller (2008). &quot;Only a Theory: Evolution and the Battle for America&#x27;s Soul&quot;.

== N ==
* National Academies of Science (2008). &quot;Science, Evolution, and Creationism&quot;. 
* Bill Nye (2014). &quot;&quot;.

== P ==
* Jean-Baptiste De Panafieu (2011). &quot;Evolution&quot;.
* Donald Prothero (2006). &quot;After the Dinosaurs: The Age of Mammals&quot;.
* Donald Prothero (2007). &quot;&quot;.
* Steven Pinker (1997). &quot;How the Mind Works&quot;.

== R ==
* Matt Ridley (1993). &quot;The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature&quot;.
* Matt Ridley (1996). &quot;The Origins of Virtue&quot;.
* Matt Ridley (1999). &quot;Genome: The Autobiography of a Species in 23 Chapters&quot;.
* Matt Ridley (2003). &quot;Nature Via Nurture: Genes, Experience, and What Makes Us Human&quot;.
** Reprinted as &quot;The Agile Gene: How Nature Turns on Nurture&quot;.
* Michael Ruse (1998). &quot;Taking Darwin Seriously: A Naturalistic Approach to Philosophy&quot;.
* Michael Ruse (1999). &quot;The Darwinian Revolution: Science Red in Tooth and Claw&quot;.
* Michael Ruse (2001). &quot;The Evolution Wars: A Guide to the Debates&quot;.
* Michael Ruse (2001). &quot;Mystery of Mysteries: Is Evolution a Social Construction?&quot;.
* Michael Ruse (2006). &quot;Darwinism and Its Discontents&quot;.
* Michael Ruse (2006). &quot;Evolution-Creation Struggle&quot;.

== S ==
* Carl Sagan (1977). &quot;The Dragons of Eden: Speculations on the Evolution of Human Intelligence&quot;.
* Neil Shubin (2008). &quot;Your Inner Fish: A Journey into the 3.5-Billion-Year History of the Human Body&quot;.
* John Skoyles and Dorion Sagan (2002). &quot;Up from Dragons: The evolution of human intelligence&quot;.
* Cameron M. Smith and Charles Sullivan (2006). &quot;The Top 10 Myths About Evolution&quot;.

== T ==

== W ==
* Nicholas Wade (2006). &quot;Before the Dawn: Recovering the Lost History of Our Ancestors&quot;.
* Jonathan Weiner (1994). &quot;The Beak of the Finch: A Story of Evolution in Our Time&quot;.
* David Sloan Wilson (2007). &quot;Evolution for Everyone: How Darwin&#x27;s Theory Can Change the Way We Think About Our Lives&quot;.
* David Sloan Wilson (2019). &quot;This View of Life: Completing the Darwinian Revolution&quot;
* Bernard Wood (2006). &quot;Human Evolution: A Very Short Introduction&quot;.

== Z ==
* Carl Zimmer (2001). &quot;&quot;.
* Carl Zimmer (2005). &quot;Smithsonian Intimate Guide to Human Origins&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6634348" start="10" end="72" title="List of popular science books on evolution" label="list of [[popular science]] [[book]]s concerning [[evolution]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152104" start="120" end="135" title="Paul M. Bingham" label="Paul M. Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="167" end="276" title="Death from a Distance and the Birth of a Humane Universe" label="Death from a Distance and the Birth of a Humane Universe: Human Evolution, Behavior, History, and Your Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356612" start="295" end="310" title="Sean B. Carroll" label="Sean B. Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q24266579" start="325" end="350" title="The Making of the Fittest" label="The Making of the Fittest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571629" start="441" end="469" title="Endless Forms Most Beautiful (book)" label="Endless Forms Most Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q911997" start="508" end="526" title="Brian Charlesworth" label="Brian Charlesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794846" start="531" end="551" title="Deborah Charlesworth" label="Deborah Charlesworth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="576" end="588" title="Matteo Conti" label="Matteo Conti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="603" end="619" title="The Selfish Cell" label="The Selfish Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227192" start="653" end="664" title="Jerry Coyne" label="Jerry Coyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q115806088" start="679" end="700" title="Why Evolution Is True" label="Why Evolution Is True"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="719" end="733" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="748" end="769" title="The Origin of Species" label="The Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165434" start="808" end="826" title="The Descent of Man" label="The Descent of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="836" end="851" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q212789" start="866" end="882" title="The Selfish Gene" label="The Selfish Gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634176" start="922" end="944" title="The Extended Phenotype" label="The Extended Phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q477792" start="984" end="1004" title="The Blind Watchmaker" label="The Blind Watchmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q937556" start="1044" end="1061" title="River out of Eden" label="River out of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526499" start="1101" end="1126" title="Climbing Mount Improbable" label="Climbing Mount Improbable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512370" start="1166" end="1190" title="The Ancestor&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Ancestor&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1230" end="1284" title="The Greatest Show on Earth: The Evidence for Evolution" label="The Greatest Show on Earth: The Evidence for Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="1294" end="1308" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Daniel Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q725569" start="1323" end="1351" title="Darwin&amp;#x27;s Dangerous Idea" label="Darwin&amp;#x27;s Dangerous Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500523" start="1390" end="1405" title="Freedom Evolves" label="Freedom Evolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q205772" start="1415" end="1428" title="Jared Diamond" label="Jared Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q440914" start="1443" end="1463" title="The Third Chimpanzee" label="The Third Chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q246731" start="1519" end="1540" title="Theodosius Dobzhansky" label="Theodosius Dobzhansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079221" start="1581" end="1615" title="Genetics and the Origin of Species" label="Genetics and the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q451437" start="1634" end="1648" title="Niles Eldredge" label="Niles Eldredge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1663" end="1687" title="The Triumph of Evolution" label="The Triumph of Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217614" start="1738" end="1757" title="Daniel J. Fairbanks" label="Daniel J. Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1772" end="1786" title="Relics of Eden" label="Relics of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1854" end="1865" title="Ann Gibbons" label="Ann Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1880" end="1940" title="The First Human: The Race to Discover Our Earliest Ancestors" label="The First Human: The Race to Discover Our Earliest Ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="1950" end="1967" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Stephen Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016626" start="1982" end="1999" title="Ever Since Darwin" label="Ever Since Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544945" start="2041" end="2055" title="Wonderful Life (book)" label="Wonderful Life"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2142" end="2199" title="Full House: The Spread of Excellence from Plato to Darwin" label="Full House: The Spread of Excellence from Plato to Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892661" start="2218" end="2229" title="Marc Hauser" label="Marc Hauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953400" start="2244" end="2255" title="Moral Minds" label="Moral Minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166721" start="2265" end="2275" title="Jay Hosler" label="Jay Hosler"/>
<link wikidata="Q243419" start="2299" end="2312" title="Julian Huxley" label="Julian Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q184366" start="2337" end="2356" title="Thomas Henry Huxley" label="Thomas Henry Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234501" start="2371" end="2412" title="Evidence as to Man&amp;#x27;s Place in Nature" label="Evidence as to Man&amp;#x27;s Place in Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984124" start="2431" end="2447" title="Donald Johansson" label="Donald Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2462" end="2483" title="From Lucy to Language" label="From Lucy to Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q15649284" start="2525" end="2539" title="Shaun Johnston" label="Shaun Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2554" end="2590" title="Re-thinking What it Means We Evolved" label="Re-thinking What it Means We Evolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q15649284" start="2644" end="2658" title="Shaun Johnston" label="Shaun Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2673" end="2714" title="Are You wonderful? Good Science Says, Yes" label="Are You wonderful? Good Science Says, Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727108" start="2759" end="2771" title="Alison Jolly" label="Alison Jolly"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2786" end="2845" title="Lucy&amp;#x27;s Legacy: Sex and Intelligence in Human Evolution" label="Lucy&amp;#x27;s Legacy: Sex and Intelligence in Human Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391397" start="2855" end="2866" title="Steve Jones (biologist)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745466" start="2881" end="2906" title="The Language of the Genes" label="The Language of the Genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q290343" start="2916" end="2934" title="David Starr Jordan" label="David Starr Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718678" start="2949" end="2972" title="The Blood of the Nation" label="The Blood of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459101" start="3042" end="3057" title="Joseph Jordania" label="Joseph Jordania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459101" start="3072" end="3101" title="Who Asked the First Question?" label="Who Asked the First Question?"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459101" start="3183" end="3198" title="Joseph Jordania" label="Joseph Jordania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459101" start="3213" end="3257" title="Why do People Sing? Music in Human Evolution" label="Why do People Sing? Music in Human Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q372597" start="3276" end="3293" title="Marc W. Kirschner" label="Marc W. Kirschner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238372" start="3298" end="3313" title="John C. Gerhart" label="John C. Gerhart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3328" end="3352" title="The Plausibility of Life" label="The Plausibility of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752" start="3395" end="3410" title="Peter Kropotkin" label="Peter Kropotkin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3425" end="3458" title="Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution" label="Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320335" start="3468" end="3484" title="Arik Kershenbaum" label="Arik Kershenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320335" start="3499" end="3539" title="The Zoologist&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy" label="The Zoologist&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027454" start="3618" end="3627" title="Nick Lane" label="Nick Lane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3642" end="3656" title="Life Ascending" label="Life Ascending"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3705" end="3722" title="Gabriel E. Lasker" label="Gabriel E. Lasker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811949" start="3737" end="3757" title="The Evolution of Man" label="The Evolution of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981608" start="3814" end="3828" title="Daniel Levitin" label="Daniel Levitin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17747291" start="3843" end="3865" title="The World in Six Songs" label="The World in Six Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q323207" start="3928" end="3946" title="John Maynard Smith" label="John Maynard Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768654" start="3961" end="3984" title="The Theory of Evolution" label="The Theory of Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4027" end="4039" title="On Evolution" label="On Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4082" end="4102" title="The Evolution of Sex" label="The Evolution of Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418624" start="4145" end="4178" title="Evolution and the Theory of Games" label="Evolution and the Theory of Games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4221" end="4242" title="Evolutionary Genetics" label="Evolutionary Genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q907743" start="4275" end="4289" title="Eörs Szathmáry" label="Eörs Szathmáry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749685" start="4304" end="4338" title="The Major Transitions in Evolution" label="The Major Transitions in Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4400" end="4469" title="The Origins of Life: From the Birth of Life to the Origin of Language" label="The Origins of Life: From the Birth of Life to the Origin of Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354" start="4479" end="4489" title="Ernst Mayr" label="Ernst Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4504" end="4521" title="What Evolution Is" label="What Evolution Is"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4556" end="4573" title="One Long Argument" label="One Long Argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386157" start="4646" end="4663" title="Kenneth R. Miller" label="Kenneth R. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449933" start="4678" end="4703" title="Finding Darwin&amp;#x27;s God" label="Finding Darwin&amp;#x27;s God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094150" start="4816" end="4829" title="Only a Theory" label="Only a Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="4898" end="4927" title="National Academies of Science" label="National Academies of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433447" start="4942" end="4977" title="Science, Evolution, and Creationism" label="Science, Evolution, and Creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619019" start="4988" end="4996" title="Bill Nye" label="Bill Nye"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5030" end="5055" title="Jean-Baptiste De Panafieu" label="Jean-Baptiste De Panafieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11721746" start="5089" end="5104" title="Donald Prothero" label="Donald Prothero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5119" end="5138" title="After the Dinosaurs" label="After the Dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11721746" start="5168" end="5183" title="Donald Prothero" label="Donald Prothero"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="5208" end="5221" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621068" start="5236" end="5254" title="How the Mind Works" label="How the Mind Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q961972" start="5273" end="5284" title="Matt Ridley" label="Matt Ridley"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5299" end="5351" title="The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature" label="The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755410" start="5387" end="5408" title="The Origins of Virtue" label="The Origins of Virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533479" start="5444" end="5497" title="Genome (book)" label="Genome: The Autobiography of a Species in 23 Chapters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980983" start="5533" end="5551" title="Nature Via Nurture" label="Nature Via Nurture"/>
<link wikidata="Q518293" start="5678" end="5690" title="Michael Ruse" label="Michael Ruse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5705" end="5728" title="Taking Darwin Seriously" label="Taking Darwin Seriously"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5804" end="5828" title="The Darwinian Revolution" label="The Darwinian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5896" end="5914" title="The Evolution Wars" label="The Evolution Wars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5975" end="5995" title="Mystery of Mysteries" label="Mystery of Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6069" end="6098" title="Darwinism and Its Discontents" label="Darwinism and Its Discontents"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6135" end="6162" title="Evolution-Creation Struggle" label="Evolution-Creation Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="6181" end="6191" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152481" start="6206" end="6225" title="The Dragons of Eden" label="The Dragons of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q458247" start="6288" end="6299" title="Neil Shubin" label="Neil Shubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q96380090" start="6314" end="6329" title="Your Inner Fish" label="Your Inner Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258129" start="6402" end="6414" title="John Skoyles (scientist)" label="John Skoyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297869" start="6419" end="6431" title="Dorion Sagan" label="Dorion Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898047" start="6446" end="6498" title="Up from Dragons" label="Up from Dragons: The evolution of human intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6508" end="6524" title="Cameron M. Smith" label="Cameron M. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6529" end="6545" title="Charles Sullivan (philosopher)" label="Charles Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6560" end="6592" title="The Top 10 Myths About Evolution" label="The Top 10 Myths About Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026367" start="6620" end="6633" title="Nicholas Wade" label="Nicholas Wade"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6648" end="6709" title="Before the Dawn: Recovering the Lost History of Our Ancestors" label="Before the Dawn: Recovering the Lost History of Our Ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703326" start="6719" end="6734" title="Jonathan Weiner" label="Jonathan Weiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716000" start="6749" end="6770" title="The Beak of the Finch" label="The Beak of the Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q715615" start="6814" end="6832" title="David Sloan Wilson" label="David Sloan Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6847" end="6869" title="Evolution for Everyone" label="Evolution for Everyone"/>
<link wikidata="Q715615" start="6949" end="6967" title="David Sloan Wilson" label="David Sloan Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893764" start="7045" end="7057" title="Bernard Wood (geologist)" label="Bernard Wood"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7072" end="7114" title="Human Evolution: A Very Short Introduction" label="Human Evolution: A Very Short Introduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q369116" start="7133" end="7144" title="Carl Zimmer" label="Carl Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7195" end="7238" title="Smithsonian Intimate Guide to Human Origins" label="Smithsonian Intimate Guide to Human Origins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816790" wikidata="Q484968" url="?curid=816790" title="Louis Saha">
<text>Louis Laurent Saha (born 8 August 1978) is a French former professional footballer who played as a striker. Saha was capped 20 times for the France national team and scored four goals. Louis Saha was a former scholar at the Clairefontaine football academy, he began his career at Metz before playing on loan at Newcastle United. Before the start of the 2000–01 season, Saha moved to Fulham where he established himself as first-choice striker, helping them to gain promotion to the Premier League in his first season with them.

His performances gained attraction from Manchester United, who eventually secured his signing for around £12.4 million midway through the 2003–04 season. Injuries plagued his Old Trafford career, however he enjoyed major success including winning the Premier League title twice, the UEFA Champions League in 2008, and the League Cup in 2006 where he was the top scorer in the competition and netted in the final. Despite Saha&#x27;s injury woes, United star Wayne Rooney stated on Sky Sports that Saha was one of his favourite strike partners.

After four and a half years at United, Everton took him to Goodison Park, where he opened the scoring in the 2009 FA Cup Final after 25 seconds, setting the record for the fastest goal scored in FA Cup Final history.

Saha made his France debut in 2004, in a 2–0 victory over Belgium. He represented France at UEFA Euro 2004 and the 2006 FIFA World Cup.

==Early life==
Saha was born in Paris. His parents were born on the island of Guadeloupe (a department of France), where his grandparents remain to this day. He has a younger sister and younger brother. Saha also revealed he and his siblings were brought up from a strict Caribbean culture.

His father worked as an aircraft mechanic and his mother worked as a nurse. Growing up in Paris, Saha said his family had little money, leading him to &quot;never take anything for granted&quot;, In return, he bought his parents a house in the West Indies, and covered his parents’ debt. Saha revealed that his father tried to make him balance his football with the rest of his education, but nevertheless, push him to make sure he &quot;got enough education away from football&quot; and supported him &quot;all the way in helping him mature as a footballer and as a man&quot;.

==Club career==

===Metz===
Saha began his football career at Soisy-Andilly-Margency in the commune of Soisy-sous-Montmorency before he joined Clairefontaine. He later moved to Metz at the age of 15 and then signed his first professional contract with the club at 17. Saha progressed to the senior team in 1997. Saha made his Metz debut on 8 August 1997, coming on as a late substitute against Bordeaux and scored the club&#x27;s fourth goal of the game, in a 4–1 win. This was his only goal of the season, as Metz finished second place in the league behind Lens by goal difference. Overall, he made 25 appearances in all competitions. The 1998–99 season saw Saha lose first team opportunities, as he only made six appearances in all competitions.

Saha went on loan to Newcastle United in January 1999, scoring once against Coventry City and playing in a total of 11 league games. He also scored in Newcastle&#x27;s run to the 1999 FA Cup Final with the only goal in the fifth round clash against Blackburn Rovers; however, he was left out of the cup final squad entirely by manager Ruud Gullit. He later reflected his time at Newcastle United, saying it made him acknowledge how hard he has to work as a footballer and gaining confidence.

At the conclusion of the 1998–99 season, Saha returned to Metz, where he made an impact, scoring seven goals for the 1999 UEFA Intertoto Cup, against MŠK Žilina, Lokeren, Polonia Warsaw and West Ham United. Saha&#x27;s first goal for the club came on 7 August 1999, winning 3–0 against Auxerre. Saha scored three more goals later in the 1999–2000, as he made 33 appearances and scoring 11 times in all competitions. Despite being in a goal scoring form, Saha revealed that the club wanted him to &quot;take on a lot more defensive duties&quot;, something that made him consider quitting football. By the time Saha left the club at the close of the 1999–2000 season, he netted five goals in 47 matches for a two-year spell.

===Fulham===
Saha returned to England, where he was signed by Fulham for £2.1 million in 2000. Upon joining the club, Manager Jean Tigana said: &quot;Louis is a very good signing. I have known him since he was 17 and he has great ability. I am sure he will follow the success of his contemporaries Thierry Henry and Nicolas Anelka. I believe he will be a very good player in the First Division and has the right qualities to be a success in the Premiership&quot;.

Saha quickly made an impact on his Fulham debut, scoring his first goal of the season in a 2–0 win against Crewe Alexandra in the opening game of the season. This was followed up by scoring in a 3–1 win against Birmingham City. Since making his debut, Saha quickly established himself in the first team, becoming the club&#x27;s first-choice striker and along with John Collins and Lee Clark. Their performances were described &quot;world class&quot; by the Evening Standard. He then scored eight goals in four matches in September 2000, scoring once against Nottingham Forest, braces against Northampton Town and Burnley, and a hat-trick against Barnsley. His goalscoring form continued with three goals in two matches against Grimsby Town on 25 November and Derby County on 29 November 2000. Saha scored two goals in two matches between in January 2001 against Norwich City and Watford. He then scored twice for the side in a 4–1 win against Tranmere Rovers on 30 March 2001. Saha scored three goals in two matches between in April 2001 against Portsmouth and Wolverhampton Wanderers. In the promotion-winning campaign of 2000–01 Saha scored 27 league goals to fire Fulham into the Premier League, making him the league top–scorer. At the conclusion of the 2000–01 season, he made 48 appearances and scored 32 times in all competitions. For his achievement, Saha was named PFA Team of the Year.

In the first two matches of the 2001–02 season, Saha scored three goals, against Manchester United and Sunderland. During his first month in the top flight he was named Premier League Player of the Month. Saha continued to regain his first team place as the club&#x27;s first choice striker, forming a partnership with Barry Hayles throughout the 2001–02 season. Although Saha did score in the League Cup against Derby County on 10 October 2001, he went on a three-month spell without scoring in the league before scoring against Newcastle United, in a 3–1 victory on 17 November 2001. However, Saha&#x27;s goal scoring form continued to dip, scoring only four more goals later in the 2001–02 season, including a brace against Chelsea. At the conclusion of the season, Saha had made 44 appearances and scored nine times in all competitions.

At the start of the 2002–03 season, Saha appeared in every match of the UEFA Intertoto Cup, scoring once against Egaleo in the third round on 20 July 2002. He played in both legs of the Intertoto Cup finals against Bologna, as they won 5–3 to win the tournament and qualify for the UEFA Cup. Saha scored his first league goal of the season, from a penalty, in a 4–1 win against Bolton Wanderers in the opening game of the season. However, he suffered a hamstring injury that kept him out for the rest of 2002. Saha scored on his return on 5 January 2003, in a 3–1 win against Birmingham City in the third round of the FA Cup. However, his return was short-lived as he suffered another injury that saw him miss two matches. He returned to the first team on 1 February 2003, coming on as a 69th-minute substitute, in a 2–1 loss against Arsenal. He then scored his fourth goal of the season in a 3–0 win against West Bromwich Albion. Following his return, Saha managed to regain his first team place for the rest of the 2002–03 season, playing in the striker position. He scored three more goals later in the 2002–03 season, including scoring two goals in two matches in March 2003 against Sunderland and Southampton. As a result of his injuries he was less prolific in the 2002–03 season, scoring onlyseven goals in 28 appearances in all competitions.

Ahead of the 2003–04 season, it was announced by the club that Saha would be staying put. He started the season well, scoring in the opening game of the season, winning 3–2 win against Middlesbrough. Saha then scored three goals in three matches in September 2003, scoring against Birmingham City, Manchester City and Blackburn Rovers. Throughout the first half of the season, he continued to be in the first team regular for Fulham, playing in the striker position. His goal scoring form continued to the end of the year, scoring three braces. As a result, Saha was named as the Player of the Month for December. In his final season at Fulham, he contributed 15 goals in only 22 appearances before leaving in the January transfer window.

It was announced on 23 December 2003 by the club that they rejected a bid from Manchester United to sign Saha, saying he was not for sale. It came after when his performance at Fulham&#x27;s victory over Manchester United at Old Trafford in October 2003 was thought to be influential in persuading Alex Ferguson to sign him in 2004. Around this time, Saha revealed that he had a fallen out with manager Chris Coleman as a result of the way in which he left Fulham. During a spell of nearly four years at the club, Saha scored 63 goals.

===Manchester United===
Saha was transferred to Manchester United for a fee of £12.4 million in 2004 having scored 15 goals so far that season and impressing Alex Ferguson in Fulham&#x27;s 3–1 win at Old Trafford. Fulham were reluctant to sell Saha but he pushed for a deal and it eventually went through on 23 January 2004. A month later, however, Metz brought a case to FIFA (and later Court of Arbitration for Sport) arguing that they were entitled to a share of Saha&#x27;s transfer fee from Fulham. Two years later, the Court of Arbitration for Sport ruled in favour of Metz and Fulham were ordered to pay.

Saha impressed early, with seven goals in his ten starting appearances of the 2003–04 season and scoring on his debut against Southampton. After the match, Manager Ferguson praised his performance. In the next match, versus Everton, Saha and Ruud van Nistelrooy both scored two goals in a 4–3 win. On 28 February 2004, he faced his former team for the first time, scoring the only goal for United in a 1–1 draw. Throughout the match, Saha received boos and jeers from Fulham supporters. He then played in both legs of the UEFA Champions League Round of 16 against Porto, as Manchester United lost 3–2 on aggregate. After missing two matches due to an Achilles problem, Saha returned to the first team and scored in the next two matches against Arsenal and Birmingham City. He was unable to play in the 2004 FA Cup Final win over Millwall, being cup-tied due to an earlier appearance with Fulham. Despite this, Saha went on to make 12 appearances and scoring seven times in all competitions by the conclusion of the 2003–04 season.

The 2004–05 season was a stop-start season marred by constant injury for Saha. He made his first appearance of the season on 28 August 2004, coming on as a second half substitute, in a 1–1 draw against Blackburn Rovers. However, Saha picked up a knee injury playing for France against the Faroe Islands which put him out of action for a month. He returned to the first team on 16 October 2004, playing the full 90 minutes of a 0–0 draw against Birmingham City. Saha then scored his first goal of the season, in a 2–0 win against Crystal Palace in the fourth round of the League Cup on 10 November 2004. Shortly after, he picked up an injury again while playing for the national side and costing him nearly two months out. Saha did not next play a full 90 minutes until 12 January 2005, in a 0–0 draw against Chelsea in the first leg of the League Cup semi–finals. Ten days later on 22 January 2005 he scored his second goal of the season, as well as setting up the first goal of the game in a 3–1 win against Aston Villa. However in February, the problem recurred, leaving Saha out for a further two months. At the conclusion of the 2004–05 season, Saha never got going, making only 11 starting appearances, 11 from the bench and scoring two goals.

Over the summer, Saha suffered another hamstring strain which ruled him out for the first three months of the 2005–06 season. He scored on his first appearance of the season, as well as setting up the third goal of the game, in a 3–1 win against West Bromwich Albion on 30 November 2005. Following his return, Saha eased back into side as a substitute, making appearances in League Cup matches. To the surprise of many, the French striker recaptured his initial good form and started a streak of goalscoring form. Six goals in the League Cup run saw him usurp Van Nistelrooy as the first-choice strike partner for Wayne Rooney. Saha was named a starter over Van Nistelrooy in the final against Wigan Athletic, and scored a goal. Despite suffering from an injury along the way, he scored four more goals later in the 2005–06 season, including a brace against West Bromwich Albion on 18 March 2006. At the end of the 2005–06 season, Saha had made 30 appearances and scored 15 times in all competitions.

Saha was chosen by Ferguson to partner alongside Rooney for the next season, after Van Nistelrooy&#x27;s exit for Real Madrid during the summer transfer window. He began the 2006–07 season by scoring only seven minutes into the first game against Fulham. This was followed up by scoring his second goal of the season in a 3–0 win against Charlton Athletic, as well as setting up the second goal of the game. Saha then scored twice for the side, as well as setting up the third goal of the game, in a 3–2 win against Celtic in the UEFA Champions League. He scored the winning goal away to Benfica in the UEFA Champions League and later scored in the home leg. Saha&#x27;s goal scoring form continued for the rest of 2006. As a result, he signed an extension to his contract lasting to 2010, though soon after began suffering from more injury problems. Groin and hamstring injuries restricted appearances and meant he only scored one goal in the second half of the season. He returned as substitute at Roma but then picked up a knee injury and was therefore absent for United&#x27;s 1–0 extra-time loss to Chelsea in the FA Cup final. Saha ended the season with 13 goals in all competitions, largely thanks to his pre-Christmas form.

In the 2007–08 season, Saha returned from injury and came as a substitute against Sunderland, scoring the winning goal. On 23 September 2007, Saha won and converted a penalty against Chelsea in Chelsea&#x27;s first game with Avram Grant in charge. United won the game 2–0. This earned Saha a recall to the France national team after a year out. Against Arsenal, Saha came on to replace the under-performing Carlos Tevez in a 2–2 draw. He was key in setting up a goal as Cristiano Ronaldo gave United a 2–1 lead. Saha continued to make appearances off the bench, but when Wayne Rooney was ruled out for a few weeks he partnered Tevez up front. He then started in a match against Sunderland on Boxing Day, and scored twice including a penalty, winning 2–0 to lift Manchester United to 1st position in the Premier League. After being sidelined with a knee injury that kept him out for a month, Saha made his return in an FA Cup clash versus Arsenal on 16 February 2008, winning 4–0. The following weekend, he came on as a substitute for Ronaldo, scoring the final goal in a 5–1 rout of Newcastle United. After returning to nearly full fitness, Saha&#x27;s injury haunts returned and forced him off with a hamstring complaint during United&#x27;s win over Bolton Wanderers at Old Trafford. Saha was ruled out for several weeks, missing key games. In the final game of the Premier League season against Wigan Athletic, Saha was named as a substitute, but played no part in the game. In May 2008, Saha admitted that he believed his United career was in doubt. Despite his desire to stay and love for the club, he was unsure of what the future held for him at Old Trafford.

Despite struggling with injuries in many of his seasons with Manchester United, Saha still contributed 42 goals in all competitions in 120 appearances for the club.

===Everton===
Saha joined Everton in 2008 for an undisclosed fee, signing a two-year &#x27;pay-as-you-play&#x27; deal. Not match-fit at his time of signing, Saha offered to train without being paid while injured.

Saha made his Everton debut on 22 September coming on as a substitute in a league game away to Hull City, before scoring his first goal against his former club Fulham, at Goodison Park on 1 November. This was followed up by scoring a brace, as well as setting up the first goal of the game in a 3–1 win against West Ham United. However during a 1–0 win against Tottenham Hotspur on 30 November 2008, he suffered a knee injury and was substituted in the 60th minute. Following this, it was announced that Saha would be out for two months. He returned to the first team on 22 February 2009, coming on as a 74th-minute substitute, in a 0–0 draw against Newcastle United. This was followed up by scoring his fourth league goal of the season in a 2–0 win against West Bromwich Albion. A week later on 8 March 2009, he came off the bench at half-time in that season&#x27;s FA Cup quarter-final against Middlesbrough, scoring the winner and helping Everton reach the semi-finals for the first time since 1995. Two months later, against West Ham United, Saha scored twice for the second time in the season, as the club won 3–1. Two weeks later in the FA Cup final, Saha scored the fastest goal in the final&#x27;s history after 25 seconds, though opponents Chelsea came from behind to win 2–1. This broke Bob Chatt&#x27;s record, set 114 years earlier in the 1895 Final. It was also the fastest goal in any match at the new Wembley Stadium, beating the previous record by Giampaolo Pazzini in March 2007 in an under-21 international for Italy. Throughout the 2008–09 season, he established himself in the starting 11, forming a striking partnership with Yakubu. At the end of the 2008–09 season, Saha had made 29 appearances and scored eight times in all competitions.

Saha scored his first goal of the 2009–10 season after coming on as a substitute on the opening day of the season against Arsenal, in a 6–1 defeat at Goodison Park. His goalscoring form continued for the next two months, scoring a goal against both Wigan Athletic and Portsmouth, as well as braces against Sigma Olomouc and Blackburn Rovers. He went on to a run of seven goals in seven games in all competitions by the end of the year. The next two months saw Saha earned two Player of the Month awards by the club. Saha signed a two-year contract extension with Everton on 5 February 2010, keeping him at the club until the end of the 2011–12 season. Five days later he scored a brace for the side, in a 2–1 win against Chelsea. Throughout the 2009–10 season he established himself in the starting 11, playing in the striker position, but found his goalscoring form dipped as the season progressed. Despite suffering from injuries during the season along the way, Saha made 40 appearances and scored 15 times in all competitions.

At the start of the 2010–11 season, Saha continued to retain his first team place for the first four matches, scoring his first goal in a 5–1 win against Huddersfield Town in the second round of the League Cup. However, he suffered an injury while on international duty that kept him out for a month. He returned from injury on 23 October 2010, coming on as a 61st-minute substitute in a 1–1 draw against Tottenham Hotspur. Since returning from injury, he was involved in the first team for the next three months, though he struggled to regain his goalscoring form. Saha then suffered a thigh injury that saw him miss one match. Saha scored his eighth goal in five starts against Chelsea on 29 January 2011, and continued his form in the next home game, against Blackpool on 5 February, when he netted four goals in a 5–3 victory. It was his first hat-trick in the Premier League. Saha scored again for Everton against Fulham on 19 March 2011 with a low right footed drive from a free kick, he was later stretchered off with an ankle injury and remained sidelined for the remainder of the season. At the end of the 2010–11 season, Saha had made 26 appearances and scored nine times in all competitions.

Saha made his return for the 2011–12 season on 30 July 2011 in a pre-season fixture against the recently relegated Birmingham City at St Andrews. He was substituted into the match in the second half and scored 3 minutes into his return from injury with a low right footed drive from outside the box. After missing four matches, Saha returned to the first team, coming on as a 66th-minute substitute in a 2–0 loss against Manchester City on 24 September 2011. This was followed up by making his first start of the season for Everton in a home fixture against Liverpool. Everton lost the game 2–0. He then scored his first goal of the season in a 3–1 victory over Fulham at Craven Cottage after coming on as a substitute. Saha continued his scoring in the following game on 26 October against Chelsea in a League Cup tie. He failed to score again for Everton, a drought that lasted 942 consecutive minutes of league football. Saha left Everton having scored 35 goals in 115 appearances.

===Tottenham Hotspur===
On 31 January 2012, Saha completed a free transfer move to Tottenham Hotspur, signing a six-month contract. He was given the number 15 jersey, last worn by Peter Crouch.

Less than a week later he made his debut against Liverpool coming on as a substitute for Emmanuel Adebayor in a 0–0 draw. He made his full debut in the very next league fixture against Newcastle United, scoring twice in a 5–0 win. On 26 February 2012, he made it three goals in three games for his new club when he scored the opening goal in Tottenham&#x27;s North London derby defeat against Arsenal, 5-2.

He scored his fourth goal, in all competitions, for the club against Bolton Wanderers to make it 3–1 to Tottenham with the last kick of the game to send his side through to the FA Cup semi-finals against London rivals Chelsea. Following his successful short spell with Tottenham, Saha reported that he was desperate to seal a long term deal at White Hart Lane, citing Harry Redknapp as a big factor in his upturn in form. On 13 July 2012, it was confirmed that Saha was released after his contract expired at the end of the season.

===Sunderland===
On 16 August 2012, Sunderland confirmed the signing of Saha on a one-year deal. He made his debut two days later, coming on as a substitute in a 0–0 draw with Arsenal. His contract was mutually terminated on transfer deadline day January 2013. During Saha&#x27;s time at Sunderland, he made only 14 appearances and failed to score a single goal.

===Lazio===
On 6 February 2013, Saha signed a six-month contract with Italian club Lazio. The following day, he was presented by the club.

Saha made his debut for Lazio, coming on as a substitute on 9 February 2013 in a match against Napoli. However, he found his playing time limited, mostly coming on as a substitute, as he went on to make six appearances for the club. Despite being keen to stay at the club beyond the 2012–13 season, Saha was released at the end of the short-term deal.

==Post-playing career==
On 8 August 2013, his 35th birthday, Saha announced his retirement from professional football via Twitter. Saha joined other retired players at a Testimonial match for his former Spurs teammate Ledley King on 12 May 2014. Coming on as a second-half substitute, he scored a hat-trick against a line-up of current Tottenham players. Three years later on 2 September 2017, he once again joined other retired players for a charity match against Barcelona that Manchester United won 3–0.

Following his retirement from professional football, Saha created a private network for pro athletes and entertainers called AxisStars.

In December 2015, Saha said he would be suing a UK bank after it was revealed that a botched investment scheme resulted in him losing &quot;around six figures.&quot; He also published his first book titled &#x27;&quot;Thinking Inside the Box?&quot;&#x27;.

==International career==
Saha represented France at various youth levels and scored the winning goal in the 1997 UEFA European Under-18 Championship against Portugal.

Saha said he wanted to play for France and put his name in the short–list to be called up to the national squad for the 2002 FIFA World Cup but due to his lack of form during the 2001–02 season, Saha acknowledged that he would be unlikely to be in the squad for the tournament, which turned out to be true. It was not until 2004 that Saha finally earned his first full cap, marking his debut with a goal in a 2–0 victory over Belgium on 18 February. That summer he was also selected for the UEFA Euro 2004 squad. Saha then scored his second goal for France, scoring the third goal of the game in a 4–0 win against Andorra on 28 May 2004. Having appeared in the first two matches as an unused substitute in the group stage, he made his first appearance of the tournament against Switzerland, coming on as a 75th-minute substitute, and set up a goal for Thierry Henry to score the national team&#x27;s second goal of the game, winning 3–1. However, Saha played 18 minutes, having come on as a 72nd-minute substitute, as France lost 1–0 against Greece in the quarter–finals, eliminating the national side from the competition.

Two years later, Saha was called up to the national team squad for the FIFA World Cup, earning his first call-up in almost a year. He made his first appearance for the national side in almost a year, starting a match against Denmark on 31 May 2006 and set up France&#x27;s first goal of the game, in a 2–0 win. Saha made his first appearance of the World Cup, coming on as a 69th-minute substitute, in a 0–0 draw against Switzerland. Saha contributed to France reaching the 2006 FIFA World Cup Final, but he was suspended for the final against Italy after receiving a yellow card during the semi-final victory over Portugal.

After the end of the World Cup tournament, Saha was called up to the France squad for the match against Bosnia and Herzegovina, and started in a 2–1 win. Saha then followed up in his next appearance for the national side by scoring in a 3–0 win against Georgia. A month later on 11 October 2006, he scored his fourth goal for France, in a 5–0 win against Faroe Islands.

Saha was named in the squad picked for the Euro 2012 qualifiers, which also included goalkeeper Hugo Lloris, Chelsea&#x27;s Florent Malouda and nine other players who took part in France&#x27;s disappointing 2010 World Cup campaign. Prior to this, he had not played for his national side since November 2006 (although he was called up by Raymond Domenech in February 2010, he withdrew from the squad due to injury). Saha made an appearance for France for the first time in four years, coming on as a 79th-minute substitute, in a 1–0 loss against Belarus on 3 September 2010. Two years later, on 29 February 2012, he made his return to the national team in a 2–1 win against Germany, in what turned out to be his last appearance for France.

==Personal life==
In addition to speaking French, Saha speaks fluent English. He learned the language after moving to Fulham in 2000, where he experienced some initial struggles before improving.

Saha has three children with his former partner: Stanley, Enzo and Lou. They split up after his retirement from football. Having previously lived in Manchester, North West England, he has since moved to the south of France.

In February 2011, Saha escaped unhurt after his car collided with a fence on Altrincham Road, at the entrance to the tunnels that run under the runways of Manchester Airport.

==Career statistics==

===Club===


===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list France&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Saha goal.&quot;

==Honours==
Fulham
*Football League First Division: 2000–01
*UEFA Intertoto Cup: 2002

Manchester United
*Premier League: 2006–07, 2007–08
*Football League Cup: 2005–06
*UEFA Champions League: 2007–08

Everton
*FA Cup runner-up: 2008–09

France U18
*UEFA European Under-18 Championship: 1997

France
*FIFA World Cup runner-up: 2006

Individual
*PFA Team of the Year: 2000–01 First Division
*Premier League Player of the Month: August 2001

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q484968" start="0" end="18" title="Louis Saha" label="Louis Laurent Saha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="72" end="82" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="99" end="106" title="Striker (association football)" label="striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="141" end="161" title="France national football team" label="France national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q712836" start="224" end="238" title="INF Clairefontaine" label="Clairefontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221525" start="280" end="284" title="FC Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="311" end="327" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="383" end="389" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="482" end="496" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="569" end="586" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q817262" start="667" end="681" title="2003–04 FA Premier League" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="704" end="716" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="812" end="833" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="851" end="861" title="Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q909875" start="935" end="940" title="2006 Football League Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q266613" start="987" end="999" title="Wayne Rooney" label="Wayne Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="1113" end="1120" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q968420" start="1133" end="1146" title="Goodison Park" label="Goodison Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083726" start="1183" end="1200" title="2009 FA Cup Final" label="2009 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484477" start="1269" end="1281" title="FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="1350" end="1357" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q102920" start="1384" end="1398" title="UEFA Euro 2004" label="UEFA Euro 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="1407" end="1426" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1461" end="1466" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="1507" end="1517" title="Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="2392" end="2399" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q839549" start="2403" end="2425" title="Soisy-sous-Montmorency" label="Soisy-sous-Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q712836" start="2443" end="2457" title="INF Clairefontaine" label="Clairefontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221525" start="2477" end="2481" title="FC Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q172476" start="2694" end="2702" title="FC Girondins de Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q532980" start="2840" end="2850" title="1997–98 French Division 1" label="the league"/>
<link wikidata="Q191843" start="2858" end="2862" title="RC Lens" label="Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q530762" start="2940" end="2954" title="1998–99 French Division 1" label="1998–99 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="3070" end="3086" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="3125" end="3138" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484528" start="3228" end="3245" title="1999 FA Cup Final" label="1999 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="3298" end="3314" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q173972" start="3384" end="3395" title="Ruud Gullit" label="Ruud Gullit"/>
<link wikidata="Q530762" start="3567" end="3581" title="1998–99 French Division 1" label="1998–99 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153489" start="3659" end="3682" title="1999 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="1999 UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q209640" start="3692" end="3702" title="MŠK Žilina" label="MŠK Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q221940" start="3704" end="3711" title="K.S.C. Lokeren Oost-Vlaanderen" label="Lokeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q262569" start="3713" end="3727" title="Polonia Warsaw" label="Polonia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="3732" end="3747" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q182876" start="3828" end="3835" title="AJ Auxerre" label="Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="4328" end="4334" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q295559" start="4392" end="4403" title="Jean Tigana" label="Jean Tigana"/>
<link wikidata="Q19587" start="4838" end="4853" title="Crewe Alexandra F.C." label="Crewe Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="4942" end="4957" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q720921" start="5096" end="5108" title="John Collins (footballer, born 1968)" label="John Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608437" start="5113" end="5122" title="Lee Clark (footballer)" label="Lee Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="5189" end="5205" title="Evening Standard" label="Evening Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="5290" end="5307" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q48945" start="5324" end="5340" title="Northampton Town F.C." label="Northampton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19458" start="5345" end="5352" title="Burnley F.C." label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19442" start="5378" end="5386" title="Barnsley F.C." label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18515" start="5459" end="5471" title="Grimsby Town F.C." label="Grimsby Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="5491" end="5503" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="5594" end="5606" title="Norwich City F.C." label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714" start="5611" end="5618" title="Watford F.C." label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19637" start="5675" end="5690" title="Tranmere Rovers F.C." label="Tranmere Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="5778" end="5788" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="5793" end="5816" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5855" end="5862" title="2000–01 in English football#Football League First Division" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="5915" end="5929" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6106" end="6126" title="PFA Team of the Year (2000s)#First Division 2" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q890790" start="6298" end="6332" title="Premier League Player of the Month" label="Premier League Player of the Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885751" start="6448" end="6460" title="Barry Hayles" label="Barry Hayles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="6542" end="6554" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="6856" end="6863" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195287" start="7043" end="7061" title="2002 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296697" start="7084" end="7090" title="Egaleo F.C." label="Egaleo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7157" end="7177" title="2002 UEFA Intertoto Cup#Finals" label="Intertoto Cup finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893" start="7186" end="7193" title="Bologna F.C. 1909" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q629461" start="7253" end="7261" title="2002–03 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="7349" end="7365" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="7880" end="7900" title="West Bromwich Albion F.C." label="West Bromwich Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181967" start="8242" end="8256" title="2002–03 in English football" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="8620" end="8635" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q44980" start="9360" end="9373" title="Alex Ferguson" label="Alex Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q381769" start="9465" end="9478" title="Chris Coleman (footballer)" label="Chris Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="9647" end="9664" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q44980" start="9757" end="9770" title="Alex Ferguson" label="Alex Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q659499" start="9987" end="10017" title="Court of Arbitration for Sport" label="Court of Arbitration for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q817262" start="10290" end="10304" title="2003–04 FA Premier League" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="10338" end="10349" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="10436" end="10443" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45626" start="10454" end="10473" title="Ruud van Nistelrooy" label="Ruud van Nistelrooy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128446" start="10776" end="10781" title="FC Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661161" start="11014" end="11031" title="2004 FA Cup Final" label="2004 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="11041" end="11049" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194403" start="11057" end="11065" title="cup-tied" label="cup-tied"/>
<link wikidata="Q456869" start="11248" end="11262" title="2004–05 FA Premier League" label="2004–05 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q200688" start="11533" end="11546" title="Faroe Islands national football team" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="11773" end="11787" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="12253" end="12264" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q269486" start="12604" end="12618" title="2005–06 FA Premier League" label="2005–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="12869" end="12879" title="Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q266613" start="13108" end="13120" title="Wayne Rooney" label="Wayne Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q909875" start="13174" end="13179" title="2006 Football League Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="13188" end="13202" title="Wigan Athletic F.C." label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q269486" start="13409" end="13423" title="2005–06 FA Premier League" label="2005–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q190112" start="13560" end="13571" title="2006–07 FA Premier League" label="next season"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="13610" end="13621" title="Real Madrid CF" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190112" start="13670" end="13684" title="2006–07 FA Premier League" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="13834" end="13851" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="14012" end="14018" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131499" start="14084" end="14091" title="SL Benfica" label="Benfica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="14496" end="14500" title="A.S. Roma" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="14600" end="14607" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574490" start="14615" end="14621" title="2007 FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q187376" start="14736" end="14750" title="2007–08 Premier League" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="14811" end="14821" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="14912" end="14919" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q274632" start="14954" end="14965" title="Avram Grant" label="Avram Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="15082" end="15089" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q50600" start="15136" end="15148" title="Carlos Tevez" label="Carlos Tevez"/>
<link wikidata="Q11571" start="15199" end="15216" title="Cristiano Ronaldo" label="Cristiano Ronaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="15647" end="15653" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="15812" end="15828" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="15981" end="15997" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="16127" end="16141" title="Wigan Athletic F.C." label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="16589" end="16596" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="16872" end="16881" title="Hull City A.F.C." label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q968420" start="16948" end="16961" title="Goodison Park" label="Goodison Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="17673" end="17686" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083726" start="17920" end="17932" title="2009 FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="18026" end="18033" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932053" start="18074" end="18083" title="Bob Chatt" label="Bob Chatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556928" start="18128" end="18138" title="1895 FA Cup Final" label="1895 Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q219389" start="18241" end="18258" title="Giampaolo Pazzini" label="Giampaolo Pazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q202410" start="18423" end="18429" title="Yakubu (footballer)" label="Yakubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188937" start="18573" end="18580" title="2009–10 Premier League" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="18661" end="18668" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q968420" start="18689" end="18702" title="Goodison Park" label="Goodison Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="18788" end="18802" title="Wigan Athletic F.C." label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="18807" end="18817" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q385518" start="18845" end="18858" title="SK Sigma Olomouc" label="Sigma Olomouc"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="18863" end="18879" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19473" start="19725" end="19742" title="Huddersfield Town A.F.C." label="Huddersfield Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19449" start="20333" end="20342" title="Blackpool F.C." label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079505" start="20419" end="20428" title="List of Premier League hat-tricks" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="20490" end="20496" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="20890" end="20905" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="21333" end="21342" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="21437" end="21443" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q318043" start="21447" end="21461" title="Craven Cottage" label="Craven Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="21566" end="21573" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="21579" end="21589" title="Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="21844" end="21861" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q180939" start="21941" end="21953" title="Peter Crouch" label="Peter Crouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="22005" end="22014" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q386876" start="22045" end="22062" title="Emmanuel Adebayor" label="Emmanuel Adebayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="22141" end="22157" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333687" start="22315" end="22333" title="North London derby" label="North London derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="22349" end="22356" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="22433" end="22449" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22541" end="22559" title="2011–12 FA Cup#Semi-finals" label="FA Cup semi-finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="22582" end="22589" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q186425" start="22708" end="22723" title="White Hart Lane" label="White Hart Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q221349" start="22732" end="22746" title="Harry Redknapp" label="Harry Redknapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="22933" end="22943" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="23073" end="23080" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609" start="23344" end="23349" title="S.S. Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641" start="23496" end="23502" title="SSC Napoli" label="Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="23876" end="23883" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207401" start="23972" end="23983" title="Ledley King" label="Ledley King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="24219" end="24228" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="24698" end="24704" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q770252" start="24764" end="24804" title="1997 UEFA European Under-18 Championship" label="1997 UEFA European Under-18 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873511" start="24813" end="24821" title="Portugal national under-18 football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="24856" end="24862" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="24944" end="24963" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="25250" end="25257" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q102920" start="25315" end="25329" title="UEFA Euro 2004" label="UEFA Euro 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q180798" start="25438" end="25445" title="Andorra national football team" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="25602" end="25613" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q45901" start="25676" end="25689" title="Thierry Henry" label="Thierry Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q134925" start="25866" end="25872" title="Greece national football team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="26020" end="26034" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="26174" end="26181" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q268567" start="26423" end="26448" title="2006 FIFA World Cup Final" label="2006 FIFA World Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="26493" end="26498" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="26564" end="26572" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181190" start="26679" end="26701" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina national football team" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q186268" start="26828" end="26835" title="Georgia national football team" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200688" start="26930" end="26943" title="Faroe Islands national football team" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907" start="27042" end="27053" title="Hugo Lloris" label="Hugo Lloris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913" start="27070" end="27085" title="Florent Malouda" label="Florent Malouda"/>
<link wikidata="Q192648" start="27284" end="27300" title="Raymond Domenech" label="Raymond Domenech"/>
<link wikidata="Q186252" start="27492" end="27499" title="Belarus national football team" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="27620" end="27627" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="27729" end="27735" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="27756" end="27763" title="British English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="27805" end="27811" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="28033" end="28043" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q47967" start="28045" end="28063" title="North West England" label="North West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="28091" end="28106" title="Southern France" label="south of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="28482" end="28512" title="Football League First Division" label="Football League First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436291" start="28514" end="28521" title="2000–01 Football League First Division" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q182068" start="28523" end="28541" title="UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195287" start="28543" end="28547" title="2002 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="28568" end="28582" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q190112" start="28584" end="28591" title="2006–07 FA Premier League" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q187376" start="28593" end="28600" title="2007–08 Premier League" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="28602" end="28621" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q909467" start="28623" end="28630" title="2005–06 Football League Cup" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="28632" end="28653" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q186489" start="28655" end="28662" title="2007–08 UEFA Champions League" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="28673" end="28679" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q615034" start="28691" end="28698" title="2008–09 FA Cup" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q677053" start="28712" end="28747" title="UEFA European Under-18 Championship" label="UEFA European Under-18 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q770252" start="28749" end="28753" title="1997 UEFA European Under-18 Championship" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="28763" end="28777" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="28789" end="28793" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="28807" end="28827" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28829" end="28851" title="PFA Team of the Year (2000s)#First Division 2" label="2000–01 First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q890790" start="28853" end="28887" title="Premier League Player of the Month" label="Premier League Player of the Month"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28889" end="28900" title="2001–02 FA Premier League#Monthly awards" label="August 2001"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816796" wikidata="Q433775" url="?curid=816796" title="ATC code A07">
<text>==A07A Intestinal anti-infectives==

===A07AA Antibiotics===
List from 01-54
:A07AA01 Neomycin
:A07AA02 Nystatin
:A07AA03 Natamycin
:A07AA04 Streptomycin
:A07AA05 Polymyxin B
:A07AA06 Paromomycin
:A07AA07 Amphotericin B
:A07AA08 Kanamycin
:A07AA09 Vancomycin
:A07AA10 Colistin
:A07AA11 Rifaximin
:A07AA12 Fidaxomicin
:A07AA13 Rifamycin
:A07AA51 Neomycin, combinations
:A07AA54 Streptomycin, combinations

:QA07AA90 Dihydrostreptomycin
:QA07AA91 Gentamicin
:QA07AA92 Apramycin
:QA07AA93 Bacitracin
:QA07AA94 Enramycin
:QA07AA95 Avilamycin
:QA07AA96 Bambermycin
:QA07AA98 Colistin, combinations with other antibacterials
:QA07AA99 Antibiotics, combinations

===A07AB Sulfonamides ===
:A07AB02 Phthalylsulfathiazole
:A07AB03 Sulfaguanidine
:A07AB04 Succinylsulfathiazole
:QA07AB20 Sulfonamides, combinations
:QA07AB90 Formosulfathiazole
:QA07AB92 Phthalylsulfathiazole, combinations
:QA07AB99 Combinations

===A07AC Imidazole derivatives===
:A07AC01 Miconazole

===A07AX Other intestinal anti-infectives===
:A07AX01 Broxyquinoline
:A07AX02 Acetarsol
:A07AX03 Nifuroxazide
:A07AX04 Nifurzide
:QA07AX90 Poly(2-propenal, 2-propenoic acid)
:QA07AX91 Halquinol

==A07B Intestinal adsorbents==

===A07BA Charcoal preparations===
:A07BA01 Medicinal charcoal
:A07BA51 Medicinal charcoal, combinations

===A07BB Bismuth preparations===

===A07BC Other intestinal adsorbents===
:A07BC01 Pectin
:A07BC02 Kaolin
:A07BC03 Crospovidone
:A07BC04 Attapulgite
:A07BC05 Diosmectite
:A07BC30 Combinations
:A07BC54 Attapulgite, combinations

==A07C Electrolytes with carbohydrates==

===A07CA Oral rehydration salt formulations===
::&quot;Subgroup A07CA is only included in the human ATC classification.&quot;

===QA07CQ Oral rehydration formulations for veterinary use===
:QA07CQ01 Oral electrolytes
:QA07CQ02 Oral electrolytes and carbohydrates

==A07D Antipropulsives==

===A07DA Antipropulsives===
:A07DA01 Diphenoxylate
:A07DA02 Opium
:A07DA03 Loperamide
:A07DA04 Difenoxin
:A07DA05 Loperamide oxide
:A07DA06 Eluxadoline
:A07DA52 Morphine, combinations
:A07DA53 Loperamide, combinations

==A07E Intestinal anti-inflammatory agents==

===A07EA Corticosteroids acting locally===
:A07EA01 Prednisolone
:A07EA02 Hydrocortisone
:A07EA03 Prednisone
:A07EA04 Betamethasone
:A07EA05 Tixocortol
:A07EA06 Budesonide
:A07EA07 Beclometasone

===A07EB Antiallergic agents, excluding corticosteroids===
:A07EB01 Cromoglicic acid

===A07EC Aminosalicylic acid and similar agents===
:A07EC01 Sulfasalazine
:A07EC02 Mesalazine
:A07EC03 Olsalazine
:A07EC04 Balsalazide

==A07F Antidiarrheal micro-organisms==

===A07FA Antidiarrheal micro-organisms===
:A07FA01 Lactic acid producing organisms
:A07FA02 Saccharomyces boulardii
:A07FA03 Escherichia coli
:A07FA51 Lactic acid producing organisms, combinations
:QA07FA90 Probiotics

==A07X Other antidiarrheals==

===A07XA Other antidiarrheals===
:A07XA01 Albumin tannate
:A07XA02 Ceratonia
:A07XA03 Calcium compounds
:A07XA04 Racecadotril
:A07XA06 Crofelemer
:A07XA51 Albumin tannate, combinations
:QA07XA90 Aluminium salicylates, basic
:QA07XA91 Zinc oxide
:QA07XA92 Zinc disodium edetate
:QA07XA99 Other antidiarrheals, combinations

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="46" end="56" title="Antibiotic" label="Antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q423098" start="86" end="94" title="Neomycin" label="Neomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q251005" start="104" end="112" title="Nystatin" label="Nystatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q248466" start="122" end="131" title="Natamycin" label="Natamycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192717" start="141" end="153" title="Streptomycin" label="Streptomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088175" start="163" end="174" title="Polymyxin B" label="Polymyxin B"/>
<link wikidata="Q415625" start="184" end="195" title="Paromomycin" label="Paromomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q412223" start="205" end="219" title="Amphotericin B" label="Amphotericin B"/>
<link wikidata="Q27094615" start="229" end="238" title="Kanamycin" label="Kanamycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q424027" start="248" end="258" title="Vancomycin" label="Vancomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418946" start="268" end="276" title="Colistin" label="Colistin"/>
<link wikidata="Q416073" start="286" end="295" title="Rifaximin" label="Rifaximin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446672" start="305" end="316" title="Fidaxomicin" label="Fidaxomicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q388565" start="326" end="335" title="Rifamycin" label="Rifamycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q423098" start="345" end="353" title="Neomycin" label="Neomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192717" start="377" end="389" title="Streptomycin" label="Streptomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707637" start="415" end="434" title="Dihydrostreptomycin" label="Dihydrostreptomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422482" start="445" end="455" title="Gentamicin" label="Gentamicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418940" start="466" end="475" title="Apramycin" label="Apramycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61954719" start="486" end="496" title="Bacitracin" label="Bacitracin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119098" start="507" end="516" title="Enramycin" label="Enramycin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="527" end="537" title="Avilamycin" label="Avilamycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837500" start="548" end="559" title="Bambermycin" label="Bambermycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q411398" start="665" end="676" title="Sulfonamide (medicine)" label="Sulfonamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493189" start="691" end="712" title="Phthalylsulfathiazole" label="Phthalylsulfathiazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q414886" start="722" end="736" title="Sulfaguanidine" label="Sulfaguanidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976577" start="746" end="767" title="Succinylsulfathiazole" label="Succinylsulfathiazole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="815" end="833" title="Formosulfathiazole" label="Formosulfathiazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q328692" start="913" end="922" title="Imidazole" label="Imidazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q410534" start="947" end="957" title="Miconazole" label="Miconazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976946" start="1013" end="1027" title="Broxyquinoline" label="Broxyquinoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q584079" start="1037" end="1046" title="Acetarsol" label="Acetarsol"/>
<link wikidata="Q822929" start="1056" end="1068" title="Nifuroxazide" label="Nifuroxazide"/>
<link wikidata="Q15409365" start="1078" end="1087" title="Nifurzide" label="Nifurzide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1098" end="1132" title="Poly(2-propenal, 2-propenoic acid)" label="Poly(2-propenal, 2-propenoic acid)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1143" end="1152" title="Halquinol" label="Halquinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="1195" end="1203" title="Charcoal" label="Charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="1300" end="1307" title="Bismuth" label="Bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188154" start="1374" end="1380" title="Pectin" label="Pectin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="1390" end="1396" title="Kaolin" label="Kaolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003746" start="1406" end="1418" title="Crospovidone" label="Crospovidone"/>
<link wikidata="Q414065" start="1428" end="1439" title="Attapulgite" label="Attapulgite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162027" start="1449" end="1460" title="Diosmectite" label="Diosmectite"/>
<link wikidata="Q414065" start="1492" end="1503" title="Attapulgite" label="Attapulgite"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="1526" end="1537" title="Electrolyte" label="Electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="1544" end="1556" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381652" start="1570" end="1591" title="Oral rehydration salt" label="Oral rehydration salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775138" start="1832" end="1846" title="Antipropulsive" label="Antipropulsive"/>
<link wikidata="Q416431" start="1888" end="1901" title="Diphenoxylate" label="Diphenoxylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="1911" end="1916" title="Opium" label="Opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q423751" start="1926" end="1936" title="Loperamide" label="Loperamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275251" start="1946" end="1955" title="Difenoxin" label="Difenoxin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1965" end="1981" title="Loperamide oxide" label="Loperamide oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q20539232" start="1991" end="2002" title="Eluxadoline" label="Eluxadoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="2012" end="2020" title="Morphine" label="Morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q423751" start="2044" end="2054" title="Loperamide" label="Loperamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426176" start="2168" end="2180" title="Prednisolone" label="Prednisolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q26981430" start="2190" end="2204" title="Hydrocortisone" label="Hydrocortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q424972" start="2214" end="2224" title="Prednisone" label="Prednisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q416132" start="2234" end="2247" title="Betamethasone" label="Betamethasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810486" start="2257" end="2267" title="Tixocortol" label="Tixocortol"/>
<link wikidata="Q422212" start="2277" end="2287" title="Budesonide" label="Budesonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q421475" start="2297" end="2310" title="Beclometasone" label="Beclometasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q416427" start="2380" end="2396" title="Cromoglicic acid" label="Cromoglicic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823237" start="2407" end="2426" title="Aminosalicylic acid" label="Aminosalicylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q420035" start="2458" end="2471" title="Sulfasalazine" label="Sulfasalazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q412479" start="2481" end="2491" title="Mesalazine" label="Mesalazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q347621" start="2501" end="2511" title="Olsalazine" label="Olsalazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q347337" start="2521" end="2532" title="Balsalazide" label="Balsalazide"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="2625" end="2636" title="Lactic acid" label="Lactic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q135368" start="2666" end="2689" title="Saccharomyces boulardii" label="Saccharomyces boulardii"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="2699" end="2715" title="Escherichia coli" label="Escherichia coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="2781" end="2790" title="Probiotic" label="Probiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712794" start="2866" end="2881" title="Albumin tannate" label="Albumin tannate"/>
<link wikidata="Q159376" start="2891" end="2900" title="Ceratonia" label="Ceratonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="2910" end="2917" title="Calcium" label="Calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q416677" start="2937" end="2949" title="Racecadotril" label="Racecadotril"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187464" start="2959" end="2969" title="Crofelemer" label="Crofelemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712794" start="2979" end="2994" title="Albumin tannate" label="Albumin tannate"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="3019" end="3028" title="Aluminium" label="Aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q193572" start="3029" end="3039" title="salicylate" label="salicylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190077" start="3058" end="3068" title="Zinc oxide" label="Zinc oxide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3079" end="3100" title="Zinc disodium edetate" label="Zinc disodium edetate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816800" wikidata="Q3987361" url="?curid=816800" title="The Great Bear (lithograph)">
<text>The Great Bear is a 1992 lithograph by Simon Patterson. At first glance the work looks like the London Underground Tube map, but Patterson uses each line to represent groups of people, including scientists, saints, philosophers, comedians, explorers and footballers.

The copyright of the work is shared between the artist and London Underground from whom the artist obtained permission after protracted negotiation.

A copy of &quot;The Great Bear&quot; can be found in the Tate Gallery. The work is in an edition of 50 with a small additional number of artist&#x27;s proofs.

==Responses==
Ian Russell, writing in &quot;Images, representations and heritage: moving beyond modern approaches to archaeology&quot; in 2006, felt that the map emphasises that &quot;the tube map distorts and masks realities&quot;. Social historian Joe Moran wrote in his 2005 work &quot;Reading the Everyday&quot; that the map &quot;suggests that the tube map has become its own reality, entirely abstracted from the work it ostensibly represents&quot;. David Pike, author of &#x27;Modernist Space and the Transformation of Underground London&#x27;, expressed his belief that Patterson &quot;discovered the dreams of modernism within the world of the 1990s in the same way that he found the dreams of the present lurking within the modernist space of Harry Beck&#x27;s underground map&quot;, comparing the work to the writing of Iain Sinclair and the artwork of Mark Dion.

==References==
==External links==
*The Great Bear (detail)
*The Great Bear in the Tate Collection </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="25" end="35" title="lithograph" label="lithograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519497" start="39" end="54" title="Simon Patterson (artist)" label="Simon Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="96" end="114" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014543" start="115" end="123" title="Tube map" label="Tube map"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="195" end="204" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="207" end="212" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="215" end="226" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q245068" start="229" end="237" title="comedian" label="comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="240" end="248" title="explorer" label="explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="254" end="265" title="football (soccer)" label="footballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q430682" start="475" end="487" title="Tate Gallery" label="Tate Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211431" start="828" end="837" title="Joe Moran (social historian)" label="Joe Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980623" start="1409" end="1422" title="Iain Sinclair" label="Iain Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900022" start="1442" end="1451" title="Mark Dion" label="Mark Dion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816807" wikidata="Q1361045" url="?curid=816807" title="Wi-Fi Alliance">
<text>The Wi-Fi Alliance is a non-profit organization that owns the Wi-Fi trademark. Manufacturers may use the trademark to brand products certified for Wi-Fi interoperability. It is based in Austin, Texas.

==History==
Early 802.11 products suffered from interoperability problems because the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) had no provision for testing equipment for compliance with its standards.

In 1999, pioneers of a new, higher-speed variant endorsed the IEEE 802.11b specification to form the Wireless Ethernet Compatibility Alliance (WECA) and branded the new technology Wi-Fi.

The group of companies included 3Com, Aironet (acquired by Cisco), Harris Semiconductor (now Intersil), Lucent Technologies (the WLAN part was renamed as Orinoco, become part of Avaya, then acquired by Extreme Networks), Nokia and Symbol Technologies (acquired by Motorola, Zebra Technologies, and now Extreme Networks).

The alliance lists Apple, Comcast, Samsung, Sony, LG, Intel, Dell, Broadcom, Cisco, Qualcomm, Motorola, Microsoft, Texas Instruments, and T-Mobile as key sponsors. The charter for this independent organization was to perform testing, certify interoperability of products, and to promote the technology.

WECA renamed itself the &quot;Wi-Fi Alliance&quot; in 2002.

Most producers of 802.11 equipment became members, and the Wi-Fi Alliance included over 550 member companies. The Wi-Fi Alliance extended Wi-Fi beyond wireless local area network applications into point-to-point and personal area networking and enabled specific applications such as Miracast.

==Wi-Fi certification==
The Wi-Fi Alliance owns and controls the &quot;Wi-Fi Certified&quot; logo, a registered trademark, which is permitted only on equipment which has passed testing. Purchasers relying on that trademark may have greater chances of interoperation than otherwise. Testing involves not only radio and data format interoperability, but security protocols, as well as optional testing for quality of service and power management protocols. Wi-Fi Certified products have to demonstrate that they can perform well in networks with other Wi-Fi Certified products, running common applications, in situations similar to those encountered in everyday use. 
Certification employs 3 principles:
* Interoperability is the primary target of certification. Rigorous test cases are used to ensure that products from different equipment vendors can interoperate in a wide variety of configurations.
* Backward compatibility has to be preserved to allow for new equipment to work with existing gear. Backward compatibility protects investments in legacy Wi-Fi products and enables users to gradually upgrade and expand their networks.
* New certification programs allow newer technology and specifications come into the marketplace. These certification programs may be mandatory (e.g., WPA2) or optional (e.g., WMM).
The Wi-Fi Alliance definition of interoperability demands that products have to show satisfactory performance levels in typical network configurations and have to support both established and emerging applications. 
The Wi-Fi Alliance certification process includes three types of tests to ensure interoperability. Wi-Fi Certified products are tested for:
* Compatibility: certified equipment has been tested for connectivity with other certified equipment. Compatibility testing has always been, and still is, the predominant component of interoperability testing, and it is the element that most people associate with &quot;interoperability&quot;. It involves tests with multiple devices from different equipment vendors.
* Conformance: the equipment conforms to specific critical elements of the IEEE 802.11 standard. Conformance testing usually involves standalone analysis of individual products and establishes whether the equipment responds to inputs as expected and specified. For example, conformance testing is used to ensure that Wi-Fi equipment protects itself and the network when the equipment detects evidence of network attacks.
* Performance: the equipment meets the performance levels required. Performance tests are not designed to measure and compare performance among products, but simply to verify that the product meets the minimum performance requirements. Specific performance tests results are not released by the Wi-Fi Alliance.

=== Certification types ===
The Wi-Fi Alliance provides certification testing in two levels:

Mandatory:
* Core MAC/PHY interoperability over 802.11a, 802.11b, 802.11g, and 802.11n (at least one).
* Wi-Fi Protected Access 2 (WPA2) security, which aligns with IEEE 802.11i. WPA2 is available in two types: WPA2-Personal for consumer use, and WPA2 Enterprise, which adds EAP authentication.

Optional:
* Tests corresponding to IEEE 802.11h and 802.11d.
* WMM Quality of Service, based upon a subset of IEEE 802.11e.
* WMM Power Save, based upon APSD within IEEE 802.11e
* Wi-Fi Protected Setup, a specification developed by the Alliance to ease the process of setting up and enabling security protections on small office and consumer Wi-Fi networks.
* Application Specific Device (ASD), for wireless devices other than Access Point and Station which has specific application, such as DVD players, projectors, printers, etc.
* Converged Wireless Group–Radio Frequency (CWG-RF, offered in conjunction with CTIA), to provide performance mapping of Wi-Fi and cellular radios in converged devices.
* Passpoint/Hotspot 2.0

==Certification programs==
There are a number of certification programs by Wi-Fi alliance:

=== 2.4/5/6GHz Wi-Fi ===
The 802.11 protocols are IEEE standards, identified as 802.11b, 11g, 11n, 11ac, etc. In 2018 The Wi-Fi Alliance created the simpler generation labels Wi-Fi 4 - 6 beginning with Wi-Fi 5, retroactively added Wi-Fi 4 and later added Wi-Fi 6 and Wi-Fi 6E. Wi-Fi 5 had Wave 1 and Wave 2 phases. Wi-Fi 6E extends the 2.4/5 GHz range to 6 GHz, where licensed. Listed in historical and capacity order. See the individual 802.11 articles for version details or 802.11 for a composite summary.

=== WiGig ===
WiGig refers to 60 GHz wireless local area network connection. It was initially announced in 2013 by Wireless Gigabit Alliance, and was adopted by the Wi-Fi Alliance in 2013. They started certifying in 2016. The first version of WiGig is IEEE 802.11ad, and a newer version IEEE 802.11ay was released in 2021.

=== Wi-Fi Direct ===
In October 2010, the Alliance began to certify Wi-Fi Direct, that allows Wi-Fi-enabled devices to communicate directly with each other by setting up ad-hoc networks, without going through a wireless access point or hotspot. Since 2009 when it was first announced, some suggested Wi-Fi Direct might replace the need for Bluetooth on applications that do not rely on Bluetooth low energy.

=== WPA ===
Wi-Fi Protected Access is a security mechanism based on IEEE 802.11i amendment to the standard that the Wi-Fi Alliance started to certify from the year of 2003.

===IBSS with Wi-Fi Protected Setup===
IBSS with Wi-Fi Protected Setup would enable the creation of ad hoc network between devices directly without central access point.

===Wi-Fi Passpoint===
Wi-Fi Passpoint, alternatively known as Hotspot 2.0, is a solution for enabling inter-carrier roaming. It utilizes IEEE 802.11u.

===Wi-Fi Easy Connect===
Wi-Fi Easy Connect is a protocol that would enable easily establishing connections via QR code.

===Wi-Fi Protected Setup===
Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS) is a network security standard to simply create a secure wireless home network, created and introduced by Wi-Fi Alliance in 2006.

===Miracast===
Miracast, introduced in 2012, is a standard for wireless display connections from devices such as laptops, tablets, or smartphones. Its goal is to replace cables connecting from the device to the display.

===Wi-Fi Aware===
Wi-Fi Aware is an interoperability certification program announced in January 2015 that enables device users, when in the range of a particular access point or another compatible device, to receive notifications of applications or services available in the proximity. Later versions of this standard included new features such as the capability to establish a peer-to-peer data connection for file transfer.

Fears were voiced immediately in media that it would be predominantly used for proximity marketing.

===Wi-Fi Location===
Wi-Fi Location is a type of Wi-Fi positioning system, and the certification could help providing accuracy to in-door positioning.

===TDLS===
TDLS, or Tunneled Direct Link Setup, is &quot;a seamless way to stream media and other data faster between devices already on the same Wi-Fi network&quot; based on IEEE 802.11z and added to Wi-Fi Alliance certification program in 2012. Devices using it communicate directly with one another, without involving the wireless network&#x27;s router.

=== Wi-Fi Agile Multiband ===
The certification of Wi-Fi Agile Multiband indicate devices can automatically connect and maintain connection in the most suitable way. It covers the IEEE 802.11k standard about access point information report, the IEEE 802.11v standard that enable exchanging information about state of network, IEEE 802.11u standard about additional information of a Wi-Fi network, IEEE 802.11r about fast transition roaming between different access points, as well as other technologies specified by Wi-Fi alliance.

=== Wi-Fi EasyMesh ===
Wi-Fi EasyMesh is a certification program based on its Multi-Access Point specification for creating Wi-Fi meshes from products by different vendors, based on IEEE 1905.1. It is intended to address the problem of Wi-Fi systems that need to cover large areas where several routers serve as multiple access points, working together to form a larger/extended and unified network.

=== Wi-Fi Vantage===
Formerly known as Carrier Wi-Fi, Wi-Fi Vantage is a certification program for operators to maintain and manage quality Wi-Fi connections in high usage environment. It includes a number of certification, such as Wi-Fi certified ac (as in 802.11ac), Passpoint, Agile Multiband, and Optimized Connectivity.

=== WMM ===
Wi-Fi Multimedia (WMM) or known as Wireless Multimedia Extensions is a Wi-Fi Alliance interoperability certification based on the IEEE 802.11e standard. It provides basic quality of service (QoS) features to IEEE 802.11 networks.

=== Wi-Fi Home Design ===
Wi-Fi Home Design is a set of guidelines released by Wi-Fi alliance for inclusion of wireless network in home design.

=== Wi-Fi HaLow ===
Wi-Fi HaLow is a standard for low-power wide-area (LPWA) connection standard using sub-1 GHz spectrum for IoT devices. It is based on IEEE 802.11ah.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1361045" start="4" end="18" title="Wi-Fi Alliance" label="Wi-Fi Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="62" end="67" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="68" end="77" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="186" end="199" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193228" start="220" end="226" title="IEEE 802.11" label="802.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q749647" start="250" end="266" title="interoperability" label="interoperability"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="288" end="337" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747387" start="482" end="494" title="IEEE 802.11b" label="IEEE 802.11b"/>
<link wikidata="Q229329" start="640" end="644" title="3Com" label="3Com"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="667" end="672" title="Cisco" label="Cisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433308" start="675" end="695" title="Harris Semiconductor" label="Harris Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065090" start="701" end="709" title="Intersil" label="Intersil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873176" start="712" end="731" title="Lucent Technologies" label="Lucent Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q212433" start="786" end="791" title="Avaya" label="Avaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034659" start="810" end="826" title="Extreme Networks" label="Extreme Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="829" end="834" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q603253" start="839" end="858" title="Symbol Technologies" label="Symbol Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="872" end="880" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443609" start="882" end="900" title="Zebra Technologies" label="Zebra Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034659" start="910" end="926" title="Extreme Networks" label="Extreme Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="949" end="954" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="956" end="963" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="965" end="972" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="974" end="978" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q136778" start="980" end="982" title="LG" label="LG"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="984" end="989" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="991" end="995" title="Dell" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q790060" start="997" end="1005" title="Broadcom" label="Broadcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="1007" end="1012" title="Cisco" label="Cisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q544847" start="1014" end="1022" title="Qualcomm" label="Qualcomm"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="1024" end="1032" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1034" end="1043" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="1045" end="1062" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511885" start="1068" end="1076" title="T-Mobile US" label="T-Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="1446" end="1473" title="wireless LAN" label="wireless local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638863" start="1578" end="1586" title="Miracast" label="Miracast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="1682" end="1686" title="logo" label="logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="1701" end="1710" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254335" start="1941" end="1958" title="security protocol" label="security protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q272165" start="2876" end="2880" title="WPA2" label="WPA2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598418" start="2901" end="2904" title="Wireless Multimedia Extensions" label="WMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="3035" end="3042" title="computer network" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="3706" end="3710" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q193228" start="3711" end="3717" title="802.11" label="802.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072285" start="3728" end="3747" title="Conformance testing" label="Conformance testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421681" start="4506" end="4513" title="802.11a" label="802.11a"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747387" start="4515" end="4522" title="802.11b" label="802.11b"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746589" start="4524" end="4531" title="802.11g" label="802.11g"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193354" start="4537" end="4544" title="802.11n" label="802.11n"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598418" start="4817" end="4820" title="Wi-Fi Multimedia" label="WMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836466" start="4934" end="4955" title="Wi-Fi Protected Setup" label="Wi-Fi Protected Setup"/>
<link wikidata="Q193228" start="6049" end="6055" title="IEEE 802.11" label="802.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q59325959" start="6096" end="6101" title="WiGig" label="WiGig"/>
<link wikidata="Q719462" start="6197" end="6222" title="Wireless Gigabit Alliance" label="Wireless Gigabit Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q59326100" start="6334" end="6347" title="IEEE 802.11ad" label="IEEE 802.11ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25100938" start="6369" end="6382" title="IEEE 802.11ay" label="IEEE 802.11ay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151146" start="6474" end="6486" title="Wi-Fi Direct" label="Wi-Fi Direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q326717" start="6617" end="6638" title="wireless access point" label="wireless access point"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="6746" end="6755" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q272165" start="6827" end="6849" title="Wi-Fi Protected Access" label="Wi-Fi Protected Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q25551897" start="7088" end="7102" title="ad hoc network" label="ad hoc network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7221" end="7232" title="Hotspot (Wi-Fi)#Hotspot 2.0" label="Hotspot 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566612" start="7296" end="7308" title="IEEE 802.11u" label="IEEE 802.11u"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203" start="7423" end="7430" title="QR code" label="QR code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836466" start="7461" end="7482" title="Wi-Fi Protected Setup" label="Wi-Fi Protected Setup"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="7546" end="7567" title="Wi-Fi" label="wireless home network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638863" start="7635" end="7643" title="Miracast" label="Miracast"/>
<link wikidata="Q368199" start="8347" end="8366" title="proximity marketing" label="proximity marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q838287" start="8418" end="8442" title="Wi-Fi positioning system" label="Wi-Fi positioning system"/>
<link wikidata="Q24589626" start="8532" end="8536" title="TDLS" label="TDLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q24589626" start="8696" end="8708" title="IEEE 802.11z" label="IEEE 802.11z"/>
<link wikidata="Q10516843" start="9059" end="9071" title="IEEE 802.11k" label="IEEE 802.11k"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970262" start="9124" end="9136" title="IEEE 802.11v" label="IEEE 802.11v"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566612" start="9205" end="9217" title="IEEE 802.11u" label="IEEE 802.11u"/>
<link wikidata="Q634749" start="9276" end="9288" title="IEEE 802.11r" label="IEEE 802.11r"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970438" start="9594" end="9605" title="IEEE 1905.1" label="IEEE 1905.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598418" start="10186" end="10216" title="Wireless Multimedia Extensions" label="Wireless Multimedia Extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185681" start="10281" end="10293" title="IEEE 802.11e" label="IEEE 802.11e"/>
<link wikidata="Q220501" start="10322" end="10340" title="quality of service" label="quality of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q193228" start="10359" end="10370" title="IEEE 802.11" label="IEEE 802.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995157" start="10547" end="10558" title="Wi-Fi HaLow" label="Wi-Fi HaLow"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="10653" end="10656" title="Internet of things" label="IoT"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995157" start="10681" end="10694" title="IEEE 802.11ah" label="IEEE 802.11ah"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816814" wikidata="Q5351689" url="?curid=816814" title="El Nido">
<text>El Nido may refer to:

==Places==
*El Nido, Merced County, California
*El Nido, Los Angeles County, California, community in Los Angeles County near Malibu
*El Nido, Torrance, California, neighborhood in Torrance, California
*El Nido, Palawan, Philippines

==Others==
*&quot;El Nido&quot; (film), a 1979 Spanish film
*El Nido, Hamilton, a heritage-listed house in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
*The fictional island archipelago from &quot;Chrono Cross&quot;
*The Nest (aviary), El Nido in Spanish, an aviary in Ixtapaluca, Mexico</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5351689" start="0" end="7" title="El Nido" label="El Nido"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478167" start="35" end="69" title="El Nido, Merced County, California" label="El Nido, Merced County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044387" start="71" end="110" title="El Nido, Los Angeles County, California" label="El Nido, Los Angeles County, California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="157" end="186" title="El Nido, Torrance, California" label="El Nido, Torrance, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q489197" start="204" end="224" title="Torrance, California" label="Torrance, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q111483" start="226" end="242" title="El Nido, Palawan" label="El Nido, Palawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402538" start="269" end="295" title="El Nido (film)" label="&amp;quot;El Nido&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754803" start="318" end="335" title="El Nido, Hamilton" label="El Nido, Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088142" start="441" end="453" title="Chrono Cross" label="Chrono Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q18416128" start="461" end="478" title="The Nest (aviary)" label="The Nest (aviary)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816816" wikidata="Q7519497" url="?curid=816816" title="Simon Patterson (artist)">
<text>Simon Patterson (born 1967) is an English artist and was born in Leatherhead, Surrey. He was shortlisted for the Turner Prize in 1996 for his exhibitions at the Lisson Gallery, the Gandy Gallery, and three shows in Japan. He is the younger brother of the painter Richard Patterson.

==Life and career==

Patterson attended Hertfordshire College of Art and Design and Goldsmiths College between 1985 and 1989. At Goldsmiths he was included in the Freeze Exhibition organized by Damien Hirst, showing two wall text pieces, one simply showing the names Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor, the other, &quot;The Last Supper Arranged According to the Flat Back Four Formation (Jesus Christ in Goal)&quot; showing the names of the Apostles arranged as different football team systems with Jesus in goal.

Patterson is perhaps best known for his work &quot;The Great Bear&quot; from 1992, an editioned print that reworks the London Underground map. Patterson is taking an order system that exists within the world and applies it to another set of subjects. In this case, he switched the names from the stations with names from famous people. Each Line is a different group of people, like actors, philosophers, footballers etc. An edition was purchased by Charles Saatchi and was shown in the Sensation exhibition of 1997, which toured London, Berlin and New York. An edition is in the Tate Gallery collection and is currently on display at Tate Britain in London.

Patterson has also created large-scale projects such as &quot;Cosmic Wallpaper&quot; at the University of Warwick, a Wilfred Owen tribute (Maison Forestière), and he also participated in the MoMA&#x27;s &quot;The Project Series, 70, Banners I&quot;. The project&#x27;s goal for each Simon, Shirin Neshat and Xu Bing was to test the ramifications of the written word in their own unique perspective to be displayed at the Museum’s Fifty-third Street facade flanked by banners bearing MoMA&#x27;s logo from 22 November 1999 to 1 May 2000.

Simon Patterson was a staff member at the Slade School of Fine Art.

==References==
==External links==
* Contemporary Art Society, Annual Report 2001/2002
* Contemporary Art Society, Annual Report 1999/2000
* Christie&#x27;s, Auction Results for Simon Patterson
* Artnet, Biography and Selected Exhibitions
* Simon Patterson interviewed by Robert Dingle, 2009–10
* Tate, Intermedia Art - Le Match des Colors - Simon Patterson
* Artconnexion.org - La Maison Forestière Wilfred Owen - Simon Patterson
* &quot;The Oxford Times&quot; - A room of one&#x27;s Owen - Simon Patterson
* Aajpress.wordpress.com - Simon Patterson: La Maison Forestière. Dedicated to the British poet Wilfred Owen, 2011
* La Maison Forestière by Simon Patterson
* Artnews.org
* Locus+
* Benrimon Contemporary - New York, USA
* Simon Patterson - Catalog for Anthology Exhibition, 2010
* Haunch of Venison - London, United Kingdom

===Video===
* BBC News Magazine - Wilfred Owen: From humble cottage to dazzling tribute
* BBC Collective - Simon Patterson video interview
* Haunch of Venison - Simon Patterson video interview for Under Cartel Exhibition

===Books===
* &quot;Eye on Europe&quot;, Museum of Modern Art, 
* &quot;Paint Ten Rooms&quot;, Locus and International Design Publishing - 
* Domini Canes: The Hounds of God - Publisher: Axis Projects - 
* Paper Democracy: Contemporary Art in Editions on Paper - Publisher: Associacao Cultura Inglesa de Sao Paulo - 
* Simon Patterson - Publisher: Locus+ - 
* &quot;Plantation Lane: Time and Tide&quot;, RIBA Publishing - 
* &quot;Republicans&quot;, Third Eye Centre - 
* &quot;High Noon&quot;, Edinburgh - 
* Simon Patterson: Black-list - Publisher: Haunch of Venison, c2006 - 
* &quot;Rex Reason&quot;, Book Works - 
* &quot;Offside! Contemporary Artists &amp; Football&quot;, Institute of International Visual Arts (INIVA) - </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7519497" start="0" end="15" title="Simon Patterson (artist)" label="Simon Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810766" start="65" end="76" title="Leatherhead" label="Leatherhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="78" end="84" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q284500" start="113" end="125" title="Turner Prize" label="Turner Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6559193" start="161" end="175" title="Lisson Gallery" label="Lisson Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328301" start="263" end="280" title="Richard Patterson (artist)" label="Richard Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q528231" start="367" end="385" title="Goldsmiths College" label="Goldsmiths College"/>
<link wikidata="Q677739" start="446" end="463" title="Freeze (exhibition)" label="Freeze Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q294326" start="477" end="489" title="Damien Hirst" label="Damien Hirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="550" end="564" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="569" end="585" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="725" end="733" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987361" start="850" end="864" title="The Great Bear (lithograph)" label="The Great Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014543" start="918" end="940" title="London Underground map" label="London Underground map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066012" start="1249" end="1264" title="Charles Saatchi" label="Charles Saatchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271243" start="1286" end="1306" title="Sensation exhibition" label="Sensation exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q430682" start="1379" end="1391" title="Tate Gallery" label="Tate Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q195436" start="1434" end="1446" title="Tate Britain" label="Tate Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="1551" end="1572" title="University of Warwick" label="University of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q212719" start="1576" end="1588" title="Wilfred Owen" label="Wilfred Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="1650" end="1654" title="MoMA" label="MoMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q262413" start="1749" end="1762" title="Shirin Neshat" label="Shirin Neshat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932124" start="1767" end="1774" title="Xu Bing" label="Xu Bing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399299" start="2039" end="2063" title="Slade School of Fine Art" label="Slade School of Fine Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816840" wikidata="Q2074448" url="?curid=816840" title="American Youth Congress">
<text>The American Youth Congress (AYC) was an early youth voice organization composed of young people from across the United States who gathered to discuss the problems facing youth as a whole in the 1930s. It met several years in a row, including one notable meeting on the lawn of the White House. The delegates are known to have caused a disturbance when they attempted to access the United States Congress. At the time, United States citizens were not legally considered adults until the age of 21, and so the group focused on the under-discussed economic exploitation of adolescents and children.

The formation of the AYC is seen as a precursor to the establishment of the National Youth Administration. Both the AYC and the NYA are notable for the support lent them by First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt.

Affiliated with the World Youth Congress Movement, the AYC hosted the 1938 Second World Youth Congress at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, New York.

== History ==
The American Youth Congress, or AYC, was formed in 1935 to advocate for youth rights in U.S. politics, and was responsible for introducing the &quot;American Youth Bill of Rights&quot; to the U.S. Congress. First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt&#x27;s relationship with the AYC eventually led to the formation of the National Youth Administration (NYA). While speaking of the NYA in the 1930s, Eleanor Roosevelt expressed her concerns regarding ageism, stating that &quot;I live in real terror when I think we may be losing this generation. We have got to bring these young people into the active life of the community and make them feel that they are necessary.&quot;

On July 4, 1936, the AYC issued the &quot;Declaration of the Rights of American Youth.&quot; The document addressed several issues, chief among them being the inalienable rights they believed were due to young people, and the economic problems which most affected them. Its Chairman in 1937 was William W. Hinckley, a member of the Communist-led Psychologists League. By 1939 the movement claimed 4,697,915 members in 513 affiliated organizations nationwide.

In 1939, the Dies Committee subpoenaed leaders of the AYC, who, in addition to serving the AYC, also were members of the Young Communist League. Eleanor Roosevelt was in attendance at the hearings and afterward invited the subpoenaed witnesses to board at the White House during their stay in Washington D.C. That same year, Joseph P. Lash, one of First Lady Roosevelt&#x27;s boarders during the hearings, described his 1937 defection from the Socialist Party in the Communist weekly, &quot;New Masses&quot;. Another officer, Abbott Simon, who was also a staff member of the Communist Party USA publication, &quot;Champion,&quot; slept for two weeks in Lincoln&#x27;s bed during the hearings.

On February 10, 1940, members of the AYC, as guests of First Lady Roosevelt, attended a picnic on the White House lawn where they were addressed by President Roosevelt from the South Portico. Appealing to them to condemn not merely the Nazi regime but also all other dictatorships, Roosevelt was reportedly booed by the group. Afterwards, many of the same youth picketed the White House as representatives of the American Peace Mobilization.

Later in 1940, despite Eleanor Roosevelt&#x27;s defense of the organization, published under the title &quot;Why I still believe in the Youth Congress,&quot; the American Youth Congress was disbanded.

==See also==
* World Youth Congress Movement
* One World Youth Project
* National Youth Administration
* Youth participation
* Youth movements
* National Commission on Resources for Youth

== References ==

* California Legislature, Joint Fact Finding Committee, Fourth Report, Un-American Activities in California, 1948: Communist Front Organizations; (Sacramento, CA, 1948) p. 180.
* John T. Flynn, &quot;The Roosevelt Myth&quot;, (New York: Devin-Adair, 1948)

== External articles ==

* Eleanor Roosevelt, &quot;Why I Still Believe in the Youth Congress&quot;
* The Student Movement of the 1930s, Joseph P. Lash, Interview.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2074448" start="4" end="27" title="American Youth Congress" label="American Youth Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074448" start="29" end="32" title="American Youth Congress" label="AYC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059355" start="47" end="58" title="youth voice" label="youth voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="113" end="126" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="282" end="293" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="382" end="404" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336958" start="674" end="703" title="National Youth Administration" label="National Youth Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q83396" start="782" end="799" title="Eleanor Roosevelt" label="Eleanor Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q124332299" start="822" end="851" title="World Youth Congress Movement" label="World Youth Congress Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093794" start="908" end="922" title="Vassar College" label="Vassar College"/>
<link wikidata="Q178093" start="926" end="948" title="Poughkeepsie, New York" label="Poughkeepsie, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059346" start="1037" end="1049" title="youth rights" label="youth rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1157" end="1170" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="1172" end="1182" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q83396" start="1183" end="1200" title="Eleanor Roosevelt" label="Eleanor Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336958" start="1273" end="1302" title="National Youth Administration" label="National Youth Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="1958" end="1967" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256394" start="1972" end="1992" title="Psychologists League" label="Psychologists League"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="2099" end="2113" title="HUAC" label="Dies Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23672290" start="2207" end="2229" title="Young Communist League" label="Young Communist League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286020" start="2411" end="2425" title="Joseph P. Lash" label="Joseph P. Lash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988479" start="2577" end="2587" title="New Masses" label="New Masses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2612" end="2624" title="Abbott Simon" label="Abbott Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="2661" end="2680" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="2928" end="2947" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="President Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="3016" end="3020" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3021" end="3027" title="Nazi Germany" label="regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="3047" end="3059" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744666" start="3193" end="3220" title="American Peace Mobilization" label="American Peace Mobilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q124332299" start="3440" end="3469" title="World Youth Congress Movement" label="World Youth Congress Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093431" start="3472" end="3495" title="One World Youth Project" label="One World Youth Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336958" start="3498" end="3527" title="National Youth Administration" label="National Youth Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440040" start="3530" end="3549" title="Youth participation" label="Youth participation"/>
<link wikidata="Q66809493" start="3552" end="3566" title="Youth movement" label="Youth movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932157" start="3570" end="3612" title="National Commission on Resources for Youth" label="National Commission on Resources for Youth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816845" wikidata="Q433777" url="?curid=816845" title="ATC code A08">
<text>==A08A Antiobesity preparations, excluding diet products==

===A08AA Centrally acting antiobesity products===
:A08AA01 Phentermine
:A08AA02 Fenfluramine
:A08AA03 Amfepramone
:A08AA04 Dexfenfluramine
:A08AA05 Mazindol
:A08AA06 Etilamfetamine
:A08AA07 Cathine
:A08AA08 Clobenzorex
:A08AA09 Mefenorex
:A08AA10 Sibutramine
:A08AA11 Lorcaserin
:A08AA12 Setmelanotide
:A08AA51 Phentermine and topiramate
:A08AA56 Ephedrine, combinations
:A08AA62 Bupropion and naltrexone

===A08AB Peripherally acting antiobesity products===
:A08AB01 Orlistat
:QA08AB90 Mitratapide
:QA08AB91 Dirlotapide

===A08AX Other antiobesity drugs===
:A08AX01 Rimonabant

==See also==
*Diet products are in the ATC group V06A.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="11" end="18" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q118713038" start="43" end="47" title="Dieting" label="diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="69" end="78" title="central nervous system" label="Centrally"/>
<link wikidata="Q418157" start="119" end="130" title="Phentermine" label="Phentermine"/>
<link wikidata="Q418928" start="140" end="152" title="Fenfluramine" label="Fenfluramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356505" start="162" end="173" title="Amfepramone" label="Amfepramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025599" start="183" end="198" title="Dexfenfluramine" label="Dexfenfluramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q255680" start="208" end="216" title="Mazindol" label="Mazindol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404591" start="226" end="240" title="Etilamfetamine" label="Etilamfetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q423797" start="250" end="257" title="Cathine" label="Cathine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134761" start="267" end="278" title="Clobenzorex" label="Clobenzorex"/>
<link wikidata="Q10579342" start="288" end="297" title="Mefenorex" label="Mefenorex"/>
<link wikidata="Q424151" start="307" end="318" title="Sibutramine" label="Sibutramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q340139" start="328" end="338" title="Lorcaserin" label="Lorcaserin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21098917" start="348" end="361" title="Setmelanotide" label="Setmelanotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378713" start="371" end="397" title="Phentermine/topiramate" label="Phentermine and topiramate"/>
<link wikidata="Q219626" start="407" end="416" title="Ephedrine" label="Ephedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998036" start="440" end="464" title="Naltrexone/bupropion" label="Bupropion and naltrexone"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="475" end="487" title="peripheral nervous system" label="Peripherally"/>
<link wikidata="Q424163" start="528" end="536" title="Orlistat" label="Orlistat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882383" start="547" end="558" title="Mitratapide" label="Mitratapide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280905" start="569" end="580" title="Dirlotapide" label="Dirlotapide"/>
<link wikidata="Q412529" start="627" end="637" title="Rimonabant" label="Rimonabant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="688" end="692" title="ATC code V06#V06A" label="V06A"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="816862" wikidata="Q619374" url="?curid=816862" title="Ever After">
<text>Ever After (known in promotional material as Ever After: A Cinderella Story) is a 1998 American romantic period drama film inspired by the Charles Perrault fairy tale &quot;Cinderella&quot;. It is directed by Andy Tennant and stars Drew Barrymore, Anjelica Huston, Dougray Scott and Jeanne Moreau. Tennant, Susannah Grant and Rick Parks wrote the screenplay while George Fenton composed the original music score.

The film removes the pantomime and supernatural elements commonly found in retellings of the Cinderella tale and instead treats the story as historical fiction, setting it in Renaissance-era France. It is considered to be a modern, post-feminist interpretation of the fairy tale.

&quot;Ever After&quot; was well received by critics and was a box-office success.

==Plot==
The Brothers Grimm are invited to an audience with the Grande Dame, who expresses her disappointment in their version of Cinderella. She produces a glass slipper and recounts Cinderella&#x27;s true story.

During the French Renaissance, ten years after Auguste de Barbarac dies, his daughter, Danielle, has been forced to become a servant to her stepmother, the Baroness Rodmilla de Ghent, and stepsisters, Marguerite and Jacqueline. One morning, Danielle has an unexpected confrontation with Prince Henry as he is attempting to flee to Genoa to avoid an arranged marriage to Princess Gabriella of Spain, at first mistaking him for a thief. Henry gives Danielle 20 gold francs to keep their interlude secret. He is eventually caught by the Royal Guard after stopping gypsies from robbing Leonardo da Vinci, whom King Francis has invited to the French court.

Danielle, disguised as a noblewoman, heads to the palace to use the coins to buy back a family servant, Maurice, who was sold by Rodmilla. Henry witnesses her arguing with the jailer and, impressed by Danielle&#x27;s passion and intelligence, orders the jailer to release Maurice. When he asks for her name, Danielle gives her late mother&#x27;s name, Countess Nicole de Lancret. King Francis strikes a deal with Henry later that night: in a few days he will hold a masquerade ball at which Henry will announce his engagement to the woman of his choosing at midnight, or else marry Gabriella. Hearing this news, Rodmilla accelerates her efforts at getting Henry to notice Marguerite, while being neglectful to Jacqueline. Meanwhile, Danielle begins secretly spending time with Henry. After visiting the library at a nearby Franciscan monastery, the gypsies ambush them. Impressed with Danielle&#x27;s cleverness, the gypsy leader agrees to let them go and takes them to their camp, where Henry and Danielle share their first kiss.

Rodmilla and Marguerite plan to take the wedding gown and glass slippers that Danielle inherited from Nicole for Marguerite to wear at the ball. When Marguerite insults Nicole, Danielle punches her in the eye and chases her through the house. Marguerite retaliates by destroying the copy of the book &quot;Utopia&quot;, the last book Auguste gave Danielle before he died. Jacqueline expresses sympathy for Danielle and criticizes Marguerite for her cruelty.

Queen Marie holds a luncheon with Marguerite and Rodmilla and expresses curiosity about the mysterious girl who has taken Henry&#x27;s fancy. Rodmilla, recognizing the name of Nicole as Danielle’s mother, deduces that the girl is Danielle. She lies to the Queen that Nicole is engaged and leaving the country that day. 

Danielle cannot bring herself to tell Henry the truth; when he tells her she has changed him as a man, inspiring him to build a university, and that he intends to announce his desire to marry her at the ball, she is overcome with emotion and flees, though she admits that the previous night was the happiest of her life. Rodmilla confronts Danielle about her deception and the whereabouts of the dress and slippers. Unbeknownst to Rodmilla, they were hidden by the servants. Danielle strongly refuses to return them and Rodmilla locks her in the pantry. Maurice convinces an initially reluctant Gustave, Danielle&#x27;s best friend since childhood, to recruit Leonardo to help Danielle escape. He, Gustave, and servants Paulette and Louise send Danielle to the ball wearing her mother&#x27;s dress and shoes. Danielle arrives determined to tell Henry the truth, but Rodmilla exposes her first. Furious, Henry rejects Danielle and she tearfully runs away, leaving behind one of her shoes. Leonardo reproaches Henry for his callousness and leaves him Danielle&#x27;s missing slipper.

Henry decides to marry Gabriella. During the ceremony, he realizes that she is miserable. She admits that she loves someone else as he does and Henry decides to call off the marriage. Maurice and Jacqueline tell him that Rodmilla sold Danielle to Pierre Le Pieu, a nasty, wealthy estate owner who has always pined for Danielle. Henry and Captain Laurent of the King&#x27;s Guard set off to rescue Danielle, only to find that she has freed herself. Henry apologizes, professes his love for her, and proposes marriage by fitting the slipper onto her foot. Danielle happily accepts.

The royal court summons Rodmilla, Marguerite, and Jacqueline where Rodmilla is confronted with her lying to Marie about Danielle. She is stripped of her title and threatened with exile alongside Marguerite unless someone speaks for her. Danielle, now married to Henry, appears and instead asks that Rodmilla be shown the same &quot;courtesy&quot; she had shown her. Rodmilla and Marguerite are reduced to servants in the palace laundry with Danielle vowing that she will never think of either of them again. Leonardo gifts Danielle and Henry with a portrait of Danielle. 

The Grande Dame reveals that Danielle&#x27;s portrait hung in Henry&#x27;s university until the French Revolution. She emphasizes that while her great-great grandparents did live happily ever after, the point is that they lived.

==Cast==
Patrick Godfrey&#x27;s wife Amanda Walker appears an old noblewoman.

==Historical context==

While the story is fictional, it involves several historical figures, places and events. The film is set in the 16th and 19th centuries and features Francis I, Prince Henry (later Henry II of France), Leonardo da Vinci, The Brothers Grimm, as well as allusions to the explorer Jacques Cartier, the fairy tale collector Charles Perrault, the French colonies in the New World, and the French Revolution.

Though the main portion of the film takes place in early 1500s France, the royals shown are most likely not meant to be the historical figures for which they are named. King Francis I summoned Leonardo da Vinci to his court around 1516, three years before King Henry II was born; neither of King Francis I&#x27;s wives was named Marie (the first was named Claude and the second Eleanor). King Henry II was married to Catherine de&#x27; Medici at the age of 14.

==Production==
&quot;Ever After&quot; was filmed in Super 35.

===Locations and sets===
The castle shown in the film is the Château de Hautefort in the Dordogne region of France. Other featured châteaux are de Fénelon, de Losse, de Lanquais, de Beynac and the Château de la Roussie, that served as the house of the de Barbaracs, as well as the city of Sarlat-la-Canéda. The painting of Danielle is based on Leonardo da Vinci&#x27;s &quot;Head of a Woman&quot; (La Scapigliata).

==Reception==
On Rotten Tomatoes, 91% of 66 reviews were positive, with an average score of 7.60/10. The critical consensus states: &quot;&quot;Ever After&quot; is a sweet, frothy twist on the ancient fable, led by a solid turn from star Barrymore&quot;. On Metacritic it has a score of 66 out of 100 based on 22 reviews. Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade &quot;A&quot; on scale of A to F.

Lisa Schwarzbaum from &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; gave the film a B−, saying: &quot;Against many odds, &quot;Ever After&quot; comes up with a good one. This novel variation is still set in the once-upon-a-time 16th century, but it features an active, 1990s-style heroine—she argues about economic theory and civil rights with her royal suitor—rather than a passive, exploited hearth sweeper who warbles &quot;A Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes&quot;&quot;. She also praised Anjelica Huston&#x27;s performance as a cruel stepmother: &quot;Huston does a lot of eye narrowing and eyebrow raising while toddling around in an extraordinary selection of extreme headgear, accompanied by her two less-than-self-actualized daughters—the snooty, social-climbing, nasty Marguerite, and the dim, lumpy, secretly nice Jacqueline. &quot;Nothing is final until you&#x27;re dead&quot;, Mama instructs her girls at the dinner table, &quot;and even then I&#x27;m sure God negotiates&quot;&quot;.

&quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; film critic, Roger Ebert, praises the film with three out of four stars and writes, &quot;The movie [...] is one of surprises, not least that the old tale still has life and passion in it. I went to the screening expecting some sort of soppy children&#x27;s picture and found myself in a costume romance with some of the same energy and zest as &quot;The Mask of Zorro&quot;. And I was reminded again that Drew Barrymore can hold the screen and involve us in her characters. [...] Here, as the little cinder girl, she is able to at last put aside her bedraggled losers and flower as a fresh young beauty, and she brings poignancy and fire to the role&quot;.

==Home media==
On March 2, 1999, the film was released on VHS &amp; DVD.

On April 11, 2003, the film was released on DVD with the movie &quot;Never Been Kissed&quot;—another film starring Drew Barrymore—in a combo pack. On May 26, 2006, the film was released in &quot;The Drew Barrymore Collection&quot; Celebrity Pack, which also contained DVDs of &quot;Never Been Kissed&quot; and &quot;Fever Pitch&quot;. On March 2, 2010, the film was released in a DVD combo pack with the movie &quot;An Affair to Remember&quot;—a double feature celebrating 20th Century Fox&#x27;s 75th anniversary; two months later, the film was then released in a DVD combo pack on May 4, 2010 with the movies &quot;Anna and the King&quot; and &quot;Australia&quot;—a triple feature celebrating the same thing.

On January 4, 2011, the film was released on Blu-ray. On September 4, 2012, it was released with the movie &quot;Never Been Kissed&quot; in a combo pack on Blu-ray. On October 7, 2014, the film was released in a &quot;4 Drew Barrymore Favorites&quot; DVD set with &quot;Never Been Kissed&quot;, &quot;Fever Pitch&quot;, and &quot;Whip It&quot;.

On January 6, 2015, the film was released in a Blu-ray / Digital HD combo pack, region-free. The film was also released on Blu-ray in the UK on August 6, 2018. Then, on January 1, 2019, the film was again released in a Blu-ray / Digital HD combo pack but for Region A.

==Musical adaptation==

A report in 2012 indicated that a musical theatre production was in the works, with the book and lyrics by Marcy Heisler and music by Zina Goldrich. The musical was originally scheduled for its world premiere in April 2009 at the Curran Theatre in San Francisco, but the pre-Broadway run was postponed. In May 2012, the project was back on track with Kathleen Marshall signing on to direct a Broadway run.

A workshop of the musical was held from April 25, 2013 – May 15, 2013 with Sierra Boggess as Danielle, Jeremy Jordan as Prince Henry, and Ashley Spencer as Marguerite. The musical made its world premiere at the Paper Mill Playhouse from May 21, 2015 – June 21, 2015. Christine Ebersole played the role of Baroness Rodmilla de Ghent. Alongside Ebersole, Margo Seibert starred as Danielle, James Snyder as Henry, Charles Shaughnessy as King Francis, and Tony Sheldon as Leonardo da Vinci. Another production of the musical played at Atlanta&#x27;s Alliance Theatre from January 15, 2019 to February 19. The production was directed by Susan V. Booth and starred Sierra Boggess as Danielle de Barbarac, Terry Burrell as Queen Marie, Todd Buonopane as Captain Laurent, David Garrison as Leonardo da Vinci, Chris Kayser as King Francis, Jeff McCarthy as Pierre Malette, Tim Rogan as Prince Henry and Rachel York as Baroness Rodmilla de Ghent.
==See also==
* Cultural references to Leonardo da Vinci

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1054574" start="96" end="104" title="Romance film" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168625" start="105" end="117" title="historical drama" label="period drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q128460" start="139" end="155" title="Charles Perrault" label="Charles Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="156" end="166" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11841" start="173" end="183" title="Cinderella" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q527862" start="209" end="221" title="Andy Tennant" label="Andy Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q676094" start="232" end="246" title="Drew Barrymore" label="Drew Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q190998" start="248" end="263" title="Anjelica Huston" label="Anjelica Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q452788" start="265" end="278" title="Dougray Scott" label="Dougray Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q106099" start="283" end="296" title="Jeanne Moreau" label="Jeanne Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q462348" start="307" end="321" title="Susannah Grant" label="Susannah Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q920167" start="364" end="377" title="George Fenton" label="George Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="435" end="444" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="449" end="461" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="555" end="573" title="historical fiction" label="historical fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="589" end="600" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914319" start="646" end="659" title="Third-wave feminism" label="post-feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="791" end="805" title="Brothers Grimm" label="Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11841" start="908" end="918" title="Cinderella" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349908" start="1004" end="1022" title="French Renaissance" label="French Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="1280" end="1292" title="Henry II of France" label="Prince Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="1324" end="1329" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="1342" end="1359" title="arranged marriage" label="arranged marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1385" end="1390" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403377" start="1457" end="1463" title="Franc" label="francs"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="1575" end="1592" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="1599" end="1611" title="Francis I of France" label="King Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="1998" end="2006" title="Countess" label="Countess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641292" start="2112" end="2127" title="masquerade ball" label="masquerade ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q157512" start="2161" end="2171" title="engagement" label="engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="2469" end="2479" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q404158" start="2984" end="2990" title="Utopia (More book)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12896105" start="3157" end="3165" title="luncheon" label="luncheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="3586" end="3596" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="5221" end="5226" title="Treason" label="lying"/>
<link wikidata="Q797902" start="5671" end="5691" title="Head of a Woman (Leonardo)" label="portrait of Danielle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="5791" end="5808" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739791" start="5962" end="5975" title="Amanda Walker" label="Amanda Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="6177" end="6186" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="6208" end="6226" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="6229" end="6246" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="6248" end="6266" title="Brothers Grimm" label="The Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321" start="6305" end="6320" title="Jacques Cartier" label="Jacques Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q128460" start="6347" end="6363" title="Charles Perrault" label="Charles Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990219" start="6369" end="6401" title="French colonization of the Americas" label="French colonies in the New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="6411" end="6428" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q229208" start="6787" end="6793" title="Claude, Duchess of Brittany" label="Claude"/>
<link wikidata="Q156045" start="6809" end="6816" title="Eleanor of Austria" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="6848" end="6873" title="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518956" start="6945" end="6953" title="Super 35" label="Super 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392601" start="7017" end="7037" title="Château de Hautefort" label="Château de Hautefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357" start="7045" end="7053" title="Dordogne" label="Dordogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241121" start="7100" end="7110" title="Château de Fénelon" label="de Fénelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242266" start="7112" end="7120" title="Château de Losse" label="de Losse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666762" start="7122" end="7133" title="Château de Lanquais" label="de Lanquais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011026" start="7135" end="7144" title="Château de Beynac" label="de Beynac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381" start="7245" end="7261" title="Sarlat-la-Canéda" label="Sarlat-la-Canéda"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="7300" end="7317" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q797902" start="7331" end="7346" title="Head of a Woman (Leonardo)" label="Head of a Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="7389" end="7404" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="7630" end="7640" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="7716" end="7727" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558398" start="7785" end="7801" title="Lisa Schwarzbaum" label="Lisa Schwarzbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="7813" end="7833" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q589793" start="8199" end="8233" title="A Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes" label="A Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="8776" end="8793" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="8813" end="8824" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q309621" start="9151" end="9168" title="The Mask of Zorro" label="The Mask of Zorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="9517" end="9520" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="9527" end="9530" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q463765" start="9602" end="9619" title="Never Been Kissed" label="Never Been Kissed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304902" start="9849" end="9860" title="Fever Pitch (2005 film)" label="Fever Pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q303719" start="9949" end="9970" title="An Affair to Remember" label="An Affair to Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="10006" end="10022" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q563743" start="10150" end="10167" title="Anna and the King" label="Anna and the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q275180" start="10184" end="10193" title="Australia (2008 film)" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="10291" end="10298" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q303213" start="10576" end="10583" title="Whip It (film)" label="Whip It"/>
<link wikidata="Q744616" start="10649" end="10659" title="Digital copy" label="Digital HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351306" start="10672" end="10683" title="region-free" label="region-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10730" end="10732" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q746611" start="10851" end="10859" title="DVD region code" label="Region A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="10920" end="10935" title="musical theatre" label="musical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758575" start="10993" end="11006" title="Marcy Heisler" label="Marcy Heisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072229" start="11020" end="11033" title="Zina Goldrich" label="Zina Goldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194956" start="11116" end="11130" title="Curran Theatre" label="Curran Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="11134" end="11147" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376821" start="11237" end="11254" title="Kathleen Marshall" label="Kathleen Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960258" start="11368" end="11382" title="Sierra Boggess" label="Sierra Boggess"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181572" start="11396" end="11409" title="Jeremy Jordan (actor, born 1984)" label="Jeremy Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805595" start="11431" end="11445" title="Ashley Spencer (actress)" label="Ashley Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132638" start="11504" end="11524" title="Paper Mill Playhouse" label="Paper Mill Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q437438" start="11560" end="11578" title="Christine Ebersole" label="Christine Ebersole"/>
<link wikidata="Q16832237" start="11646" end="11659" title="Margo Seibert" label="Margo Seibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143382" start="11681" end="11693" title="James Snyder (actor)" label="James Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q122473" start="11704" end="11723" title="Charles Shaughnessy" label="Charles Shaughnessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823394" start="11745" end="11757" title="Tony Sheldon (actor)" label="Tony Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732331" start="11839" end="11855" title="Alliance Theatre" label="Alliance Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q728744" start="12057" end="12071" title="David Garrison" label="David Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310433" start="12124" end="12137" title="Jeff McCarthy" label="Jeff McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q528215" start="12187" end="12198" title="Rachel York" label="Rachel York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193396" start="12245" end="12285" title="Cultural references to Leonardo da Vinci" label="Cultural references to Leonardo da Vinci"/>
</links>
</doc>
