<doc id="803611" wikidata="Q1822160" url="?curid=803611" title="Lewis Strauss">
<text>Lewis Lichtenstein Strauss ( ; January 31, 1896January 21, 1974) was an American government official, businessman, philanthropist, and naval officer. He was one of the original members of the United States Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) in 1946 and he served as the commission&#x27;s chairman in the 1950s. Strauss was a major figure in the development of nuclear weapons after World War II, nuclear energy policy, and nuclear power in the United States.

Raised in Richmond, Virginia, Strauss became an assistant to Herbert Hoover as part of the Commission for Relief in Belgium during World War I and the American Relief Administration after that. Strauss then worked as an investment banker at Kuhn, Loeb &amp; Co. during the 1920s and 1930s, where he amassed considerable wealth. As a member of the executive committee of the American Jewish Committee and several other Jewish organizations in the 1930s, Strauss made several attempts to change U.S. policy in order to accept more refugees from Nazi Germany but was unsuccessful. He also came to know and fund some of the research of refugee nuclear physicist Leo Szilard. During World War II, Strauss served as an officer in the U.S. Navy Reserve and rose to the rank of rear admiral due to his work in the Bureau of Ordnance in managing and rewarding plants engaged in production of munitions.

As a founding commissioner with the AEC during the early years of the Cold War, Strauss emphasized the need to protect U.S. atomic secrets and to monitor and stay ahead of atomic developments within the Soviet Union. Accordingly, he was a strong proponent of developing the hydrogen bomb. During his stint as chairman of the AEC, Strauss urged the development of peaceful uses of atomic energy, and he predicted that atomic power would make electricity &quot;too cheap to meter&quot;. At the same time, he downplayed the possible health effects of radioactive fallout such as that experienced by Pacific Islanders following the Castle Bravo thermonuclear test.
Strauss was the driving force behind physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer&#x27;s security clearance hearing, held in April and May 1954 before an AEC Personnel Security Board, in which Oppenheimer&#x27;s security clearance was revoked. As a result, Strauss often has been regarded as a villain in American history. President Dwight D. Eisenhower&#x27;s nomination of Strauss to become U.S. secretary of commerce resulted in a prolonged, public political battle in 1959 where Strauss was not confirmed by the U.S. Senate.

==Early life==
Strauss was born in Charleston, West Virginia, the son of Rosa (née Lichtenstein) and Lewis Strauss, a successful shoe wholesaler. Their parents were Jewish emigrants from Germany and Austria who came to the United States in the 1830s and 1840s and settled in Virginia. His family moved to Richmond, Virginia, and he grew up and attended public schools there. At the age of ten, he lost much of the vision in his right eye in a rock fight, which later disqualified him from normal
military service.

Having developed an amateur&#x27;s knowledge from reading textbooks, Strauss planned to study physics. He was on track to be valedictorian of his class at John Marshall High School, which would have entitled him to a scholarship to the University of Virginia, but typhoid fever in his senior year made him unable to take final exams or graduate with his classmates.

By the time he finally graduated from high school, his family&#x27;s business had experienced a downturn during the Recession of 1913–1914. In order to help out, Strauss decided to work as a traveling shoe salesman for his father&#x27;s company. In his spare time, Strauss studied his Jewish heritage. He was quite successful in his sales efforts; over the next three years, he saved $20,000 (): enough money to cover college tuition now that the scholarship offer was no longer in effect.

== Career ==
===World War I===

Strauss&#x27;s mother encouraged him to perform public or humanitarian service. It was 1917; World War I was continuing to devastate parts of Europe and Herbert Hoover had become a symbol of humanitarian altruism by way of heading the Commission for Relief in Belgium. Accordingly, Strauss took the train to Washington, D.C., and talked his way into serving without pay as an assistant to Hoover. (Strauss and his biographer differ on whether this happened in February or May 1917, but the latter seems more likely.)

Hoover became chief of the United States Food Administration. Strauss worked well and soon was promoted to Hoover&#x27;s private secretary and confidant. In that position he made powerful contacts that would serve him later on. One such contact he made was with attorney Harvey Hollister Bundy. Another was with Robert A. Taft, a counsel for the Food Administration.

Following the Armistice of 11 November 1918, Hoover became head of the post-war American Relief Administration, headquartered in Paris, and Strauss joined him there once more as his private secretary. Acting on behalf of a nearly destitute diplomatic representative of Finland, Rudolf Holsti, whom he met in Paris, Strauss persuaded Hoover to urge President Woodrow Wilson to recognize Finland&#x27;s independence from Russia.

Besides the U.S. food relief organization, Strauss worked with the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (JDC) to relieve the suffering of Jewish refugees, who were often neglected by other bodies. Strauss acted as a liaison between Hoover&#x27;s organization and JDC workers in a number of Central and Eastern European countries. Getting news in April 1919 of the Pinsk massacre, during the Polish–Soviet War, in which 35 Jews meeting to discuss the distribution of American relief aid were summarily executed by the Polish Army in the belief that they were Bolshevik conspirators, Strauss pressed the case to Hoover that a forceful response must be made to the Polish government. Hoover spoke to Polish Prime Minister Ignacy Jan Paderewski and demanded a fair investigation, but Strauss saw Paderewski as an anti-Semite who believed that all Jews were Bolsheviks and all Bolsheviks were Jews. After a while, the situation for Jews in Poland did (temporarily) improve.

Strauss had grown up in Virginia, in a culture that venerated Southern military heroes of the &quot;War Between the States&quot;, but a tour he took in summer 1918 to the devastated battlefields of Château-Thierry and Belleau Wood disabused him of any romantic illusions about the glory of warfare. Similarly, his exposure to effects of Communism in 1919, as manifested in the Polish–Soviet War, led to a powerful and lifelong anti-Communist sentiment.

=== Investment banker, marriage and family ===
At the JDC, Strauss came to the attention of Felix M. Warburg, a JDC leader who was a partner in the investment bank Kuhn, Loeb &amp; Co. in New York City, and Harriet Loewentstein, a JDC European head who was an accountant at the bank. In addition Hoover had introduced Strauss to Mortimer Schiff, another partner at Kuhn Loeb, who interviewed Strauss in Paris and offered him a job. In so doing, Strauss turned down an offer to become comptroller for the newly forming League of Nations.

Strauss returned to the United States and started at Kuhn Loeb in 1919. As a result, he never did attend college, a fact that may have led to the perfectionist and defensive personality traits that he exhibited later in life.

Kuhn Loeb&#x27;s major customers were railroads, and by the mid-1920s, Strauss was helping to arrange financing for new railroad terminal buildings in Cincinnati and Richmond and for the reorganizations of the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad and the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad. By 1926 his yearly compensation from the firm had reached $75,000 () and by the next year, $120,000 (). Subsequently, Strauss arranged the firm&#x27;s financing for steel companies such as Inland Steel, Republic Steel, and Great Lakes Steel. He became a full partner in 1929, at which point he was making a million dollars a year, and he endured the Wall Street Crash of 1929 without significant financial damage. With the firm he helped bring to market Kodachrome film for Eastman Kodak and the Polaroid camera for Edwin H. Land.

On March 5, 1923, Strauss married Alice Hanauer in a ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in New York. Born in 1903, she was the daughter of Jerome J. Hanauer, who was one of the Kuhn Loeb partners. She was a New York native who had attended Vassar College and was a skilled equestrian and potter. The couple had two sons, one of whom did not survive early childhood. While in New York, they lived on Central Park West, then on the Upper East Side, and later on Central Park South.

Strauss had involvements in the New York City community. In particular, he was on the board of directors of the Metropolitan Opera Company and later the Metropolitan Opera Association and was also on the boards of the American Relief Administration and the American Children&#x27;s Fund. He was a member of American Bankers Association and New York State Chamber of Commerce.

Hoover was a candidate for the Republican Party nomination in the United States presidential election, 1920; Strauss campaigned for him and attended the 1920 Republican National Convention on his behalf, but Hoover failed to gain significant support. Strauss again worked for the this-time-successful campaign of Hoover in the United States presidential election, 1928, and was a member from Virginia that year of the Republican National Committee. Over several years, Strauss engaged in activities designed to strengthen the Republican Party in Virginia and the South overall. He also was committed to protecting the reputation of President Hoover; in 1930, on behalf of the White House, he conspired with two naval intelligence officers to illegally break into the office of a Tammany Hall follower in New York who was thought to hold documents that would be damaging to Hoover.

During the 1930s, following Hoover&#x27;s re-election defeat by Franklin D. Roosevelt in the United States presidential election, 1932, Strauss was a strong opponent of the New Deal. He shared this antipathy with Hoover, who increasingly adopted an ideologically conservative, anti-New Deal viewpoint in the years following his defeat.

Strauss was active in Kuhn Loeb until 1941, although he resented restrictions imposed on investment banking by regulators in the Roosevelt administration and derived less enjoyment from the business. Nonetheless, in his role as an investment banker Strauss had become vastly wealthy, and given his humble original circumstances he has been considered a self-made millionaire and a Horatio Alger tale. As one historian has written, Strauss&#x27;s business success was the residue of &quot;luck, pluck, hard work, and good contacts&quot;. Strauss&#x27;s biographer reaches a similar conclusion: &quot;Strauss reached the top because of his ability, ambition, choices of the right firm and the right wife, and the good luck to start out at a prosperous time.&quot; Due to his lack of higher education, Strauss has also been characterized as an autodidact.

=== Lay religious activities ===
A proudly religious man, Strauss became a leader in Jewish causes and organizations. In 1933 he was a member of the executive committee of the American Jewish Committee. He was active in the Jewish Agricultural Society, for whom by 1941 he was honorary president. By 1938 he was also active in the Palestine Development Council, the Baron de Hirsch Fund, and the Union of American Hebrew Congregations.

However, he was not a Zionist and opposed the establishment of a Jewish state in Mandatory Palestine. He did not view Jews as belonging to a nation or a race; he considered himself an American of Jewish religion, and consequently he advocated for the rights of Jews to live as equal and integral citizens of the nations in which they resided.

Strauss fully recognized the brutality of Nazi Germany. He first made his concern known in early 1933, writing to President Hoover during the final weeks of Hoover&#x27;s time in office. Strauss attended a London conference of concerned Jews later that year on behalf of the American Jewish Committee, but the conference fell apart over the issue of Zionism.

Following the November 1938 &quot;Kristallnacht&quot; attacks on Jews in Germany, Strauss attempted to persuade prominent Republicans to support the Wagner–Rogers Bill that would legislatively allow the entry of 20,000 German refugee children into the United States. Long allied with both Hoover and Taft, he asked each of them to support the bill. Hoover did, but Taft did not, telling Strauss, &quot;With millions of people out of work, I can&#x27;t see the logic of admitting others.&quot; The bill had considerable popular support, but eventually failed to move forward in Congress due to opposition from the American Legion, the Daughters of the American Revolution, and other immigration restrictionists.

At the same time, Strauss joined with Hoover and Bernard Baruch in supporting the establishment of a refugee state in Africa as a safe haven for all persecuted people, not just Jews, and pledged ten percent of his wealth towards it. This effort too failed to materialize. Still another scheme that involved Strauss concerned an international corporation, the Coordinating Foundation, that would be set up to effectively pay Germany an immense ransom in exchange for their allowing Jews to emigrate; that too did not happen. Strauss received many individual requests for help, but often was unable to. Decades later, Strauss wrote in his memoir: &quot;The years from 1933 to the outbreak of World War II will ever be a nightmare to me, and the puny efforts I made to alleviate the tragedies were utter failures, save in a few individual cases—pitifully few.&quot;

Strauss was president of Congregation Emanu-El of New York, the largest such in New York City, for a decade, from 1938 to 1948. He was named to the presidency to replace Judge Irving Lehman, after having previously been chair of the temple&#x27;s finance committee. He had first joined the board of trustees of the temple in 1929, when the congregation was absorbing the merger of Temple Beth-El.

Strauss succeeded in Washington&#x27;s social and political circles despite that environment being notoriously anti-Semitic at the time. Indeed, experiences with anti-Semitism may have contributed to the outsider perspective and fractious personality that became evident during his later career. He was proud of his Southern upbringing as well as his religion, and insisted his name be pronounced in Virginia fashion as &quot;straws&quot; rather than with the usual German pronunciation.

=== World War II ===
Despite his medical disqualification for regular military duty, Strauss applied to join the U.S. Navy Reserve in 1925, becoming effective 1926, and he received an officer&#x27;s commission as a lieutenant intelligence officer. He remained in the reserve as a lieutenant commander. In 1939 and 1940, as World War II began overseas, he volunteered for active duty. He wanted to go into intelligence but was blocked, reportedly because the Director of Naval Intelligence, U.S. Navy was prejudiced against Jews and because Strauss&#x27;s contributions to B&#x27;nai B&#x27;rith had aroused suspicion on the part of FBI director J. Edgar Hoover and others in the U.S. intelligence community. Instead, in February 1941, he was called to active duty, and was assigned as a Staff Assistant to the Chief at the Bureau of Ordnance, where he helped organize and manage Navy munitions work. Strauss and his wife moved to Washington, D.C., where they lived in an apartment at the prestigious Shoreham Hotel. She served as an operating room nurse&#x27;s aide during this period.

During 1941, Strauss recommended actions to improve inspectors&#x27; abilities and consolidate field inspections into one General Inspectors&#x27; Office that was independent of the Navy&#x27;s bureau system; these changes took hold by the following year. Strauss organized a morale-boosting effort to award &quot;E for Excellence&quot; awards to plants doing a good job of making war materials. The program proved popular and helped the United States ramp up production quickly in case it entered the war; by the end of 1941 the Bureau of Ordnance had given the &quot;E&quot; to 94 different defense contractors. It was adopted across all services in 1942 as the Army-Navy &quot;E&quot; Award, and over the course of the war over 4,000 of them were granted. (Strauss&#x27;s biographer has depicted Strauss as also helping to investigate the notorious failures of U.S. torpedoes during the war and coordinate development of the very secret and highly successful anti-aircraft VT (proximity) fuse; however histories of these efforts do not indicate that Strauss played a significant role.)

When James V. Forrestal succeeded Frank Knox as Secretary of the Navy in May 1944, he employed Strauss as his special assistant. In conjunction with Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia, Strauss established the Office of Naval Research, which kept scientific research of naval matters under control of the Navy rather than civilian or academic organizations. Strauss&#x27;s contributions were recognized by the Navy and by 1945 he was serving on the Army-Navy Munitions Board, a role that concluded by the following year. He was also on the Naval Reserve Policy Board starting in 1946.

Earlier during the war, Strauss was promoted to commander, then by November 1943 was a captain. He rose in rank and influence due to a combination of his intelligence, personal energy, and ability to find favor in higher places. Strauss&#x27;s rigid manner managed to make enemies during the war as well, including significant disputes with E. N. Toland, chief counsel for the House Committee on Naval Affairs; Representative Carl Vinson, chair of that committee; and Admiral Ernest J. King, the Chief of Naval Operations. A proposed promotion for Strauss in 1944 to rear admiral did not happen at the time due to a variety of factors, including that President Franklin D. Roosevelt had disliked Strauss for years, going back to an incident at an Inner Circle event in 1932, and blocked the move. Roosevelt&#x27;s death changed matters, as his successor, Harry S. Truman, had no negative feelings about Strauss. In July 1945 Strauss was promoted to commodore. Then in November 1945, after the war, Strauss was promoted to rear admiral by Truman.

The promotion to flag rank was unusual for a member of the reserve, and as such, he liked being addressed as &quot;Admiral Strauss&quot;, even though use of the honorific perturbed some regular officers, who considered him a civilian. By this time, Strauss had taken advantage of his ties in both Washington and Wall Street to enter the post-war establishment in the capital. He also was learning how to get things accomplished in Washington via unofficial back channels, something at which he would become quite adept.

=== Introduction to atomic energy ===
Strauss&#x27;s mother died of cancer in 1935, and his father of the same disease in 1937. That and his early interest in physics led Strauss to establish a fund in their names, the Lewis and Rosa Strauss Memorial Fund, for physics research that could lead to better radiation treatment for cancer patients. The fund supported the refugee German physicist Arno Brasch, who was working on producing artificial radioactive material with bursts of X-rays. Brasch&#x27;s work was based on previous work with Leo Szilard, who saw in this work a possible means to developing an atomic chain reaction. Szilard already had foreseen that this could lead to an atomic bomb. Szilard persuaded Strauss to support him and Brasch in building a &quot;surge generator&quot;. Strauss ultimately provided tens of thousands of dollars to this venture.
Through Szilard, Strauss met other nuclear physicists, such as Ernest Lawrence. Strauss talked to scientists who had left Nazi Germany and learned about atom-related experiments that had taken place there. Szilard kept him up to date on developments in the area, such as the discovery of nuclear fission and the use of neutrons. In February 1940, Szilard asked him to fund the acquisition of some radium, but Strauss refused, as he had already spent a large sum.

Strauss had no further direct involvement with atomic energy developments during the war. Indeed, he was frustrated by Harvey Hollister Bundy, his colleague from the Food Administration days, who kept Strauss away from information regarding the Manhattan Project. At the end of the war, when the first atomic bombs were ready for use, Strauss advocated to Forrestal dropping one on a symbolic target, such as a Japanese cedar grove near Nikkō, Tochigi, as a warning shot. In subsequent years Strauss would say in interviews, &quot;I did my best to prevent it. The Japanese were defeated before the bomb was used.&quot;

After the war, Strauss was the Navy&#x27;s representative on the Interdepartmental Committee on Atomic Energy. Strauss recommended a test of the atomic bomb against a number of modern warships, which he thought would refute the idea that the atomic bomb made the Navy obsolete. His recommendation contributed to the decision to hold the mid-1946 Operation Crossroads tests, the first since the war, at Bikini Atoll.

=== Atomic Energy Commission member ===

In 1947, the United States transferred control of atomic research from the U.S. Army to civilian authority under the newly created Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). In October 1946, in advance of the commission actually coming into being, Strauss was named by President Truman as one of the first five Commissioners, with David E. Lilienthal as the chairman. Strauss had been recommended for a position on the body by Vice Admiral Paul Frederick Foster, a long-time friend for whom Strauss earlier had provided contacts in the business world (and who had subsequently helped Strauss get his active duty assignment). In their initial discussion about the appointment, Strauss noted to the New Deal-supporting Truman that &quot;I am a black Hoover Republican.&quot; Truman said that was of no matter, since the commission was intended to be non-political. Strauss, who briefly had returned to work at Kuhn Loeb after the war, now exited the firm altogether in order to comply with AEC regulations.

Once there, Strauss became one of the first commissioners to speak in dissent from existing policy. In the first two years, there were a dozen instances, most having to do with information-security matters, in which Strauss was in a 1–4 minority on the commission; in the process, he increasingly was perceived as stubborn.

One of Strauss&#x27;s first actions on the AEC was to urge his fellow commissioners to set up the capability to monitor foreign atomic activity via atmospheric testing. In particular, he saw that WB-29 Superfortress aircraft equipped with radiological tests could run regular &quot;sniffer&quot; flights to monitor the upper atmosphere and detect any atomic tests by the Soviet Union. Other people in government and science, including physicists J. Robert Oppenheimer and Edward Teller, argued that the radiological approach would not work, but Strauss and the newly formed United States Air Force continued regardless. Several days after the first atomic bomb test by the Soviet Union in August 1949, a WB-29 flight did, in fact, find evidence of the test. While Strauss was not the only person who had been urging long-range detection capabilities, it was largely due to his efforts that the United States was able to discover that the Soviet Union had become a nuclear power.

Strauss believed in a fundamental premise of the Cold War: that the Soviet Union was determined on a course of world domination. As such, he believed in having a more powerful nuclear force than the Soviets and in maintaining secrecy about U.S. nuclear activities. This extended to allies: Among the commissioners, he was the most skeptical about the value of the Modus Vivendi to which the United States, Britain, and Canada agreed in January 1948 that provided for limited sharing of technical information between the three nations (and that already was a stricter set of guidelines than those established by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in the Quebec Agreement of the Manhattan Project era). During the U.S. presidential election of 1948, Strauss tried to convince the Republican Party nominee, Thomas E. Dewey, of the dangers of sharing atomic information with Britain, and, after Dewey lost, Strauss tried to convince President Truman of the same. Following the revelations about the British physicist Klaus Fuchs&#x27;s espionage for the Soviet Union and the appointment of the former Marxist John Strachey as Secretary of State for War in the British Cabinet, Strauss argued that the Modus Vivendi should be suspended completely, but no other commissioner wanted to go to that extreme.

Strauss was known for his psychological rigidity; one of his fellow commissioners reportedly said, &quot;If you disagree with Lewis about anything, he assumes you&#x27;re just a fool at first. But if you go on disagreeing with him, he concludes you must be a traitor.&quot; Strauss was increasingly unhappy in his position, but President Truman indicated satisfaction with Strauss&#x27;s work and the minority stances that he was taking on the commission.
The first atomic-bomb test by the Soviet Union in August 1949 came earlier than expected by Americans, and, over the next several months, there was an intense debate within the U.S. government, military, and scientific communities regarding whether to proceed with development of the far more powerful hydrogen bomb, then known as &quot;the Super&quot;. Strauss urged for the United States to move immediately to develop it, writing to his fellow commissioners on October 5 that &quot;the time has come for a quantum jump in our planning ... we should make an intensive effort to get ahead with the super.&quot; In particular, Strauss was unswayed by moral arguments against going forward, seeing no real difference between using it and the atomic bomb or the boosted fission weapon that some opponents of the Super were advocating as an alternative. When Strauss was rebuffed by the other commissioners, he went to National Security Council executive secretary Sidney Souers in order to bring the matter to President Truman directly. It was as a consequence of this meeting that Truman first learned (when Souers informed him) that such a thing as a hydrogen bomb could exist. In a memorandum urging development of the Super that he sent to President Truman on November 25, 1949, the pious Strauss expressed no doubt about what the Soviets would do, writing that &quot;a government of atheists is not likely to be dissuaded from producing the weapon on &#x27;moral&#x27; grounds.&quot;

On January 31, 1950, Truman announced his decision to go forward with hydrogen-bomb development. A few narratives, including ones promoted by Strauss and that of Strauss&#x27;s biographer, have placed Strauss as having had a central role in Truman&#x27;s decision. However, by the time that the decision was made, Strauss was one of an increasingly large coalition of military and government figures, and a few scientists, who strongly felt that development of the new weapon was essential to U.S. security in the face of a hostile, nuclear-capable, ideological enemy. Thus, in the absence of Strauss&#x27;s action, the same decision almost surely would have been reached. In any case, when the decision was announced, Strauss, considering that he had accomplished as much as he could in his role as commissioner, submitted his resignation that same day. Within the administration, there was some consideration given to Strauss being named chairman of the AEC to replace the departing Lilienthal, but Strauss was considered too polarizing a figure. The last day for Strauss during this first stint of his on the commission was April 15, 1950. 

=== Financial analyst ===
Beginning in June 1950, Strauss became a financial adviser to the Rockefeller brothers, where his charter was to participate in decisions regarding projects, financing, and investing. For them, he assisted in the founding of, and served on the first board for, the Population Council. He was also involved in the negotiations with Columbia University that led to a sale and leasing back of real estate associated with part of Rockefeller Center. The relationship with the Rockefeller brothers would last until 1953. However, Strauss felt that the brothers treated him as a second-class asset and, in turn, he felt no loyalty towards them.

During this time, Strauss continued to take an interest in atomic affairs; as did other former members of the AEC, he had a consulting arrangement with the United States Congress Joint Committee on Atomic Energy and was active in making his opinion known on various matters. These included his dissatisfaction with the speed at which research and development into actually making a working hydrogen device was taking place.

In the 1952 U.S. presidential election, Strauss originally supported Robert A. Taft, his friend from the Hoover days, for the Republican Party nomination. Once Dwight D. Eisenhower secured the nomination, however, Strauss contributed substantial monies towards Eisenhower&#x27;s campaign.

=== Atomic Energy Commission chairman ===

In January 1953, President Eisenhower named Strauss as presidential atomic energy advisor. Then in July 1953, Eisenhower named Strauss as chairman of the AEC.

While Strauss had initially opposed Eisenhower&#x27;s push for Operation Candor, his view and the administration&#x27;s goals both evolved, and he endorsed the &quot;Atoms for Peace&quot; program, which Eisenhower announced in December 1953. Strauss was now one of the best-known advocates of atomic energy for many purposes. In part, he celebrated the promise of peaceful use of atomic energy as part of a conscious effort to divert attention away from the dangers of nuclear warfare. Nevertheless, Strauss, like Eisenhower, did sincerely believe in and hope for the potential of peaceful uses. In 1955 Strauss helped arrange the U.S. participation in the first international conference on peaceful uses of atomic energy, held in Geneva. Strauss held Soviet capabilities in high regard, saying after the conference that &quot;in the realm of pure science the Soviets had astonished us by their achievements ... [the Russians] could be described in no sense as technically backward.&quot;

Strauss was involved in finding the site and industry partners for the start of construction, in 1954, of the first dedicated U.S. atomic electric power plant, the Shippingport Atomic Power Station in Pennsylvania; it would eventually go on-line in 1957. While Shippingport was a joint government-commercial collaboration, Strauss advocated for private industry taking on the development of nuclear power plants on its own. Strauss made public remarks in 1954 predicting that atomic power would make electricity &quot;too cheap to meter&quot;. Regarded as fanciful even at the time, the quote is now seen as damaging to the industry&#x27;s credibility. Strauss was possibly referring to Project Sherwood, a secret program to develop power from hydrogen fusion, rather the commonly-believed uranium fission reactors. Indeed, on the run-up to a 1958 Geneva conference on atomic power, Strauss offered substantial funding to three laboratories for fusion power research.

Following the unexpectedly large blast of the Castle Bravo thermonuclear test of March 1954 at Bikini Atoll, there was international concern over the radioactive fallout experienced by residents of nearby Rongelap Atoll and Utirik Atoll and by the &quot;Daigo Fukuryū Maru&quot;, a Japanese fishing vessel. The AEC initially tried to keep the contamination secret, and then tried to minimize the health dangers of fallout. Voices began to be heard advocating for a ban or limitation on atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons. Strauss himself downplayed dangers from fallout and insisted that it was vital that a program of atmospheric blasts proceed unhindered; internally within the administration, Strauss was dismissive of the matter and even speculated that the &quot;Fukuryū Maru&quot; was part of a Communist scheme. However, Strauss also contributed to public fears when, during a March 1954 press conference, he made an impromptu remark that a single Soviet H-bomb could destroy the New York metropolitan area. The remark captured the immense destructiveness of the H-bomb and was featured in headlines in newspapers across the United States. This statement was heard overseas as well and served to add to what UK Minister of Defence Harold Macmillan termed a &quot;panic&quot; over the subject. The AEC had commissioned the Project SUNSHINE report in 1953 to ascertain the impact of radioactive fallout, generated from repeated nuclear detonations of greater and greater yield, on the world&#x27;s population. The British asked the AEC for the report, but Strauss resisted giving them anything more than a heavily redacted version, leading to frustration on the part of Prime Minister Winston Churchill and other UK officials.
Internal debate ensued over the next several years within the Eisenhower administration over the possibility of an atmospheric test ban with the Soviet Union, with some in favor of trying to arrange one, but Strauss was always one of those implacably opposed. Strauss would continue to minimize the dangers of Bravo fallout to the islanders of the atolls, insisting in his 1962 memoirs that they had been under &quot;continuous and competent medical supervision&quot; and that follow-up tests showed them to be in &quot;excellent health [and] their blood counts were approximately normal&quot;. Others in the AEC were equally cavalier. In fact, AEC scientists had seen the islanders as a valuable laboratory case of human exposure. The Limited Test Ban Treaty banning atmospheric tests would not be arrived at until 1963, and the U.S. government engaged in a series of reevaluations of the health of the islanders, and relocation and economic packages to compensate them, over the next several decades. Strauss and others in the AEC were also dismissive of the dangers Americans faced who were downwind of the Nevada Test Site.

Regarding the prospect of nuclear proliferation, Strauss was skeptical that attempts to prevent it would accomplish anything, and Strauss and the AEC also doubted that the problem was as severe as some others in the administration maintained. During 1956, Harold Stassen, who had been chosen by Eisenhower to lead an effort on disarmanent policy, focused on making nonprofileration a key goal of the United States, including proposals to halt not just testing but also the continued expansion of the U.S. fissionable material stockpile. Eisenhower was at least partially receptive to the proposals, but Strauss argued that nuclear materials production could not be stopped yet and that testing could never be halted completely.

The Sputnik crisis of 1957 led Eisenhower to create the President&#x27;s Science Advisory Committee. Once that body was in place, Eisenhower began to directly receive a broader selection of scientific information; Strauss lost his ability to control scientists&#x27; access to the president and his influence within the administration began to recede. While Strauss had maintained his hostility towards Anglo-American cooperation on nuclear matters since becoming AEC chairman, Sputnik gave impetus to renewed cooperation on this front. Strauss visited Prime Minister Harold Macmillan to give a message from Eisenhower to this effect, and subsequent talks and hearings resulted in the 1958 US–UK Mutual Defence Agreement coming into place.

As AEC chairman, Strauss was informed regarding U.S. intelligence findings on the Dimona reactor in Israel. He met with Ernst David Bergmann, chairman of the Israel Atomic Energy Commission and a key early force in the Israeli nuclear program (and years later would help Bergmann get a visiting fellowship in the United States). While Strauss&#x27;s thoughts on the Israeli effort to develop nuclear weapons are not documented, his wife later said that he would have been in favor of Israel being able to defend itself.

=== Strauss and Oppenheimer ===

During his terms as an AEC commissioner, Strauss became hostile to Oppenheimer, the physicist who had been director of the Los Alamos Laboratory during the Manhattan Project and who, after the war, became a celebrated public figure and remained in influential positions in atomic energy.

In 1947, Strauss, a trustee of the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, presented Oppenheimer with the institute&#x27;s offer to be its director. Strauss, who as one writer notes was a man of high intelligence and financial skills if not higher education, had also been considered for the job; he was the institute&#x27;s faculty&#x27;s fifth-ranked choice, while Oppenheimer was their first ranked. Strauss, a conservative Republican, had little in common with Oppenheimer, a liberal who had had Communist associations. Oppenheimer subsequently was a leading opponent of moving ahead with the hydrogen bomb and proposed a national security strategy based on atomic weapons and continental defense; Strauss wanted the development of thermonuclear weapons and a doctrine of deterrence. Oppenheimer supported a policy of openness regarding the numbers and capabilities of the atomic weapons in America&#x27;s arsenal; Strauss believed that such unilateral frankness would benefit no one but Soviet military planners.

In addition, Strauss disliked Oppenheimer on a variety of personal grounds. Starting in 1947, Strauss had been in a dispute with the General Advisory Committee (GAC) of senior atomic scientists, which Oppenheimer chaired and which reported to the AEC, over whether exporting radioisotopes for medical purposes was a risk to U.S. security, from which the scientists on the GAC developed a poor image of Strauss. Then during a public hearing in 1949, Oppenheimer had given a mocking answer to a point Strauss had raised on the subject, a humiliation that Strauss did not forget. Strauss was also offended that Oppenheimer had engaged in adulterous relations. And Strauss did not like that Oppenheimer had seemingly left his Jewish heritage behind, whereas Strauss had become successful – despite the anti-Semitic environment of Washington – while still maintaining his prominent roles in Jewish organizations and his Temple Emanu-El presidency.
When Eisenhower offered Strauss the AEC chairmanship, Strauss named one condition: Oppenheimer would be excluded from all classified atomic work. Oppenheimer held a highest-level Q clearance, and was one of the most respected figures in atomic science, briefing the President and the National Security Council on several occasions. Oppenheimer&#x27;s AEC consultancy, and the clearance that went with it, had just been renewed for another year by Gordon Dean, the outgoing chairman of the AEC; it would extend through June 30, 1954.

Strauss&#x27;s misgivings about Oppenheimer went beyond dislike and disagreement. He had become aware of Oppenheimer&#x27;s former Communist affiliations before World War II and had begun to think that Oppenheimer might even be a Soviet spy. For instance, Strauss was suspicious of Oppenheimer&#x27;s tendency to downplay Soviet capabilities. In 1953, Oppenheimer stated in the July edition of &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; that he believed the Soviets were &quot;about four years behind&quot; in nuclear weapons development. The United States had exploded the first thermonuclear device the previous year; however, only a month after Oppenheimer made his proclamation, in August 1953, the Soviet Union declared that it had tested its own fusion-based bomb, which U.S. sensors identified as a boosted fission weapon. Strauss was not alone in having his doubts; a number of other officials in Washington also suspected that Oppenheimer might be a security risk.

In September 1953, Strauss, hoping to uncover evidence of Oppenheimer&#x27;s disloyalty, asked FBI director J. Edgar Hoover to initiate surveillance to track Oppenheimer&#x27;s movements. The director readily did so; the tracking uncovered no evidence of disloyalty but that Oppenheimer had lied to Strauss about his reason for taking a trip to Washington (Oppenheimer met a journalist but had told Strauss that he had visited the White House). Strauss&#x27;s suspicions increased further with the discovery that in 1948 and 1949 Oppenheimer had tried to stop the long-range airborne detection system that Strauss had championed and that had worked in discovering the Soviet Union&#x27;s first atomic weapon test. At first Strauss moved cautiously, even heading off an attack on Oppenheimer by Senator Joseph McCarthy, due to Strauss&#x27;s belief that any case that McCarthy might make would be premature and lack a solid basis of evidence.

=== Oppenheimer security hearing ===

In November 1953, William L. Borden, the former executive director of the United States Congress Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, wrote a letter to the FBI alleging that &quot;more probably than not J. Robert Oppenheimer is an agent of the Soviet Union.&quot; According to the book &quot;American Prometheus&quot;, Strauss collaborated and aided Borden in making the allegations against Oppenheimer. This action set into motion a chain of events. On December 3, 1953, Eisenhower, after consulting with Strauss and others, ordered a &quot;blank wall&quot; between Oppenheimer and all areas of government. On December 21, Strauss told Oppenheimer that his security clearance had been suspended, pending resolution of a series of charges outlined in a letter from Kenneth D. Nichols, general manager of the AEC. Rather than resign, Oppenheimer requested a hearing. Upon Strauss&#x27;s request, FBI director Hoover ordered full surveillance on Oppenheimer and his attorneys, including tapping of phones; these wiretaps were illegal.

The hearing was held in April and May 1954, before an AEC Personnel Security Board. Strauss selected the three-man board, headed by Gordon Gray. He also picked the person who would lead the case against Oppenheimer, the trial attorney Roger Robb. Strauss had access to the FBI&#x27;s information on Oppenheimer, including his conversations with his lawyers, which was used to prepare counterarguments against those lawyers in advance. Strauss was not present at the hearings, instead reading daily transcripts.

At the hearing, many top scientists, as well as government and military figures, testified on Oppenheimer&#x27;s behalf. Physicist Isidor Isaac Rabi stated that the suspension of the security clearance was unnecessary: &quot;he is a consultant, and if you don&#x27;t want to consult the guy, you don&#x27;t consult him, period.&quot;

Oppenheimer, however, admitted that he had previously lied to a military counterintelligence officer about a conversation his friend Haakon Chevalier had had with him about passing nuclear secrets to the Soviets. He also admitted that he had stayed with Chevalier only the previous December. Leslie Groves, the former director of the Manhattan Project, testified that under the stricter security criteria in effect in 1954, he &quot;would not clear Dr. Oppenheimer today&quot;.

At the conclusion of the hearings, Oppenheimer&#x27;s clearance was revoked by a 2–1 vote of the board. They unanimously cleared Oppenheimer of disloyalty, but a majority found that 20 of the 24 charges were either true or substantially true and that Oppenheimer would represent a security risk. Then on June 29, 1954, the AEC upheld the findings of the Personnel Security Board, by a 4–1 decision, with Strauss writing the majority opinion. In that opinion, Strauss stressed Oppenheimer&#x27;s &quot;defects of character&quot;, &quot;falsehoods, evasions and misrepresentations&quot;, and past associations with Communists and people close to Communists as the primary reasons for his determination. He did not comment on Oppenheimer&#x27;s loyalty.

Oppenheimer was thus stripped of his clearance: one day before it would have expired, and seven months after it had been suspended on the orders of the president.

The successor agency to the AEC later ruled that the hearing was &quot;a flawed process that violated the Commission&#x27;s own regulations.&quot; The loss of his security clearance ended Oppenheimer&#x27;s role in government and policy. Oppenheimer returned to his directorship at the Institute of Advanced Studies, but Strauss, who was still on the board of trustees there, attempted to have him dismissed. However, in October 1954, the board voted to keep Oppenheimer on. In the years that followed, Strauss still hoped to remove Oppenheimer, but never got the votes on the board he needed.

In the wake of the AEC decision, public opinion and most scientists were firmly against Strauss. Nearly 500 of the scientists at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory signed a petition saying &quot;this poorly founded decision ... will make it increasingly difficult to obtain adequate scientific talent in our defense laboratories.&quot; Strauss responded by first sending a letter to the petitioners saying that they were not trying to quash the expression of professional opinions – &quot;We certainly do not want &#x27;yes men&#x27; in the employ of the Atomic Energy Commission&quot; – and followed that with a July 1954 visit to the laboratory to try to mollify the scientists. An editorial in &quot;The New Mexican&quot; newspaper nicknamed Strauss&#x27;s efforts as &quot;Operation Butter-Up&quot;.

In 2022, Jennifer Granholm, the United States Secretary of Energy – head of the successor organization to the AEC – vacated the 1954 revocation of Oppenheimer&#x27;s security clearance. Her decision was not based on revisiting the merits of the case against Oppenheimer, but rather on the flawed processes in the hearings that had violated the AEC&#x27;s own regulations. Historian Alex Wellerstein states that Strauss had been a major culprit in those process violations.

=== Secretary of Commerce nomination ===

Strauss&#x27;s term as Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) chair completed at the end of June 1958. Eisenhower wanted to reappoint him, but Strauss feared the Senate would reject or at least subject him to ferocious questioning. Besides the Oppenheimer affair, he had clashed with Senate Democrats on several major issues, including his autocratic nature as AEC chair and his secretive handling of the Dixon–Yates contract. That contract involved a supply of electrical power in Tennessee without going through the Tennessee Valley Authority and Strauss had embarked on discussions about the idea without informing his fellow commissioners. The plan itself was controversial and eventually became a losing issue for Republicans in the 1954 U.S. midterm elections. Strauss had stated to an interviewer in late 1954, &quot;For the first time in my life, I have enemies.&quot; By the end of the 1950s, Strauss had garnered the reputation, as a &quot;Time&quot; magazine profile put it, of being &quot;one of the nation&#x27;s ablest and thorniest public figures&quot;.

Eisenhower offered him the post of White House Chief of Staff to replace Sherman Adams but Strauss did not think it would suit him. Eisenhower also asked if Strauss would consider succeeding John Foster Dulles (who was ill) as Secretary of State but Strauss did not want to preempt Undersecretary Christian Herter, who was a good friend.
Finally, Eisenhower proposed nominating Strauss as Secretary of Commerce and Strauss concurred. With the 1958 United States Senate elections imminent, Eisenhower announced the choice on October 24. Strauss took office via a recess appointment, effective November 13, 1958. However, Senate opposition to his nomination was as strong as a renewed AEC term. This was surprising, given the high level of experience Strauss had, the relative lack of prominence of the Commerce post compared to some other cabinet positions and the tradition of the Senate deferring to presidents to choose the cabinet heads they wanted. Indeed, at the time the previous thirteen nominees for this Cabinet position had won Senate confirmation in an average of eight days. Due to a long-running feud between the two, Senator Clinton Anderson of New Mexico took up the cause of preventing Strauss&#x27;s confirmation by the Senate. Anderson found an ally in Senator Gale W. McGee on the Senate Commerce Committee, which had jurisdiction over Strauss&#x27;s confirmation.

During and after the Senate hearings, McGee charged Strauss with &quot;a brazen attempt to hoodwink&quot; the committee. Strauss also overstated his role in the development of the H-bomb, implying that he had convinced Truman to support it. Truman was annoyed by this and sent a letter to Anderson undermining Strauss&#x27;s claim, a letter that Anderson promptly leaked to the press. Strauss attempted to reach Truman through an intermediary to rescue the situation but was rebuffed and felt bitter at the lack of support. A group of scientists who were still upset over the role Strauss had played in the Oppenheimer hearings lobbied against confirmation, playing upon the pronunciation of their target&#x27;s name by calling themselves the Last Straws Committee. Physicist David L. Hill, the former chairman of the Federation of American Scientists, was one of several scientists who testified before the Commerce Committee against Strauss&#x27;s nomination, saying that &quot;most of the scientists in this country would prefer to see Mr. Strauss completely out of the Government&quot;.

After sixteen days of hearings the Senate Commerce Committee recommended Strauss&#x27;s confirmation to the full Senate by a vote of 9–8. By now the struggle was in the forefront of the national political news, with a &quot;Time&quot; cover story calling it &quot;one of the biggest, bitterest, and in many ways most unseemly confirmation fights in Senate history&quot;. In preparation for the floor debate on the nomination, the Democratic majority&#x27;s main argument against the nomination was that Strauss&#x27;s statements before the committee included semi-truths and outright falsehoods and that under tough questioning Strauss tended towards ambiguous responses and engaging in petty arguments. Despite an overwhelming Democratic majority, the 86th United States Congress was not able to accomplish much of its agenda since the President had immense popularity and a veto. With the 1960 elections approaching, congressional Democrats looked for issues on which they could demonstrate their institutional strength in opposition to Eisenhower. On June 19, 1959, just after midnight, the Strauss nomination failed by a vote 46–49. Voting for Strauss were 15 Democrats and 31 Republicans, voting against him were 47 Democrats and 2 Republicans. The nays included future U.S. presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.

It marked only the eighth instance in U.S. history in which a Cabinet appointee had failed to be confirmed by the Senate and it was the first time since Charles B. Warren in 1925, and would be the last one until John Tower in 1989. President Eisenhower, who had invested both personal and professional capital in the nomination of Strauss, spoke of the Senate action in bitter terms, saying that &quot;I am losing a truly valuable associate in the business of government. ... it is the American people who are the losers through this sad episode.&quot; Strauss sent a letter of resignation from his recess appointment as Commerce Secretary on June 23, a resignation that took effect on June 30, 1959.

==Final years==

The Commerce defeat effectively ended Strauss&#x27;s government career. The numerous enemies that Strauss had made during his career took some pleasure from the turn of events. Strauss himself was hurt by the rejection and, never fully getting over it, tended to brood over events past.

Strauss published his memoir, &quot;Men and Decisions&quot;, in 1962. At the time, &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s review said they &quot;may now remind readers of [Strauss&#x27;s] many real accomplishments before they were obscured by political rows.&quot; The book sold well, spending fifteen weeks on the &quot;New York Times&quot; Best Seller for non-fiction and rising as high as number five on that list. The general view of historians is that the memoirs were self-serving.
The tie between Herbert Hoover and Strauss remained strong throughout the years; in 1962 Hoover wrote in a letter to Strauss: &quot;Of all the men who have come into my orbit in life, you are the one who has my greatest affections, and I will not try to specify the many reasons, evidences or occasions.&quot; Strauss assisted in the organizing of support for the Barry Goldwater 1964 presidential campaign. He also remained on good terms with President Eisenhower and for several years in the 1960s Eisenhower and Strauss advocated construction of a nuclear-powered, regional desalination facility in the Middle East that would benefit both Israel and its Arab neighbors but the plan never found sufficient Congressional support to move forward.

During his retirement Strauss devoted time to philanthropic activities and to the American Jewish Committee, the Jewish Theological Seminary of America and the Alliance Israélite Universelle. He helped arrange a no-interest loan to fund a congregation building for the Los Alamos Jewish Center. He lived on a farm, where he engaged in cattle breeding and raised prized Black Angus. A book he was working on about Herbert Hoover was never completed.

After battling lymphosarcoma for three years, Strauss died of it on January 21, 1974, at his home, the Brandy Rock Farm in Brandy Station, Virginia. His funeral was held in New York at Temple Emanu-El and there was also a memorial service held in the capital at Washington Hebrew Congregation. He is buried in Richmond Hebrew Cemetery along with more than sixty other family members.

Alice Hanauer Strauss lived until 2004, when she died at age 101 in Brandy Station.

== Legacy ==
The Oppenheimer matter quickly became a cause célèbre, with Strauss frequently being cast in the role of villain. This was an image that would persist in both the near term and the long term. Strauss had his defenders as well, who saw the hero and villain roles as being reversed. Such polarized assessments followed Strauss for much of his career.

Even such matters as the unusual, Southern-based pronunciation of his surname could be perceived as a puzzling artificiality. In a 1997 essay in the &quot;New York Times Book Review&quot; commenting on the Oppenheimer matter, literary critic Alfred Kazin claimed Strauss &quot;pronounced his own name &#x27;Straws&#x27; to make himself sound less Jewish&quot;. Strauss, however, had been prominent in Jewish causes and organizations throughout his life, and this charge was implausible. Indeed, Strauss&#x27;s papers take up seventy-six boxes in the archives of the American Jewish Historical Society; the executive director of that organization has remarked that, &quot;I&#x27;m not gonna say he is a member of more Jewish organizations than any historical figure I&#x27;ve ever seen, but he&#x27;s up there.&quot; 

Strauss&#x27;s personality was not simply categorized; a mid-1950s interviewer, political scientist Warner R. Schilling, found him bland and courteous in one session but prickly and temperamental in a second session. As Alden Whitman&#x27;s front-page obituary of Strauss for the &quot;New York Times&quot; stated,

At the start of his 1962 memoir, Strauss states his belief that &quot;the right to live in the social order established [at the American founding] is so priceless a privilege that no sacrifice to preserve it is too great.&quot; This sentiment became the basis of the title of, and the interpretative framework for, &quot;No Sacrifice Too Great&quot;, historian Richard Pfau&#x27;s 1984 authorized biography of Strauss. In it, Pfau criticizes Strauss&#x27;s conduct in the Oppenheimer affair, but presents it as the acts of a man with integrity who felt compelled to do what was necessary to protect the nation. Historian Barton J. Bernstein disagrees with this approach, saying that the framework is too generous and that Pfau errs in &quot;seeing Strauss as a man of great integrity (Strauss&#x27;s own claim) rather than as a man who used such claims to conceal sleazy behavior.&quot;

Decades after his death, historians continue to examine Strauss&#x27;s records and actions. Scholar of the early Cold War period Ken Young studied the historiography of H-bomb development and scrutinized the role that Strauss played in trying to form that history to his benefit. In particular, Young looked at the publication during 1953 and 1954 of a popular magazine article and book that promoted a highly distorted notion that the hydrogen bomb project had been unreasonably stalled, both before Truman&#x27;s decision and after, by a small group of American scientists working against the national interest; also that Strauss was one of the heroes who had overcome this cabal&#x27;s efforts. Young points to circumstantial archival evidence that Strauss was behind both publications and may well have given classified information to the book authors involved (James R. Shepley and Clay Blair Jr.). Historian Priscilla Johnson McMillan has identified archival evidence which suggests to some degree that Strauss was in collusion with Borden, the former congressional staff member whose letter had triggered the Oppenheimer security hearing. McMillan also argues that following that letter, Strauss was likely behind Eisenhower&#x27;s &quot;blank wall&quot; directive to separate Oppenheimer from nuclear secrets.

Oppenheimer biographers Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin state that Strauss&#x27;s decision to publish the transcript of the Oppenheimer security hearing even though witnesses had been promised their testimony would remain secret, rebounded against him in the long run, as the transcript showed how the hearing had taken the form of an inquisition.

In 2023, Bernstein stated that evidence developed in the prior two decades that Oppenheimer had been a secret member of the Communist Party partially vindicated Strauss. &quot;Strauss was devious, thin-skinned, mean-spirited, and even vicious in helping to do in Robert Oppenheimer. But on some important matters—in even somewhat suspecting Oppenheimer’s political past—Strauss was not unreasonable.&quot;

==Awards and honors==
For his European relief work during and after World War I, Strauss was decorated by six nations. These honors included the Chevalier, Belgian Order of Leopold I, the First Class Commander of the White Rose of Finland, and the Chevalier, Star of Roumania. He received a similar medal from Poland. Per a biographical account presented in the &quot;Congressional Record&quot;, he was also awarded the Grand Officer level of the Legion of Honour of France.
Strauss, then with the rank of captain, was awarded a Legion of Merit by the Navy in September 1944 for his work on Navy requirements regarding contract termination and disposal of surplus property. At the war&#x27;s end he received an Oak Leaf Cluster—Army in lieu of a second such award, for his work in coordinating procurement processes. A Gold Star—Navy in lieu of a third award was given in 1947, for his work during and after the war as a special assistant to the Navy secretary and on joint Army–Navy industrial mobilization boards. Finally in 1959 he received a Gold Star in lieu of a fourth award, this time for his work on atomic energy as it benefited the Navy as a source of power and ship propulsion. He also received the Navy Distinguished Service Medal.
On July 14, 1958, Strauss was presented with the Medal of Freedom, a civilian honor, by President Eisenhower. The award was for &quot;exceptional meritorious service&quot; in the interest of the national security in his efforts towards both military and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

Strauss received a number of honorary degrees during his lifetime; indeed his advocates during the Secretary of Commerce confirmation hearings gave twenty-three as the number of colleges and universities that had awarded him such honors. These include, among others, an Honorary LL.D. from the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in 1944, a Doctor of Humane Letters from Case Institute of Technology in 1948,
a Doctor of Laws from Carnegie Institute of Technology in 1956, a Doctor of Science from the University of Toledo in 1957, 
and a Doctor of Science from Union College in 1958.

Strauss served on boards of directors for several corporations, one of which was the United States Rubber Company. He was a trustee of the Hampton Institute, a historically black university in Virginia, as well as of the Memorial Hospital for the Treatment of Cancer and Allied Diseases in New York. Due to donations made to the Medical College of Virginia, a research building there was named after him. He was a founding trustee of Eisenhower College, for which he had assisted in the planning and raising funds. In 1955, Strauss received a silver plaque from the Men&#x27;s Club of Temple Emanu-El for &quot;distinguished service&quot;; President Eisenhower sent a message to the ceremony saying the honor was well-deserved.

The cover of &quot;Time&quot; magazine featured Strauss twice. The first was in 1953 when he was AEC chair and the nuclear arms race was underway, and the second was in 1959 during his Secretary of Commerce confirmation process.

==In media==
Strauss is played by Phil Brown in the 1980 BBC miniseries &quot;Oppenheimer&quot;, and by Robert Downey Jr. in Christopher Nolan&#x27;s 2023 film &quot;Oppenheimer&quot;. Downey received the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal.

==See also==
*Unsuccessful nominations to the Cabinet of the United States

==Writings==
* Strauss, Lewis L. &quot;Men and Decisions&quot; (Garden City, New York: Doubleday &amp; Company, 1962).

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 

== References ==
==External links==

* Lewis L. Strauss Papers at the Hoover Presidential Library, link no longer given
** 
** &quot;Lewis Strauss and Robert Oppenheimer&quot;, blog entry at the Herbert Hoover Library and Museum
*Annotated bibliography for Lewis Strauss from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues 
*Guide to the Papers of Admiral Lewis Lichtenstein Strauss (1896–1974) at the American Jewish Historical Society, New York.
* Full text of &quot;too cheap to meter&quot; speech, at Nuclear Regulatory Commission site
* Dwight D. Eisenhower, Remarks on Presentation of the Medal of Freedom to Lewis L. Strauss, at The American Presidency Project site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1822160" start="0" end="26" title="Lewis Strauss" label="Lewis Lichtenstein Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="192" end="230" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="United States Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="356" end="371" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="378" end="390" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068105" start="392" end="413" title="nuclear energy policy of the United States" label="nuclear energy policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645387" start="419" end="453" title="nuclear power in the United States" label="nuclear power in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="466" end="484" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="517" end="531" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780279" start="547" end="579" title="Commission for Relief in Belgium" label="Commission for Relief in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="587" end="598" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q466663" start="607" end="637" title="American Relief Administration" label="American Relief Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759732" start="697" end="717" title="Kuhn, Loeb &amp;amp; Co." label="Kuhn, Loeb &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q465308" start="830" end="855" title="American Jewish Committee" label="American Jewish Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="999" end="1011" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153238" start="1114" end="1125" title="Leo Szilard" label="Leo Szilard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="1184" end="1201" title="U.S. Navy Reserve" label="U.S. Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906424" start="1262" end="1280" title="Bureau of Ordnance" label="Bureau of Ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1421" end="1429" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1554" end="1566" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="1625" end="1638" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823986" start="1810" end="1828" title="too cheap to meter" label="too cheap to meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="1899" end="1918" title="radioactive fallout" label="radioactive fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="1947" end="1963" title="Pacific Islander" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q304419" start="1979" end="1991" title="Castle Bravo" label="Castle Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="2059" end="2080" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098557" start="2088" end="2114" title="Oppenheimer security clearance hearing" label="security clearance hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="2332" end="2352" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003296" start="2392" end="2418" title="United States Secretary of Commerce" label="U.S. secretary of commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2515" end="2526" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44564" start="2564" end="2589" title="Charleston, West Virginia" label="Charleston, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220695" start="2663" end="2672" title="wholesale" label="wholesale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2694" end="2697" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="2834" end="2852" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3138" end="3145" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416417" start="3169" end="3182" title="valedictorian" label="valedictorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q63866743" start="3199" end="3224" title="John Marshall High School (Richmond, Virginia)" label="John Marshall High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="3280" end="3302" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="3308" end="3321" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097311" start="3527" end="3549" title="List of recessions in the United States" label="Recession of 1913–1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4027" end="4038" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="4087" end="4101" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780279" start="4169" end="4201" title="Commission for Relief in Belgium" label="Commission for Relief in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453796" start="4479" end="4512" title="United States Food Administration" label="United States Food Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677294" start="4723" end="4745" title="Harvey Hollister Bundy" label="Harvey Hollister Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q519730" start="4764" end="4778" title="Robert A. Taft" label="Robert A. Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="4834" end="4863" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="Armistice of 11 November 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q466663" start="4900" end="4930" title="American Relief Administration" label="American Relief Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628567" start="5098" end="5111" title="Rudolf Holsti" label="Rudolf Holsti"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="5178" end="5192" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27916528" start="5206" end="5245" title="Independence of Finland" label="Finland&amp;#x27;s independence from Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702533" start="5315" end="5359" title="American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee" label="American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068312" start="5620" end="5634" title="Pinsk massacre" label="Pinsk massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="5647" end="5664" title="Polish–Soviet War" label="Polish–Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="5814" end="5823" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q191957" start="5975" end="5996" title="Ignacy Jan Paderewski" label="Ignacy Jan Paderewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q843285" start="6326" end="6348" title="War Between the States" label="War Between the States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172504" start="6424" end="6439" title="Battle of Château-Thierry (1918)" label="Château-Thierry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474180" start="6444" end="6456" title="Battle of Belleau Wood" label="Belleau Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="6563" end="6572" title="Communism" label="Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="6653" end="6667" title="anti-Communist" label="anti-Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q214114" start="6772" end="6788" title="Felix M. Warburg" label="Felix M. Warburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759732" start="6844" end="6864" title="Kuhn, Loeb &amp;amp; Co." label="Kuhn, Loeb &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6868" end="6881" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493716" start="7009" end="7024" title="Mortimer Schiff" label="Mortimer Schiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="7198" end="7215" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190006" start="7655" end="7693" title="Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad" label="Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071804" start="7702" end="7751" title="Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad" label="Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034817" start="7942" end="7954" title="Inland Steel Company" label="Inland Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487172" start="7956" end="7970" title="Republic Steel" label="Republic Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978700" start="7976" end="7993" title="Great Lakes Steel Corporation" label="Great Lakes Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="8103" end="8128" title="Wall Street Crash of 1929" label="Wall Street Crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455620" start="8207" end="8222" title="Kodachrome film" label="Kodachrome film"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="8227" end="8240" title="Eastman Kodak" label="Eastman Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q313695" start="8249" end="8264" title="Polaroid camera" label="Polaroid camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q380134" start="8269" end="8282" title="Edwin H. Land" label="Edwin H. Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599873" start="8354" end="8372" title="Ritz-Carlton Hotel (New York City)" label="Ritz-Carlton Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093794" start="8525" end="8539" title="Vassar College" label="Vassar College"/>
<link wikidata="Q109951" start="8684" end="8701" title="Central Park West" label="Central Park West"/>
<link wikidata="Q455587" start="8715" end="8730" title="Upper East Side" label="Upper East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q245364" start="8745" end="8763" title="Central Park South" label="Central Park South"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="8878" end="8904" title="Metropolitan Opera Company" label="Metropolitan Opera Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="8919" end="8949" title="Metropolitan Opera Association" label="Metropolitan Opera Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q466663" start="8984" end="9014" title="American Relief Administration" label="American Relief Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743131" start="9073" end="9101" title="American Bankers Association" label="American Bankers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069535" start="9106" end="9140" title="Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York" label="New York State Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="9174" end="9190" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q699343" start="9209" end="9250" title="United States presidential election, 1920" label="United States presidential election, 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560879" start="9296" end="9331" title="1920 Republican National Convention" label="1920 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q699380" start="9470" end="9511" title="United States presidential election, 1928" label="United States presidential election, 1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145369" start="9561" end="9590" title="Republican National Committee" label="Republican National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="9922" end="9934" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="10089" end="10110" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q179868" start="10118" end="10159" title="United States presidential election, 1932" label="United States presidential election, 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="10198" end="10206" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448143" start="10715" end="10736" title="Self-made man" label="self-made millionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q453251" start="10743" end="10756" title="Horatio Alger" label="Horatio Alger"/>
<link wikidata="Q207650" start="11203" end="11213" title="autodidact" label="autodidact"/>
<link wikidata="Q465308" start="11392" end="11417" title="American Jewish Committee" label="American Jewish Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q45214" start="11582" end="11602" title="Baron de Hirsch Fund" label="Baron de Hirsch Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130842" start="11612" end="11650" title="Union of American Hebrew Congregations" label="Union of American Hebrew Congregations"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="11675" end="11682" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="11734" end="11753" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="12039" end="12051" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="12391" end="12404" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027531" start="12506" end="12524" title="Wagner–Rogers Bill" label="Wagner–Rogers Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="12970" end="12985" title="American Legion" label="American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541947" start="12991" end="13027" title="Daughters of the American Revolution" label="Daughters of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q181662" start="13118" end="13132" title="Bernard Baruch" label="Bernard Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q56316084" start="13958" end="13991" title="Congregation Emanu-El of New York" label="Congregation Emanu-El of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074676" start="14109" end="14122" title="Irving Lehman" label="Irving Lehman"/>
<link wikidata="Q96407941" start="14314" end="14328" title="Temple Beth-El (New York City)" label="Temple Beth-El"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="14933" end="14950" title="U.S. Navy Reserve" label="U.S. Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q457271" start="15035" end="15045" title="Lieutenant (navy)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983433" start="15100" end="15120" title="Lieutenant commander (United States)" label="lieutenant commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15143" end="15155" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149784" start="15278" end="15319" title="Director of Naval Intelligence, U.S. Navy" label="Director of Naval Intelligence, U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q248686" start="15392" end="15414" title="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith" label="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="15452" end="15455" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="15465" end="15480" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906424" start="15643" end="15661" title="Bureau of Ordnance" label="Bureau of Ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="15750" end="15766" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7090343" start="15820" end="15834" title="Shoreham Hotel" label="Shoreham Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890833" start="16085" end="16114" title="United States Navy bureau system" label="the Navy&amp;#x27;s bureau system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794061" start="16571" end="16600" title="Army-Navy &amp;quot;E&amp;quot; Award" label="Army-Navy &amp;quot;E&amp;quot; Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380971" start="16749" end="16785" title="Mark 14 torpedo" label="notorious failures of U.S. torpedoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q333133" start="16883" end="16902" title="proximity fuze" label="VT (proximity) fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q463385" start="17002" end="17020" title="James V. Forrestal" label="James V. Forrestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q526220" start="17031" end="17041" title="Frank Knox" label="Frank Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="17045" end="17066" title="United States Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q775382" start="17154" end="17167" title="Harry F. Byrd" label="Harry F. Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063818" start="17205" end="17229" title="Office of Naval Research" label="Office of Naval Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508630" start="17958" end="17990" title="House Committee on Naval Affairs" label="House Committee on Naval Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040943" start="18007" end="18018" title="Carl Vinson" label="Carl Vinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q366731" start="18057" end="18071" title="Ernest J. King" label="Ernest J. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="18077" end="18102" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="18242" end="18263" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035349" start="18328" end="18340" title="Inner Circle (parody group)" label="Inner Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="18436" end="18451" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q844242" start="18530" end="18539" title="Commodore (United States)" label="commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278830" start="18603" end="18615" title="Rear admiral (United States)" label="rear admiral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18645" end="18654" title="Admiral (United States)#History" label="flag rank"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19542" end="19553" title=":de:Arno Brasch" label="Arno Brasch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="19631" end="19636" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q153238" start="19690" end="19701" title="Leo Szilard" label="Leo Szilard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160121" start="19765" end="19779" title="chain reaction" label="chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="19837" end="19848" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="20054" end="20072" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q169577" start="20082" end="20097" title="Ernest Lawrence" label="Ernest Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344449" start="20294" end="20322" title="discovery of nuclear fission" label="discovery of nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="20338" end="20345" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="20416" end="20422" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="20728" end="20745" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q147388" start="20894" end="20914" title="Cryptomeria" label="Japanese cedar grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q235753" start="20920" end="20934" title="Nikkō, Tochigi" label="Nikkō, Tochigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999002" start="20941" end="20953" title="warning shot" label="warning shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="21449" end="21469" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q152225" start="21505" end="21517" title="Bikini Atoll" label="Bikini Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="21692" end="21716" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233191" start="21881" end="21900" title="David E. Lilienthal" label="David E. Lilienthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150730" start="21990" end="22011" title="Paul Frederick Foster" label="Paul Frederick Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641558" start="23077" end="23096" title="WB-29 Superfortress" label="WB-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="23327" end="23348" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733" start="23353" end="23366" title="Edward Teller" label="Edward Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="23455" end="23478" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q586755" start="23524" end="23566" title="RDS-1" label="first atomic bomb test by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="23910" end="23918" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24225" end="24238" title="Quebec Agreement#End of the Quebec Agreement" label="Modus Vivendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="24482" end="24503" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460752" start="24511" end="24527" title="Quebec Agreement" label="Quebec Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="24570" end="24604" title="United States presidential election, 1948" label="U.S. presidential election of 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q320061" start="24662" end="24677" title="Thomas E. Dewey" label="Thomas E. Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q57475" start="24871" end="24882" title="Klaus Fuchs" label="Klaus Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q334116" start="24963" end="24976" title="John Strachey (politician)" label="John Strachey"/>
<link wikidata="Q622568" start="24980" end="25006" title="Secretary of State for War" label="Secretary of State for War"/>
<link wikidata="Q586755" start="25618" end="25660" title="RDS-1" label="first atomic-bomb test by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="25916" end="25929" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909689" start="26374" end="26396" title="boosted fission weapon" label="boosted fission weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="26530" end="26555" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376775" start="26576" end="26589" title="Sidney Souers" label="Sidney Souers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130469" start="28339" end="28359" title="Rockefeller family" label="Rockefeller brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229776" start="28538" end="28556" title="Population Council" label="Population Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="28604" end="28623" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28638" end="28690" title="Rockefeller Center#Post-World War II expansion" label="sale and leasing back of real estate associated with"/>
<link wikidata="Q11277" start="28699" end="28717" title="Rockefeller Center" label="Rockefeller Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889644" start="29069" end="29124" title="United States Congress Joint Committee on Atomic Energy" label="United States Congress Joint Committee on Atomic Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q699548" start="29345" end="29376" title="United States presidential election, 1952" label="1952 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="29498" end="29518" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674571" start="29894" end="29910" title="Operation Candor" label="Operation Candor"/>
<link wikidata="Q757644" start="29997" end="30012" title="Atoms for Peace" label="Atoms for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q727399" start="30985" end="31018" title="Shippingport Atomic Power Station" label="Shippingport Atomic Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823986" start="31339" end="31357" title="too cheap to meter" label="too cheap to meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249318" start="31508" end="31524" title="Project Sherwood" label="Project Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q641442" start="31554" end="31580" title="Fusion power" label="power from hydrogen fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="31611" end="31635" title="Fission power" label="uranium fission reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q304419" start="31836" end="31848" title="Castle Bravo" label="Castle Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152225" start="31885" end="31897" title="Bikini Atoll" label="Bikini Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="31940" end="31959" title="radioactive fallout" label="radioactive fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q542619" start="31995" end="32009" title="Rongelap Atoll" label="Rongelap Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q700015" start="32014" end="32026" title="Utirik Atoll" label="Utirik Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q510109" start="32044" end="32062" title="Daigo Fukuryū Maru" label="Daigo Fukuryū Maru"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="33032" end="33048" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249308" start="33123" end="33139" title="Project SUNSHINE" label="Project SUNSHINE"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="33484" end="33501" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="34262" end="34285" title="Limited Test Ban Treaty" label="Limited Test Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344605" start="34636" end="34652" title="Nevada Test Site" label="Nevada Test Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364891" start="34681" end="34702" title="nuclear proliferation" label="nuclear proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q887520" start="34911" end="34925" title="Harold Stassen" label="Harold Stassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q333352" start="35388" end="35402" title="Sputnik crisis" label="Sputnik crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241184" start="35440" end="35483" title="President&amp;#x27;s Science Advisory Committee" label="President&amp;#x27;s Science Advisory Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="35952" end="35968" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q368235" start="36069" end="36104" title="1958 US–UK Mutual Defence Agreement" label="1958 US–UK Mutual Defence Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752912" start="36207" end="36221" title="Dimona reactor" label="Dimona reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q88926" start="36245" end="36265" title="Ernst David Bergmann" label="Ernst David Bergmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791690" start="36283" end="36314" title="Israel Atomic Energy Commission" label="Israel Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q65455964" start="36344" end="36367" title="Nuclear weapons and Israel" label="Israeli nuclear program"/>
<link wikidata="Q27832090" start="36802" end="36823" title="Los Alamos Laboratory" label="Los Alamos Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="37003" end="37031" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="37035" end="37044" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="38938" end="38948" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265661" start="39112" end="39123" title="Q clearance" label="Q clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585059" start="39380" end="39391" title="Gordon Dean (lawyer)" label="Gordon Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="39867" end="39882" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q248542" start="40022" end="40052" title="Ivy Mike" label="the first thermonuclear device"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582085" start="40196" end="40221" title="Joe 4" label="its own fusion-based bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909689" start="40258" end="40280" title="boosted fission weapon" label="boosted fission weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="40535" end="40550" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="41229" end="41244" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58483334" start="41426" end="41443" title="William L. Borden" label="William L. Borden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744748" start="41697" end="41716" title="American Prometheus" label="American Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390533" start="42170" end="42188" title="Kenneth D. Nichols" label="Kenneth D. Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q723378" start="42571" end="42582" title="Gordon Gray (politician)" label="Gordon Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358842" start="42674" end="42684" title="Roger Robb" label="Roger Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q165969" start="43082" end="43099" title="Isidor Isaac Rabi" label="Isidor Isaac Rabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636491" start="43419" end="43435" title="Haakon Chevalier" label="Haakon Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q314675" start="43578" end="43591" title="Leslie Groves" label="Leslie Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762258" start="45977" end="45992" title="The New Mexican" label="The New Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q234994" start="46088" end="46105" title="Jennifer Granholm" label="Jennifer Granholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029968" start="46111" end="46144" title="United States Secretary of Energy" label="United States Secretary of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36726927" start="46461" end="46477" title="Alex Wellerstein" label="Alex Wellerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="46618" end="46648" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="Atomic Energy Commission (AEC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284940" start="46992" end="47012" title="Dixon–Yates contract" label="Dixon–Yates contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="47105" end="47131" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892433" start="47325" end="47353" title="1954 United States elections" label="1954 U.S. midterm elections."/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="47537" end="47541" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q786242" start="47692" end="47718" title="White House Chief of Staff" label="White House Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q775070" start="47730" end="47743" title="Sherman Adams" label="Sherman Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="47848" end="47866" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="47884" end="47902" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q240274" start="47954" end="47970" title="Christian Herter" label="Christian Herter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003296" start="48046" end="48067" title="Secretary of Commerce" label="Secretary of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348088" start="48100" end="48135" title="1958 United States Senate elections" label="1958 United States Senate elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901949" start="48219" end="48237" title="recess appointment" label="recess appointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q464733" start="48796" end="48812" title="Clinton Anderson" label="Clinton Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q336770" start="48936" end="48949" title="Gale W. McGee" label="Gale W. McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378864" start="48957" end="48982" title="Senate Commerce Committee" label="Senate Commerce Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q93768470" start="49818" end="49831" title="David L. Hill" label="David L. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q762201" start="49860" end="49893" title="Federation of American Scientists" label="Federation of American Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644951" start="50887" end="50914" title="86th United States Congress" label="86th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q112762791" start="51010" end="51014" title="Veto power in the United States" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892436" start="51021" end="51039" title="1960 United States elections" label="the 1960 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="51425" end="51440" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="51445" end="51462" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456442" start="51525" end="51585" title="Unsuccessful nominations to the Cabinet of the United States" label="a Cabinet appointee had failed to be confirmed by the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075344" start="51618" end="51635" title="Charles B. Warren" label="Charles B. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658030" start="51677" end="51687" title="John Tower" label="John Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="52781" end="52819" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864266" start="53318" end="53360" title="Barry Goldwater 1964 presidential campaign" label="Barry Goldwater 1964 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q190873" start="53531" end="53543" title="desalination" label="desalination"/>
<link wikidata="Q465308" start="53784" end="53809" title="American Jewish Committee" label="American Jewish Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688743" start="53815" end="53853" title="Jewish Theological Seminary of America" label="Jewish Theological Seminary of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316546" start="53862" end="53892" title="Alliance Israélite Universelle" label="Alliance Israélite Universelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212348" start="54071" end="54082" title="Black Angus" label="Black Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="54167" end="54180" title="lymphosarcoma" label="lymphosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957257" start="54275" end="54299" title="Brandy Station, Virginia" label="Brandy Station, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971902" start="54414" end="54444" title="Washington Hebrew Congregation" label="Washington Hebrew Congregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695834" start="54462" end="54486" title="Hebrew Cemetery (Richmond, Virginia)" label="Richmond Hebrew Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246417" start="54675" end="54688" title="cause célèbre" label="cause célèbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413088" start="55140" end="55166" title="New York Times Book Review" label="New York Times Book Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529254" start="55227" end="55239" title="Alfred Kazin" label="Alfred Kazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744218" start="55551" end="55585" title="American Jewish Historical Society" label="American Jewish Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993479" start="55903" end="55922" title="Warner R. Schilling" label="Warner R. Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713590" start="56023" end="56036" title="Alden Whitman" label="Alden Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="56089" end="56103" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56480" end="56492" title="Richard Pfau" label="Richard Pfau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865592" start="56740" end="56759" title="Barton J. Bernstein" label="Barton J. Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q62000158" start="57136" end="57145" title="Ken Young" label="Ken Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q98149804" start="57873" end="57889" title="James R. Shepley" label="James R. Shepley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099176" start="57894" end="57908" title="Clay Blair Jr." label="Clay Blair Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q97062222" start="57921" end="57947" title="Priscilla Johnson McMillan" label="Priscilla Johnson McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347357" start="58350" end="58358" title="Kai Bird" label="Kai Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q45811" start="58363" end="58380" title="Martin J. Sherwin" label="Martin J. Sherwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26126" start="59226" end="59263" title="Order of Leopold (Belgium)" label="Chevalier, Belgian Order of Leopold I"/>
<link wikidata="Q94437" start="59269" end="59319" title="Order of the White Rose of Finland" label="First Class Commander of the White Rose of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q950604" start="59329" end="59356" title="Order of the Star of Romania" label="Chevalier, Star of Roumania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160952" start="59449" end="59469" title="Congressional Record" label="Congressional Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="59528" end="59544" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="59610" end="59625" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q571544" start="59792" end="59813" title="Oak leaf cluster" label="Oak Leaf Cluster—Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189410" start="59900" end="59914" title="5/16 inch star" label="Gold Star—Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086458" start="60292" end="60324" title="Navy Distinguished Service Medal" label="Navy Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330790" start="60375" end="60391" title="Medal of Freedom (1945)" label="Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688743" start="60908" end="60946" title="Jewish Theological Seminary of America" label="Jewish Theological Seminary of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="60988" end="61016" title="Case Institute of Technology" label="Case Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="61048" end="61080" title="Carnegie Institute of Technology" label="Carnegie Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302319" start="61119" end="61139" title="University of Toledo" label="University of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567748" start="61179" end="61192" title="Union College" label="Union College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296074" start="61288" end="61316" title="United States Rubber Company" label="United States Rubber Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797817" start="61342" end="61359" title="Hampton Institute" label="Hampton Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="61363" end="61392" title="Historically black colleges and universities" label="historically black university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808012" start="61424" end="61489" title="Memorial Hospital for the Treatment of Cancer and Allied Diseases" label="Memorial Hospital for the Treatment of Cancer and Allied Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906647" start="61532" end="61559" title="Medical College of Virginia" label="Medical College of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349913" start="61637" end="61655" title="Eisenhower College" label="Eisenhower College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633146" start="61936" end="61970" title="List of covers of Time magazine (1950s)" label="cover of &amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q325398" start="62196" end="62206" title="Phil Brown (actor)" label="Phil Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="62219" end="62222" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098548" start="62240" end="62251" title="Oppenheimer (TV series)" label="Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165219" start="62266" end="62283" title="Robert Downey Jr." label="Robert Downey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="62287" end="62311" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q108839994" start="62328" end="62339" title="Oppenheimer (film)" label="Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62367" end="62406" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor#2020s" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456442" start="62441" end="62501" title="Unsuccessful nominations to the Cabinet of the United States" label="Unsuccessful nominations to the Cabinet of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744218" start="63067" end="63101" title="American Jewish Historical Society" label="American Jewish Historical Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803614" wikidata="Q3104332" url="?curid=803614" title="Gerry Conlon">
<text>Gerard Patrick Conlon (1 March 1954 – 21 June 2014) was a Northern Irish man known for being one of the Guildford Four who spent 15 years in prison after being wrongly convicted of being a Provisional IRA bomber.

==Biography==
Gerard Conlon was born in Belfast and grew up at 7 Peel Street on the corner of Mary Street in the impoverished but close-knit community of the Lower Falls Road. He described his childhood as happy. His father was Giuseppe Conlon, a factory worker, and his mother was Sarah Conlon, a hospital cleaner.

In 1974, at age 20, Conlon went to England to seek work and to escape the everyday violence he was encountering on the streets of Belfast. He was living with a group of squatters in London when he was arrested for the Guildford pub bombings, which occurred on 5 October the same year.

Conlon, along with fellow Irishmen Paul Michael Hill and Paddy Armstrong and Englishwoman Carole Richardson, known as the Guildford Four, were convicted on 22 October 1975 of planting two bombs a year earlier in the Surrey town of Guildford, which killed five people and injured dozens more. The four were sentenced to life in prison. At their trial the judge, Lord John Donaldson, told the defendants, &quot;If hanging were still an option you would have been executed.&quot;

Conlon continued to protest his innocence, insisting that police had tortured him into making a false confession. On 19 October 1989,
his position was vindicated when the Guildford Four were freed after the Court of Appeal in London ruled that police had fabricated the handwritten interrogation notes used in the conviction. Crucial evidence proving Conlon could not have carried out the bombings had been held back by the police from the original trial. Most notably, the police falsely claimed that they had been unable to locate Charles Burke, a homeless man with whom Conlon had been using drugs in a local park at the time of the bombings.

A group of Conlon&#x27;s relatives, collectively known as the Maguire Seven, were convicted of being part of the bombing campaign and also spent decades in prison. Among them was his father, Giuseppe, who had travelled to London from Belfast to help his son mount a legal defence, and who died in prison in 1980. In 1991 the Maguire Seven were also exonerated, although by this time they had all either served their prison sentences in full or, in the case of Giuseppe Conlon, died. Scientists had falsely asserted that the hands of each defendant had tested positive for nitroglycerine.
After emerging from the Court of Appeal as a free man, Conlon said: &quot;I have been in prison for something I did not do. I am totally innocent. The Maguire Seven are innocent. Let&#x27;s hope the Birmingham Six are freed.&quot; Conlon was represented by human rights lawyer Gareth Peirce, who also secured the release of the Birmingham Six.

Conlon described his experience of injustice in his book &quot;Proved Innocent&quot; (1990). He was portrayed by Daniel Day-Lewis in the film &quot;In the Name of the Father&quot; (1993).

After his release from prison, Conlon had problems adjusting to civilian life, suffering two nervous breakdowns, attempting suicide, and becoming addicted to alcohol and other drugs. He eventually recovered and became a campaigner against various miscarriages of justice in the United Kingdom and around the world. Gerry Conlon also made a cameo appearance in the film &quot;Face &quot;(1997) alongside Robert Carlyle.

==Death==
Conlon died of lung cancer on 21 June 2014 in his native Belfast home, surrounded by family members. His funeral was held at St Peter&#x27;s Cathedral in Belfast: the ceremony was presided by Father Ciaran Dallat and saw the participation of the other members of the Guildford Four, the Maguire Seven, Irish Tánaiste Eamon Gilmore and Conlon&#x27;s former lawyer Gareth Peirce.

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;The Guardian&quot;, Guildford Four&#x27;s Gerry Conlon dies of cancer in Belfast, aged 60, 22 June 2014

== External links ==
*&quot;Belfast Telegraph&quot; article
*&quot;Standard&quot; article</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3104332" start="0" end="21" title="Gerry Conlon" label="Gerard Patrick Conlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148834" start="104" end="118" title="Guildford Four and Maguire Seven" label="Guildford Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="189" end="204" title="Provisional IRA" label="Provisional IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="254" end="261" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394714" start="378" end="388" title="Falls Road, Belfast" label="Falls Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422201" start="496" end="508" title="Sarah Conlon" label="Sarah Conlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q891879" start="749" end="771" title="Guildford pub bombings" label="Guildford pub bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148834" start="939" end="953" title="Guildford Four" label="Guildford Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="1033" end="1039" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="1048" end="1057" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700103" start="1178" end="1197" title="John Donaldson, Baron Donaldson of Lymington" label="Lord John Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911413" start="1391" end="1407" title="false confession" label="false confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148834" start="2004" end="2017" title="Maguire Seven" label="Maguire Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="2514" end="2528" title="nitroglycerine" label="nitroglycerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q865753" start="2729" end="2743" title="Birmingham Six" label="Birmingham Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q518591" start="2807" end="2820" title="Gareth Peirce" label="Gareth Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="2988" end="3004" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q304074" start="3023" end="3048" title="In the Name of the Father" label="In the Name of the Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="3157" end="3174" title="nervous breakdown" label="nervous breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064058" start="3439" end="3443" title="Face (1997 film)" label="Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q207307" start="3467" end="3481" title="Robert Carlyle" label="Robert Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144269" start="3619" end="3644" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Belfast" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="3648" end="3655" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146214" start="3802" end="3810" title="Tánaiste" label="Tánaiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q982225" start="3811" end="3824" title="Eamon Gilmore" label="Eamon Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q518591" start="3857" end="3870" title="Gareth Peirce" label="Gareth Peirce"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803627" wikidata="Q2158789" url="?curid=803627" title="Robert S. Strauss">
<text>Robert Schwarz Strauss (October 19, 1918 – March 19, 2014) was an influential figure in American politics, diplomacy, and law whose service dated back to future President Lyndon Johnson&#x27;s first congressional campaign in 1937. By the 1950s, he was associated in Texas politics with the faction of the Democratic Party that was led by Johnson and John Connally. He served as the Chairman of the Democratic National Committee between 1972 and 1977 and served under President Jimmy Carter as the U.S. Trade Representative and special envoy to the Middle East. He later served as the Ambassador to Russia under President George H. W. Bush. Strauss also served as the last United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union.

An accomplished lawyer, Strauss founded the law firm now known as Akin Gump Strauss Hauer &amp; Feld in 1945, which had grown to be one of the largest in the world with offices in 15 cities and employing over 900 lawyers and professionals worldwide. His business activities included serving on the Texas Banking Commission and as Chairman of the U.S.-Russia Business Council.

Strauss was inducted into the Academy of Achievement in 2003 and was a recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest US civilian award, on January 16, 1981. 
He was a trustee of the Center for Strategic and International Studies and The Forum for International Policy and was a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission.

Strauss occupied academic chairs and lecture positions, including one as the Lloyd Bentsen Chair at the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas. He was also the namesake of The Robert S. Strauss Center for International Security and Law at The University of Texas. He was interested in biomedical issues and endowed two chairs at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas: the Helen and Robert S. Strauss Professorship in Pediatric Neurology and the Helen and Robert S. Strauss Professorship in Urology.

==Background==
Strauss was born in Lockhart, Texas, south of Austin. He was the son of Edith Violet (née Schwarz) and Charles H. Strauss. His father was a Jewish immigrant from Germany and his mother was born into a Jewish merchant family in Hempstead and Lockhart Texas. When he was one year old, his family moved to the small town of Hamlin, north of Abilene, and later to the slightly larger nearby town of Stamford. Strauss&#x27;s father opened a small general store in Stamford.

In his sophomore year at the University of Texas at Austin, he campaigned for a state legislature candidate. He was given a part-time job as a Committee Clerk in the Texas State Legislature. In 1937, while still an undergraduate, he volunteered for Johnson&#x27;s first congressional campaign. Strauss was also a member of the Texas Cowboys, an honorary service organization at the University of Texas. At the University of Texas Law School, he met Connally, another student who would significantly impact his career. After completing his law degree, Strauss was hired as a special agent by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and served in the FBI throughout World War II.

After the war, he settled in Dallas, where he and a fellow FBI agent, Richard A. Gump, founded their own law firm. This firm, known initially as Gump and Strauss, would eventually grow into the international law firm Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer &amp; Feld. The many partners over the years included a high-profile defense attorney, William G. Hundley.

==Texas political activity==
Still interested in a political career, Strauss and his wife, Helen Jacobs, found a more comfortable niche participating in numerous charities and community activities. Strauss became a prodigious fundraiser for the Democratic Party. By the 1950s, Strauss&#x27;s law school friend, John Connally, was serving on the staff of Lyndon Johnson, who soon became Senate Majority Leader.

When John F. Kennedy and Johnson were respectively elected President and Vice President in 1960, Connally, a former naval officer, was appointed Secretary of the Navy. Within a year, at Strauss&#x27;s urging, Connally returned to Texas to run for governor. At the time, the Republican Party had little presence in Texas. However, Connally nevertheless faced stiff opposition in the Democratic primary.

Strauss&#x27;s skill as a campaign adviser and fundraiser was crucial in Connally&#x27;s narrow victory. Having secured the Democratic nomination, Connally easily won the general election. Connally&#x27;s election finally brought Strauss the access to the Dallas business establishment that he had long sought. Governor Connally appointed Strauss to the Texas Banking Commission, and Strauss&#x27;s law firm grew and prospered.

The world of Texas politics was turned upside down by the events of November 1963. Connally and his wife Nellie were riding in the limousine with Kennedy in Dallas when the latter was fatally shot. Connally was severely wounded by the assassin&#x27;s bullets but soon recovered. Connally and Strauss&#x27;s mentor and patron, Johnson, was now President of the United States. Although Strauss did not regard himself as part of the President&#x27;s inner circle of political advisers, Connally certainly was, and Strauss&#x27;s connection to Connally brought him closer to the President.

In Texas, Connally was finding himself at odds with the more liberal wing of his party. Democrats were becoming divided over the Vietnam War on the national stage. Johnson solicited Strauss&#x27;s advice on the issue.

Strauss feared that continued involvement in the war was a mistake endangering Johnson&#x27;s presidency. However, he felt too intimidated by the imposing Johnson to share his true feelings. Strauss immediately regretted withholding his genuine opinion from Johnson. He resolved that if any president ever sought his advice again, Strauss would tell him the truth regardless of what he wanted to hear.

==National political activity==
The 1968 presidential election brought the Republican Richard Nixon to power and left the Democratic Party deeply divided. Strauss had long expected that his friend, Connally, would run for president and hoped that he would seek the Democratic nomination in the next election. Strauss opened a Washington, D.C. office for his law firm and became Treasurer of the Democratic Party in 1970. However, less than a year later, Connally accepted an invitation from Nixon to serve as Secretary of the Treasury. Strauss resigned from his treasurer position in 1972 after the Democrats nominated George McGovern.

McGovern and the Democrats suffered a crushing defeat, losing in 49 of the 50 states. Democratic governors from the South and West, seeking to reverse the party&#x27;s liberal shift, forced out McGovern ally Jean Westwood as chair of the Democratic National Committee and replaced her with Strauss, who was favored by the leader of the effort, Kentucky Gov. Wendell Ford.

Although emboldened by its success in 1974, the party had no obvious frontrunner for the presidential nomination in 1976. While remaining studiously neutral in the struggle for the nomination, Strauss carefully rebuilt the party&#x27;s finances and planned a tightly disciplined national convention in New York City to erase memories of the chaotic gatherings of 1968 and 1972.

By the time the Democrats met at Madison Square Garden, the nomination had been secured by an unexpected candidate, former Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter.

Strauss expertly managed the convention. At the 1972 convention, party infighting had delayed candidate McGovern&#x27;s acceptance speech until late at night, when the television audience had gone to sleep. Strauss made sure that Carter&#x27;s acceptance speech ran in prime time, and the convention ended with a memorable tableau: the leaders of the party&#x27;s opposing wings, conservative George Wallace and liberal George McGovern, flanking Carter with clasped hands upraised. The Democrats entered the fall campaign united for the first time in years. Credit for this accomplishment was awarded to Chairman Strauss, and Carter quickly asked Strauss to chair his election campaign.

The national election was closely contested, but Carter emerged victorious, Strauss being acclaimed as a political kingmaker.

==Carter==
After ascending to the presidency in 1977, Carter named Strauss as U.S. Trade Representative. The position enjoyed cabinet-level status while allowing Strauss to apply his considerable negotiating skills to America&#x27;s troubled relations with its trading partners. As Trade Representative, Strauss completed the Tokyo Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations and secured the agreement&#x27;s ratification by the US Congress in the Trade Act of 1979. Then, Carter asked Strauss to undertake an even more challenging task as his Personal Representative to the Middle East. Carter&#x27;s previous efforts had already resulted in the Camp David Accords between Israel and Egypt, and Carter hoped that Strauss would be able to build on the success. The handshake of Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Egyptian President Anwar Al Sadat on the White House lawn was a high point of Carter&#x27;s presidency. On April 24, 1979, Carter announced that Strauss would serve as Personal Representative of the President to the Middle East Peace Negotiations (Palestinian autonomy talks).

The Iranian Revolution led to the seizure of American diplomats as hostages, a crisis that dominated the last year of Carter&#x27;s term.

In 1980, Strauss&#x27;s old friend, Connally, finally made a run for the presidency. He entered the Republican primaries as a hard-core conservative. However, he found himself running at the back of the pack while Ronald Reagan emerged as the frontrunner. Strauss chaired Carter&#x27;s campaign committee again in 1980, but Carter did not win re-election. Before leaving office, Carter awarded Robert Strauss the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation&#x27;s highest civilian award.

Strauss returned to his law firm&#x27;s thriving Washington office. His experience as Trade Representative made him a sought-after expert on international trade matters.

==Reagan==
Carter&#x27;s successor, Reagan, was to face difficulties of his own. His efforts to resolve another hostage situation led to the Iran-Contra affair. Many of the president&#x27;s supporters believed that the aggressive management style of his White House Chief of Staff, Donald Regan, was making matters worse. However, Reagan remained loyal to Regan and would not consider replacing him. A presidential adviser, Michael Deaver, as well as First Lady Nancy Reagan made a discreet approach to an experienced outsider they believed might be able to persuade Reagan. Others had told him what he wanted to hear: that the controversy would blow over and that Donald Regan was more useful than not being there. Strauss, who had closely observed the workings of two other presidential administrations, told Reagan the painful truth: Regan had become a liability and that the White House needed a Chief of Staff who could mend fences, especially with Congress.

Strauss recommended former Senator Howard Baker, a Republican who was respected on both sides of the aisle for his competence and his integrity. Reagan was visibly annoyed with Strauss&#x27;s suggestions. However, a few days later, Donald Regan submitted his resignation, and the President appointed Baker to replace him. Baker skillfully managed Reagan&#x27;s recovery from the controversy, and Reagan left office with his popularity restored.

Strauss was then appointed as the co-chair, along with ex-Secretary of Transportation Drew Lewis, of the National Economic Commission. The bipartisan commission was tasked to solve the federal budget deficit that had grown to over $4 trillion. The commission lasted from 1988 to 1989 and ended in the first term of George HW Bush.

==Bush==
Reagan&#x27;s Vice President, Bush, won the 1988 election to succeed him. Bush also found a need for the counsel of Strauss. Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev was attempting to reform the country&#x27;s communist system and to forge a new relationship with the United States. His efforts faced opposition from hard-liners within the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and newly elected leaders who agitated for more and more autonomy.

Bush appointed Strauss to serve as Ambassador to the Soviet Union, hoping that Strauss&#x27;s proven negotiation skills would ease the transition to a new era. The Soviet Union was also starting to transition from a dictatorship to a democracy, making it important to show that party membership should no longer be a requirement for political office and that political opposition should no longer be considered treasonous but, to use a British term, &quot;the loyal opposition,&quot; making Bush&#x27;s selection of one of his opponents especially significant.

It was reported that Bush told Strauss that Bush had selected Strauss because Strauss said that he had voted against Bush and intended to do so again.

In August 1991, only weeks after a state visit by President Bush, reactionary members of the Communist Party and a few high-ranking officers of the military and KGB attempted to seize power and restore the old dictatorship. The coup attempt collapsed, but Gorbachev&#x27;s leadership had been fatally injured. Strauss presented his credentials to Gorbachev only hours after Gorbachev resigned his post as Chairman of the Communist Party.

While Strauss served in Moscow, the first elected President of Russia, Boris Yeltsin, emerged as the most powerful figure in the fragile union. With the agreement of the elected presidents of the other constituent republics, the Soviet Union was officially dissolved and replaced by a loosely associated Commonwealth of Independent States.

In December, Gorbachev resigned the presidency of a superstate that had ceased to exist. Strauss was quickly reappointed as Ambassador to the largest of the Soviet Union&#x27;s successor states, the Russian Federation. With Strauss&#x27;s assistance, Yeltsin quickly established amicable relations with the United States. Strauss resigned shortly after the 1992 presidential election in the United States and returned to private law practice with Akin Gump.

==Awards==
Strauss was awarded the H. Neil Mallon Award by the World Affairs Council in 1992. The H. Neil Mallon Award, named after the Council&#x27;s founder, and hosted by the World Affair Council of Dallas/ Fort Worth, is presented annually to individuals who have excelled at promoting the international profile of North Texas. Funds raised from this event support the World Affair Council&#x27;s public and education programming, international exchanges, and diplomatic services.

==Later life and death==
Apart from his law practice and government service, Robert Strauss had long been a popular public speaker and lecturer, and had written on law, business, and public affairs for professional journals, magazines, and newspapers across the United States and abroad. He had also served on the boards of major corporations, including Xerox and the Archer Daniels Midland Company until his death. In the academic world, he had occupied the Lloyd Bentsen Chair at the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas, where he lectured to students of law, business, and public affairs. In his later years, Strauss served as Chair of the U.S.-Russia Business Council and was a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and a trustee of the Center for Strategic and International Studies.

His sister-in-law, Annette Strauss, served as mayor of Dallas from 1987 to 1991.

On March 19, 2014, Strauss died of natural causes at his home in Washington, D.C. He was 95 years old.

==See also==
* List of U.S. political appointments that crossed party lines

==References==
==External links==

*Strauss profile and bio at the Academy of Achievement
*Strauss bio at Akin Gump Strauss Hauer &amp; Feld, LLP
*Strauss bio at Answers.com
*Strauss bio at U.S.-Russia Business Council
*McGarr, Kathryn J. &quot;The Whole Damn Deal: Robert Strauss and the Art of Politics&quot;. PublicAffairs, 2011. 







|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2158789" start="0" end="22" title="Robert S. Strauss" label="Robert Schwarz Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="171" end="185" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="305" end="321" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q311293" start="350" end="363" title="John Connally" label="John Connally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="398" end="427" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="477" end="489" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574977" start="497" end="522" title="U.S. Trade Representative" label="U.S. Trade Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="548" end="559" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="621" end="638" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701049" start="785" end="819" title="Akin Gump" label="Akin Gump Strauss Hauer &amp;amp; Feld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862993" start="1065" end="1093" title="U.S.-Russia Business Council" label="U.S.-Russia Business Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="1126" end="1148" title="Academy of Achievement" label="Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="1184" end="1213" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053614" start="1292" end="1338" title="Center for Strategic and International Studies" label="Center for Strategic and International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1343" end="1377" title="The Forum for International Policy" label="The Forum for International Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="1402" end="1430" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="1439" end="1460" title="Trilateral Commission" label="Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q455401" start="1540" end="1553" title="Lloyd Bentsen" label="Lloyd Bentsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710993" start="1567" end="1609" title="Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs" label="Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="1617" end="1636" title="University of Texas" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349513" start="1666" end="1729" title="The Robert S. Strauss Center for International Security and Law" label="The Robert S. Strauss Center for International Security and Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725999" start="1827" end="1884" title="University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas" label="University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q522530" start="2053" end="2068" title="Lockhart, Texas" label="Lockhart, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="2079" end="2085" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2173" end="2179" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2195" end="2202" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q980335" start="2354" end="2360" title="Hamlin, Texas" label="Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128295" start="2371" end="2378" title="Abilene, Texas" label="Abilene"/>
<link wikidata="Q982190" start="2428" end="2436" title="Stamford, Texas" label="Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="2532" end="2561" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="2669" end="2692" title="Texas State Legislature" label="Texas State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707614" start="2830" end="2843" title="Texas Cowboys" label="Texas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896446" start="2913" end="2943" title="University of Texas Law School" label="University of Texas Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655853" start="3077" end="3090" title="special agent" label="special agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="3098" end="3129" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3169" end="3181" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q613142" start="3289" end="3297" title="law firm" label="law firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701049" start="3401" end="3438" title="Akin Gump" label="Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer &amp;amp; Feld"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203056" start="3515" end="3533" title="William G. Hundley" label="William G. Hundley"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="3781" end="3797" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q311293" start="3847" end="3860" title="John Connally" label="John Connally"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="3890" end="3904" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="3922" end="3944" title="Senate Majority Leader" label="Senate Majority Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="3952" end="3967" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="4006" end="4015" title="List of Presidents of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="4020" end="4034" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="4063" end="4076" title="naval officer" label="naval officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="4092" end="4113" title="Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q878323" start="4194" end="4202" title="List of Governors of Texas" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="4221" end="4237" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="4340" end="4347" title="Partisan primary" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="4606" end="4612" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="4963" end="4975" title="John F. Kennedy assassination" label="fatally shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5495" end="5506" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="6024" end="6050" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="6074" end="6087" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="6314" end="6330" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q388338" start="6366" end="6375" title="Treasurer" label="Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="6497" end="6522" title="US Secretary of the Treasury" label="Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="6607" end="6622" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="6663" end="6678" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="crushing defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="6863" end="6892" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892442" start="7036" end="7040" title="United States general elections, 1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413715" start="7277" end="7296" title="United States presidential nominating convention" label="national convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7300" end="7313" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="7361" end="7365" title="1968 Democratic National Convention" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575004" start="7370" end="7374" title="1972 Democratic National Convention" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="7410" end="7431" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q880198" start="7500" end="7516" title="Georgia Governor" label="Georgia Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="7517" end="7529" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q745818" start="7801" end="7811" title="prime time" label="prime time"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152917" start="7821" end="7831" title="1976 Democratic National Convention" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="7912" end="7924" title="conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="7925" end="7939" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="7944" end="7951" title="modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="7952" end="7967" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574977" start="8425" end="8450" title="U.S. Trade Representative" label="U.S. Trade Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="8673" end="8684" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="Tokyo Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="8773" end="8784" title="US Congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="8919" end="8930" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q309204" start="8991" end="9009" title="Camp David Accords" label="Camp David Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="9018" end="9024" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="9029" end="9034" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="9122" end="9144" title="Israeli Prime Minister" label="Israeli Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="9145" end="9159" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="9183" end="9197" title="Anwar Al Sadat" label="Anwar Al Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="9205" end="9216" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127406" start="9412" end="9438" title="Palestinian autonomy talks" label="Palestinian autonomy talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="9446" end="9464" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="9476" end="9517" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="seizure of American diplomats as hostages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="9795" end="9808" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="9994" end="10023" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="10209" end="10228" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="10380" end="10398" title="Iran-Contra affair" label="Iran-Contra affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q786242" start="10493" end="10519" title="White House Chief of Staff" label="White House Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240286" start="10521" end="10533" title="Donald Regan" label="Donald Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619033" start="10663" end="10677" title="Michael Deaver" label="Michael Deaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="10690" end="10700" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="10701" end="10713" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="11231" end="11238" title="US Senator" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337643" start="11239" end="11251" title="Howard Baker" label="Howard Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q368811" start="11736" end="11746" title="Drew Lewis" label="Drew Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="11965" end="11979" title="George HW Bush" label="George HW Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="12005" end="12019" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="12133" end="12150" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="12195" end="12204" title="communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="12325" end="12360" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354420" start="12889" end="12905" title="loyal opposition" label="loyal opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="13304" end="13307" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="13371" end="13383" title="Soviet coup attempt of 1991" label="coup attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="13606" end="13612" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q218295" start="13632" end="13651" title="President of Russia" label="President of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="13653" end="13666" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="13886" end="13920" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="14122" end="14140" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="14280" end="14306" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035337" start="14445" end="14466" title="World Affairs Council of Dallas/Fort Worth" label="World Affairs Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342738" start="14984" end="14998" title="public speaker" label="public speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569495" start="15003" end="15011" title="lecturer" label="lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152433" start="15222" end="15227" title="Xerox" label="Xerox"/>
<link wikidata="Q632694" start="15236" end="15266" title="Archer Daniels Midland Company" label="Archer Daniels Midland Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710993" start="15354" end="15396" title="Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs" label="Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="15404" end="15423" title="University of Texas" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862993" start="15544" end="15572" title="U.S.-Russia Business Council" label="U.S.-Russia Business Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="15597" end="15625" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053614" start="15647" end="15693" title="Center for Strategic and International Studies" label="Center for Strategic and International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769119" start="15715" end="15730" title="Annette Strauss" label="Annette Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="15751" end="15757" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438541" start="15813" end="15827" title="natural causes" label="natural causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="15843" end="15859" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6602868" start="15897" end="15957" title="List of U.S. political appointments that crossed party lines" label="List of U.S. political appointments that crossed party lines"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803631" wikidata="Q28026016" url="?curid=803631" title="Junot">
<text>Junot is a French name that may refer to the following notable people:
;Given name
*Junot Díaz (born 1968), Dominican American

;Surname
*Laure Junot, Duchess of Abrantes (1784–1838), French writer
*Jean-Andoche Junot, 1st Duke of Abrantès (1771–1813), French general during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars
*Mara Junot, American voiceover actress
*Philippe Junot (born 1940), venture capitalist and property developer

== See also ==
* Juno (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28026016" start="0" end="5" title="Junot" label="Junot"/>
<link wikidata="Q402664" start="84" end="94" title="Junot Díaz" label="Junot Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q272690" start="138" end="170" title="Laure Junot, Duchess of Abrantes" label="Laure Junot, Duchess of Abrantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q353907" start="199" end="217" title="Jean-Andoche Junot" label="Jean-Andoche Junot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128787" start="354" end="368" title="Philippe Junot" label="Philippe Junot"/>
<link wikidata="Q226151" start="442" end="463" title="Juno (disambiguation)" label="Juno (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803634" wikidata="Q63201" url="?curid=803634" title="Ernst Wollweber">
<text>Ernst Friedrich Wollweber (29 October 1898 – 3 May 1967) was a German politician who was State Secretary of State Security from 1953 to 1955 and Minister of State Security of East Germany from 1955 to 1957.

==Biography==
Born in Hannoversch Münden, Hanover, in 1898, Wollweber joined the Imperial Germany&#x27;s navy, the &quot;Kaiserliche Marine&quot;, at a young age and served in the submarine department during World War I.

In November 1918, Wollweber participated in the Wilhelmshaven mutiny, a high-profile sailor rebellion in Kiel, and, following the end of the German Revolution, joined the Communist Party of Germany in 1919.

Wollweber rose quickly through the party ranks and by 1921 had become a member of the KPD’s Central Committee and Political Secretary of Hesse-Waldeck. Two years later, Wollweber became a leader of the militant wings of the KPD in Hesse-Waldeck, Thuringia, and Silesia. Wollweber’s activities led to his arrest in 1924, after which time he was charged with high treason. Wollweber was released in 1926, and in 1928 he was elected a representative of the Prussian Federal State Parliament, a position he held until 1932. In 1929, he was elected to the Federal State Parliament of Lower Silesia and from 1932 to 1933 was a representative of the Reichstag. In 1931 was he elected to the leadership of the International Union of Seamen and Harbour Workers (ISH).

When the KPD was outlawed in Germany after the Reichstag fire of February 1933, Wollweber was forced to flee to Copenhagen and later to Leningrad. From 1936 to 1940, Wollweber organized the &quot;Organisation Against Fascism and in Support of the USSR&quot;, better known as the Wollweber League which conducted 21 known acts of sabotage against the ships of Fascist nations sailing from Scandinavian and other northern European ports. In 1937, Wollweber became a weapons supplier to the Republican side in the Spanish Civil War. A worldwide fugitive, Wollweber was finally apprehended in Sweden in 1940 when he was very nearly deported to certain death in Germany. Eventually he was sentenced to three years of imprisonment. Because he had received Soviet citizenship while in custody, the Swedish Government in 1944 finally gave in to Soviet pressure and allowed Wollweber to leave for the USSR.

After World War II, Wollweber returned to Germany and joined the Socialist Unity Party of Germany in 1946. A year later, he became leader of the central management for shipping and in 1950, Undersecretary of State for the Ministry of Traffic in East Germany. Around this time, it was rumored in the West that he had established a new Wollweber Organization for the USSR, which would be teaching Communist agents in nations in Eastern Europe and along the North Sea the art of sabotage. However, these rumours have not been substantiated. While in this position, he was spied on by Walter Gramsch, who foiled several of Wollweber&#x27;s attempts to smuggle products past the Western embargo into East Germany.

In June 1953, Wollweber was made Undersecretary of State for the Shipping Office, but a month later he became State Secretary of State Security (the Stasi) after Wilhelm Zaisser was removed from the post as Minister of State Security and the Stasi was downgraded to a State Secretariat. In November 1955, Wollweber was made Minister of State Security, after the Stasi had been restored to a ministry. Wollweber tried to improve the Stasi&#x27;s domestic powers in the search of what he saw as Western intelligence infiltration of the GDR but this brought him into conflict with the mainstream in the SED party leadership, in particularly with its head Walter Ulbricht and Erich Honecker.

In 1954, Wollweber became a delegate to the Volkskammer or People&#x27;s Parliament and a member of the SED’s Central Committee. After 1956, his influence began to wane when he clashed with Walter Ulbricht and Erich Honecker on issues ranging from East Germany’s policies towards Poland to an estimate of the number of anti-Communist groups within GDR. Besides, a new opposition group led by Politburo member Karl Schirdewan had formed within the SED Politburo to oppose Ulbricht&#x27;s policies and Wollweber had unwisely taken Schirdewan&#x27;s side.

In 1957, Wollweber was forced to resign as head of the Stasi and was succeeded by his deputy, Erich Mielke. In 1958, Wollweber was accused of anti-SED activity and was removed from the Central Committee. Shortly thereafter, Wollweber resigned from the Volkskammer and lived in obscurity in East Berlin eking out a living as a translator until his death in 1967. After his death Wollweber was cremated and honoured with burial in the &quot;Pergolenweg&quot; Ehrengrab section of Berlin&#x27;s Friedrichsfelde Cemetery.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Cookridge, E. H. &quot;Gehlen: Spy of the Century&quot;. New York: Random House, 1972. 
* Flocken, Jan von and Scholz, Michael F. &quot;Ernst Wollweber. Saboteur - Minister - Unperson&quot;, Berlin: Aufbau-Verlag 1994. 
*Lee, Martin A. &quot;The Beast Reawakens&quot;. New York: Little, Brown and Company, 1997. 
*Payne, Ronald and Dobson, Christopher. &quot;Who&#x27;s Who in Espionage&quot;. New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 1984. 
*Whitney, Craig R. &quot;Spy Trader&quot;. New York: Times Books - Random House, 1994. 
*Wolf, Markus. &quot;Man Without a Face: The Autobiography of Communism&#x27;s Greatest Spymaster&quot;. New York: Times Books - Random House, 1997. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q63201" start="0" end="25" title="Ernst Wollweber" label="Ernst Friedrich Wollweber"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="89" end="122" title="Stasi" label="State Secretary of State Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="145" end="171" title="Stasi" label="Minister of State Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="175" end="187" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q165380" start="230" end="248" title="Hann. Münden" label="Hannoversch Münden"/>
<link wikidata="Q819125" start="250" end="257" title="Province of Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="289" end="305" title="Imperial Germany" label="Imperial Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q156649" start="329" end="347" title="Kaiserliche Marine" label="Kaiserliche Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="416" end="427" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q702250" start="478" end="498" title="Wilhelmshaven mutiny" label="Wilhelmshaven mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="571" end="588" title="German Revolution" label="German Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="601" end="627" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="724" end="727" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="KPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q190652" start="730" end="747" title="Central Committee" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="775" end="780" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q540107" start="781" end="788" title="Waldeck, Hesse" label="Waldeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="884" end="893" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="899" end="906" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353353" start="1217" end="1230" title="Lower Silesia" label="Lower Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637829" start="1281" end="1290" title="Reichstag (Weimar Republic)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1340" end="1389" title="International Union of Seamen and Harbour Workers" label="International Union of Seamen and Harbour Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q153992" start="1445" end="1459" title="Reichstag fire" label="Reichstag fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="1510" end="1520" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="1534" end="1543" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1677" end="1693" title="Wollweber League" label="Wollweber League"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="1727" end="1735" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="1757" end="1764" title="Fascist" label="Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="1909" end="1926" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="1987" end="1993" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2055" end="2062" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2148" end="2154" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2235" end="2241" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2290" end="2294" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2303" end="2315" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="2362" end="2394" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="Socialist Unity Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="2723" end="2737" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="2752" end="2761" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964988" start="2878" end="2892" title="Walter Gramsch" label="Walter Gramsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="3156" end="3161" title="Stasi" label="Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q57730" start="3169" end="3184" title="Wilhelm Zaisser" label="Wilhelm Zaisser"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="3607" end="3610" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="SED"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628" start="3659" end="3674" title="Walter Ulbricht" label="Walter Ulbricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607" start="3679" end="3693" title="Erich Honecker" label="Erich Honecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q168396" start="3740" end="3751" title="Volkskammer" label="Volkskammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="3800" end="3803" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="SED"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628" start="3886" end="3901" title="Walter Ulbricht" label="Walter Ulbricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607" start="3906" end="3920" title="Erich Honecker" label="Erich Honecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="3944" end="3956" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="3976" end="3982" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="4044" end="4047" title="East Germany" label="GDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533960" start="4105" end="4120" title="Karl Schirdewan" label="Karl Schirdewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57309" start="4344" end="4356" title="Erich Mielke" label="Erich Mielke"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="4540" end="4551" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q378118" start="4707" end="4716" title="Ehrengrab" label="Ehrengrab"/>
<link wikidata="Q190494" start="4742" end="4766" title="Zentralfriedhof Friedrichsfelde" label="Friedrichsfelde Cemetery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803635" wikidata="Q7350118" url="?curid=803635" title="Robert Strausz-Hupé">
<text>Robert Strausz-Hupé (March 25, 1903 – February 24, 2002) was an Austrian-born American diplomat and geopolitical theorist.

==Life and career ==
Born in 1903 in Austria, Strausz-Hupé immigrated to the United States in 1923. Serving as an advisor on foreign investment to American financial institutions, he watched the Depression spread political misery across America and Europe. 
After the Anschluss of Austria in 1938, Strausz-Hupé began writing and lecturing to American audiences on &quot;the coming war.&quot; 
After one such lecture in Philadelphia, he was invited to give a talk at the University of Pennsylvania, an event which led to his taking a position on the faculty there in 1940. He became an Associate Professor in 1946.

Strausz-Hupé founded the Foreign Policy Research Institute at the University of Pennsylvania in 1955, which later became independent in 1970. In 1957, the Institute published the first issue of &quot;Orbis&quot;, the quarterly journal that remains to this day the institute&#x27;s flagship publication. Strausz-Hupé authored or co-authored several important books on international affairs.

Strausz-Hupé was a foreign policy advisor to Barry Goldwater when Goldwater was the Republican Party&#x27;s candidate for President of the United States in 1964, and also advised Richard Nixon in his successful 1968 campaign. As president, Nixon appointed Strausz-Hupé to be Ambassador to Morocco in 1969, but the appointment was blocked by Arkansas Senator J. William Fulbright, head of the Foreign Relations Committee, on the grounds that Strausz-Hupé was too strongly against communism. Despite this, the following year he was appointed U.S. Ambassador to Sri Lanka and the Maldive Islands, and subsequently served as ambassador to Belgium (1972–1974), Sweden (1974–1976), NATO (1976–77), and Turkey (1981–1989).

In 1989, upon retirement after eight years as Ambassador to Turkey, Strausz-Hupé rejoined the Foreign Policy Research Institute as Distinguished Diplomat-in-Residence and president emeritus.

==Personal life and death==
On April 26, 1938, in New York City, he married Eleanor DeGraff Cuyler Walker (1898–1976), daughter of railroad director Thomas DeWitt Cuyler (1854–1922) and his wife, Frances Lewis Cuyler (1860–1941). She was a descendant of the Hasbrouck family and a second cousin, once removed of New York Governor DeWitt Clinton. She was the youngest of four daughters, and was divorced from Joseph Walker with three children of her own: Eleanor Cuyler Walker Seyffert (1917–1992), Joseph Walker IV (1920–2007) and Peter Cuyler Walker (1925–2000). They did not have any children together, and Eleanor died on March 8, 1976, while in Sweden.

Strausz-Hupé married secondly Mayrose (nee Ferreira) Nugara (b. 1936) on August 22, 1979. She had three children of her own: Ingrid, Cynthia and Ricky. He died at home in Newtown Square, Pennsylvania, on February 24, 2002, at the age of 98.

==Quotations==
*&quot;As policy evolves towards several continental systems, and technology accentuates the strategic importance of large, contiguous areas. Thus the era of overseas empires and free world trade closes. If this reasoning is pushed to its absolute conclusion, the national state is also a thing of the past, and the future belongs to the giant state. Many nations will be locked in a few vast compartments. But in each of these one people, controlling a strategic area, will be master of the others.&quot; – &quot;Geopolitics: The Struggle for Space and Power&quot; (1942)

==Works==
* &quot;Axis America: Hitler Plans Our Future&quot; (1941)
* &quot;Geopolitics: The Struggle for Space and Power&quot; (1942)
* &quot;The Balance of Tomorrow: Power and Foreign Policy in the United States&quot; (1945)
* &quot;International Relations&quot; (1950)
* &quot;The Zone of Indifference&quot; (1952)
* &quot;The Estrangement of Western Man&quot; (1953)
* &quot;A Forward Strategy for America&quot; (1955)
* &quot;Power and Community&quot; (1956)
* (co-editor) &quot;The Idea of Colonialism&quot; (1958)
* (with others) &quot;Protracted Conflict: A Forward Strategy for America&quot; (1959) 
* (with others) &quot;Building the Atlantic World&quot; (1963)
* &quot;In My Time: An Eclectic Autobiography&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Strategy and Values: Selected Writings of Robert Strausz-Hupé (1973)
* &quot;Democracy and American Foreign Policy: Reflections on the Legacy of Alexis de Tocqueville&quot; (1995)

==References==
Notes
Further reading
*Kaplan, Robert D. (2012) &quot;The Revenge of Geography: What the Maps Tell Us About the Coming Conflicts and the Battle Against Fate&quot; New York: Random House. 

==External links==
*The Political Graveyard</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7350118" start="0" end="19" title="Robert Strausz-Hupé" label="Robert Strausz-Hupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="100" end="112" title="Geopolitics" label="geopolitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="201" end="214" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="361" end="368" title="United States" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="373" end="379" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="392" end="401" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="543" end="555" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="594" end="620" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468312" start="764" end="797" title="Foreign Policy Research Institute" label="Foreign Policy Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100022" start="939" end="944" title="Orbis (journal)" label="Orbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="1175" end="1190" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1252" end="1282" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="1309" end="1322" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="1405" end="1415" title="Ambassador" label="Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1419" end="1426" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q550255" start="1488" end="1508" title="J. William Fulbright" label="J. William Fulbright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="1522" end="1549" title="U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee" label="Foreign Relations Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1609" end="1618" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="1675" end="1685" title="Ambassador" label="Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="1689" end="1698" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="1707" end="1722" title="Maldive Islands" label="Maldive Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1765" end="1772" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="1786" end="1792" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1806" end="1810" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1826" end="1832" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889393" start="1893" end="1913" title="United States Ambassador to Turkey" label="Ambassador to Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788905" start="2188" end="2208" title="Thomas DeWitt Cuyler" label="Thomas DeWitt Cuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901893" start="2297" end="2313" title="Hasbrouck family" label="Hasbrouck family"/>
<link wikidata="Q527462" start="2369" end="2383" title="DeWitt Clinton" label="DeWitt Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20695" start="2868" end="2896" title="Newtown Square, Pennsylvania" label="Newtown Square, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097982" start="4487" end="4504" title="Robert D. Kaplan" label="Kaplan, Robert D."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803636" wikidata="Q565039" url="?curid=803636" title="Reichsrat (Germany)">
<text>The Reichsrat (, &quot;Reich Council&quot;) of the Weimar Republic was the de facto upper house of Germany&#x27;s parliament; the lower house was the popularly elected Reichstag. The Reichsrat&#x27;s members were appointed by the German state governments to represent their interests in the legislation and administration of the nation at the federal level. Its powers were relatively limited, making it considerably weaker than its predecessor, the Bundesrat of the German Empire (1871–1918). It could introduce legislation for the Reichstag to consider and veto laws that it passed, but the vetoes could be overridden. The Reichsrat also played a role in administering and implementing Reich laws.

After the Nazis took control in 1933, they centralized all power, including that of the states. The Reichsrat no longer had a function to perform and was dissolved by law on 14 February 1934.

== Composition ==
The Reichsrat was composed of representatives of the eighteen German states, whose governments appointed its members. According to Article 63 of the Weimar Constitution, &quot;the states shall be represented in the Reichsrat by members of their ministries&quot;. All Reichsrat deputies had an imperative mandate – that is, they were bound by instructions from the governmental body that had appointed them. The number of representatives from the constituent states was based on their population. Article 61 guaranteed each state at least one vote and therefore one member. In the case of larger states, one vote was originally allotted for every one million inhabitants. A Reich law of 24 March 1921 lowered the number to every 700,000 inhabitants and provided that a remainder of at least 350,000 inhabitants be counted as 700,000. No state was allowed to have more than two-fifths of all votes, or members.

Prussia, whose population would have justified it having just over sixty percent of Reichsrat votes, was the only state affected by the two-fifths maximum. Its still strong position was further weakened as of 14 July 1921 when, under a state law referenced in Article 63, half of its members had to be chosen by the provincial associations of the Prussian provinces rather than by the state government. (A Prussian provincial association () was a body of local self-government above the municipalities and the rural and urban districts.) This ( &quot;anti-Prussian clause&quot;), by preventing Prussia&#x27;s state government from exerting too much influence, was intended to achieve a certain fairness with respect to the smaller states that had fewer votes .

== Distribution of votes in the Reichsrat by state ==

== Organization ==
Although the Reichstag was constitutionally required to meet on an annual basis (Article 24), the Reichsrat was convened under the responsibility of the Reich government. The Reichsrat was also chaired by a member of the government (Article 65), usually the minister of the interior.

The Reichsrat could form committees of its members. Those appointed had equal voting rights, although no state could have more than one vote on a committee (Article 62). Within the Reichsrat, every member as well as the members of the Reich government could submit motions; in this respect, it differed from the former Bundesrat, in which the Reich government had no right of initiative. Motions were decided by a simple majority.

== Rights ==
The constitution enumerated relatively few powers for the Reichsrat. It had the right to:
* introduce a bill for consideration, in which case the Reich government was allowed to comment on it. Articles 68 and 69 under the heading &#x27;National Legislation&#x27; state:
Article 68: Bills shall be introduced by the National Ministry [the Reich government], or by members of the Reichstag. National laws shall be enacted by the Reichstag.

Article 69: The initiation of bills by the National Ministry shall require the consent of the Reichsrat. If the National Ministry and the Reichsrat fail to agree, the National Ministry may, nevertheless, introduce the bill, but must present therewith the dissenting opinion of the Reichsrat. If the Reichsrat passes a bill to which the National Ministry fails to assent, the Ministry must introduce such bill in the Reichstag accompanied by an expression of its views.
* be informed by the Reich government about current government business (Article 67)
* veto legislation passed by the Reichstag, although the veto could be overridden by a two-thirds majority of the Reichstag (Article 74).
== Assessment of its position ==

In the tradition of German federalism, the Reichsrat was the institutionalized representation of the interests of the states at the national level. Primarily because it had lost its equal status in the legislative process, the Reichsrat was less important than the imperial Bundesrat, which had nominally been the highest constitutional body of the Empire. It also lost independence because the Reich government was not only in charge but could also introduce legislation directly, whereas the Bundesrat had theoretically been a pure representation of the interests of the state sovereigns (although dominated by Prussia) which the Reich leadership had to follow.

The Reichsrat had the right to advise on and to veto legislation, but the Reichstag could override a veto and was thus nominally the stronger of the two parliamentary bodies. Since the Reichstag had many parties and it was not easy to unify two-thirds of the votes, the governing parties in the Reichstag usually tried to reach an agreement with the Reichsrat in advance. The fact that the chairman of the Reichsrat was a member of the Reich government also curtailed the Reichsrat&#x27;s sovereign rights: it could be convened only if one third of its members requested it of the Reich government (Article 64). Because the chairman of the Reichsrat was a government minister, the Reich also had a determining influence on the course of the Reichrat&#x27;s business.

The Reichsrat was not a purely legislative body. Since it was required to approve the majority of governmental acts (), it also participated in the administration of the Reich. As a result, the states, supported by the expertise of their ministerial bureaucracies, were able to exert considerable influence on the implementation of Reich laws, which they also usually executed on their own authority. Due to the relative stability of the state governments, the Reichsrat was seen as one of the last firm anchors of Weimar institutions, especially in the final phase of the Republic when the Reichstag was increasingly unable to act.

The weakening of the Reichsrat in comparison to its position under the constitution of the German Empire is part of the generally more centralized nature of the Weimar Constitution, which significantly expanded the Reich&#x27;s legislative authority and its supervisory rights over the states. The &quot;sovereignty of the Reich over the states&quot; that was then assumed in constitutional law, together with Finance Minister Matthias Erzberger&#x27;s reforms of 1919/20 which introduced a national income tax, led to a significant weakening of the position of the constituent states that was not reversed until the constitution of the Federal Republic of Germany came into force in 1949. Its Bundesrat is modeled on the Reichsrat in its composition and competencies. Compared to the Reichsrat, the Bundesrat of the Federal Republic has a stronger position with regard to laws that require its approval (), over which it has an absolute right of veto, but a weaker one with regard to laws that do not (). The Bundesrat can veto them, but the Bundestag can override with a simple majority.

== End under National Socialism ==
In the course of the National Socialist takeover in 1933, the states of the German Reich went through the process of &quot;Gleichschaltung&quot; (Nazification). Prussia had been taken over by the government under Reich chancellor Franz von Papen in the 1932 Prussian coup d&#x27;état; on the basis of the Reichstag Fire Decree of 28 February 1933, the new Nazi regime set up governments led by appointed Reich commissioners in all the states. Since the commissioners appointed members of the Reichsrat, the Nazis quickly had a large majority that it then used to rubber stamp the Enabling Act passed by the Reichstag on 24 March 1933. The act allowed Hitler as chancellor to make and enforce laws without the involvement of the parliament.

The Provisional Law on the Coordination of the States with the Reich of 31 March 1933 significantly curtailed the influence of the state parliaments. With the Law on the Reconstruction of the Reich () of 30 January 1934, the state parliaments were abolished and the sovereign rights of the states transferred to the Reich. Since the law affected the constitution, the Reichsrat, which by that point consisted only of Nazi representatives, had to approve it. It did so in its last session on 30 January 1934. Since the states were now only administrative units of the central state, their representation had lost its meaning. The Reichsrat&#x27;s abolition was then possible since the Law on the Reconstruction of the Reich gave the Reich government the right to determine constitutional law. The Reich government formally dissolved the Reichsrat on 14 February 1934 through the Law on the Abolition of the Reichsrat (). Under the centralized Nazi regime, there was no longer any place for a chamber representing the states.

== After World War II ==
In the Federal Republic of Germany, the Bundesrat has represented the states since 1949. In the former German Democratic Republic (East Germany) the Chamber of States () carried out the function from 1949 to 1958.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q565039" start="4" end="13" title="Reichsrat (Germany)" label="Reichsrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q960541" start="23" end="28" title="Reich" label="Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="51" end="66" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q637829" start="168" end="177" title="Reichstag (Weimar Republic)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q464602" start="450" end="459" title="Bundesrat (German Empire)" label="Bundesrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="467" end="480" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q875508" start="688" end="697" title="Reich law" label="Reich law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="711" end="716" title="National Socialists" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712151" start="974" end="987" title="States of the Weimar Republic" label="German states"/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="1061" end="1080" title="Weimar Constitution" label="Weimar Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q161036" start="1822" end="1829" title="Free State of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q574299" start="2169" end="2187" title="Provinces of Prussia" label="Prussian provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q702349" start="6691" end="6724" title="constitution of the German Empire" label="constitution of the German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q57755" start="7047" end="7072" title="Matthias Erzberger" label="Matthias Erzberger&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="7237" end="7284" title="constitution of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="constitution of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7767" end="7794" title="Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s rise to power#Seizure of control (1931–1933)" label="National Socialist takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q313768" start="7869" end="7884" title="Gleichschaltung" label="Gleichschaltung"/>
<link wikidata="Q150552" start="7976" end="7991" title="Franz von Papen" label="Franz von Papen"/>
<link wikidata="Q451046" start="7999" end="8029" title="1932 Prussian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1932 Prussian coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q696629" start="8051" end="8072" title="Reichstag Fire Decree" label="Reichstag Fire Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q310218" start="8326" end="8338" title="Enabling Act of 1933" label="Enabling Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534171" start="8491" end="8555" title="Provisional Law on the Coordination of the States with the Reich" label="Provisional Law on the Coordination of the States with the Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518983" start="8646" end="8684" title="Law on the Reconstruction of the Reich" label="Law on the Reconstruction of the Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q19208470" start="9365" end="9402" title="Law on the Abolition of the Reichsrat" label="Law on the Abolition of the Reichsrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q146138" start="9577" end="9586" title="German Bundesrat" label="Bundesrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="9640" end="9666" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q314074" start="9686" end="9703" title="Chamber of States" label="Chamber of States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803637" wikidata="Q1521067" url="?curid=803637" title="Spice mix">
<text>Spice mixes are blended spices or herbs. When a certain combination of herbs or spices is called for in a recipe, it is convenient to blend these ingredients beforehand. Blends such as chili powder, curry powder, herbes de Provence, garlic salt, and other seasoned salts are traditionally sold pre-made by grocers, and sometimes baking blends such as pumpkin pie spice are also available. These spice mixes are also easily made by the home cook for later use.

==Masala==

Masala (from Hindi/Urdu &quot;masalah&quot;, based on Arabic &quot;masalih&quot;) is a term from the Indian subcontinent for a spice mix, often confused with Marsala wine due to similar pronunciations. A masala can be either a combination of dried (and usually dry-roasted) spices, or a paste (such as vindaloo masala) made from a mixture of spices and other ingredients—often garlic, ginger, onions, chilli paste and tomato. Masalas are used extensively in Indian cuisine to add spice and flavour, most familiarly to Western cuisine in chicken tikka masala and chicken curry, or in masala chai. Other South Asian cuisines including Bangladeshi, Nepalese, Pakistani and Sri Lankan, Southeast Asian cuisine such as Burmese and the Caribbean regularly use spice mixes.

==Notable spice mixes by region==
=== Americas ===

* Jerk, a spicy Jamaican dry-rub for meat primarily made with allspice and Scotch bonnet peppers
* Montreal steak spice, a seasoning mix for steaks and grilled meats
* Old Bay Seasoning, a seasoning mix of celery salt, black pepper, crushed red pepper flakes, and paprika originally created in Baltimore and regionally popular in Maryland as well as Mid-Atlantic and Southern states, parts of New England, and the Gulf Coast
* Pumpkin pie spice, a North American blend of cinnamon, clove, ginger, nutmeg, and allspice
* Italian seasoning, a blend of rosemary, thyme, basil and oregano
* Tajín, a Mexican blend of chili powder, salt, and dehydrated lime juice

=== European ===

* Adobo, a marinade of paprika, oregano, salt, garlic, and vinegar originating in Iberia and widely adopted in Latin America and elsewhere; not to be confused by the Philippines preparation given the same name by colonial-era Spaniards
* Fines herbes, a French blend of parsley, chives, tarragon, and chervil for seasoning delicate dishes
* Beau monde seasoning, salt, onion powder and celery powder - sometimes other ingredients
* Garlic salt, a mixture of dried garlic and table salt
* Herbes de Provence, a Provençal blend of thyme, marjoram, rosemary, basil, bay leaf, and sometimes lavender
* Khmeli suneli, a blend used in Georgia and the Caucasus region
* Lemon pepper, a blend of lemon zest, cracked black peppercorns, salt, and spices
* Mixed spice or pudding spice, a British blend of cinnamon, nutmeg, allspice, and other spices
* Mulling spices, a European spice mixture of cinnamon, cloves, allspice, nutmeg and dried fruit
* Quatre épices, a French blend of ground pepper, cloves, nutmeg and ginger
* Seasoned salt, a blend of table salt, herbs, spices, other flavourings
* Sharena sol, a Bulgarian mixture of summer savory, paprika and salt, with other optional ingredients
* Vadouvan, French version of an Indian masala

=== Middle East and Africa ===

*Advieh, a spice mixture used in Iranian cuisine and Mesopotamian cuisine
* Afrinj, an Ethiopian blend that is milder than berbere or mitmita
* Baharat, used throughout the Middle East
* Berbere, an Eritrean and Ethiopian blend
* Hawaij, Yemenite ground spice mixtures used primarily for soups and coffee
* Mitmita, an Ethiopian blend of African birdseye chili peppers, cardamom, cloves and salt
* Ras el hanout, a Moroccan blend that includes cinnamon and cumin among other spices
* Yaji, a Hausa spice mix for traditional suya and chichinga kebabs in sahelian West Africa. Made from cayenne, ginger, ground peanuts, dried onion, and chili
* Za&#x27;atar, a Middle Eastern mix which is both an individual herb and a blend of that herb with sesame seeds and sometimes dried sumac

=== East and Southeast Asian ===

* Bumbu, several Indonesian blends.
* Five-spice powder, a blend of cassia (Chinese cinnamon), star anise, cloves, and two other spices, usually fennel seeds and szechuan peppercorns.
* , a Vietnamese blend
* Shichimi, a mix of ground red chili pepper, Japanese pepper, roasted orange peel, black and white sesame seed, hemp seed, ground ginger and nori.
*Shisan Xiang (Chinese: 十三香, Shísān Xiāng), a kind of Wuxiang powder whose names suggests which being made up of thirteen spices. The most popular Shisan Xiang is produced by Wang Shouyi(王守義), a time-honored brand in He&#x27;nan(河南) province of China.

=== South Asia ===
* Bafat, used in Mangalorean cuisine
* Chaat masala, ground spices used for flavouring chaat
* Garam masala, most commonly used spice blend in the Indian subcontinent
* Kaala masala, black spice blend used in the Indian subcontinent
* Panch phoron, a five-spice blend of whole fenugreek, nigella, fennel, cumin, and mustard or radhuni seeds originating from the Indian subcontinent
* Tandoori masala, spice blend originating from the Indian subcontinent for tandoor-cooked meats
* Thunapaha, a spice blend of coriander, cumin and fennel seed used in traditional Sri Lankan cuisine

==See also==

* List of culinary herbs and spices
* Seasoning

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1521067" start="0" end="11" title="Spice mix" label="Spice mixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="24" end="29" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="34" end="38" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072946" start="185" end="197" title="chili powder" label="chili powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144935" start="199" end="211" title="curry powder" label="curry powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q913548" start="213" end="231" title="herbes de Provence" label="herbes de Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935156" start="233" end="244" title="garlic salt" label="garlic salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521075" start="256" end="269" title="seasoned salt" label="seasoned salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623066" start="351" end="368" title="pumpkin pie spice" label="pumpkin pie spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="486" end="491" title="Hindi language" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="492" end="496" title="Urdu language" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="527" end="533" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="574" end="593" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q842052" start="631" end="643" title="Marsala wine" label="Marsala wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860338" start="734" end="745" title="Dry roasting" label="dry-roasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726634" start="760" end="765" title="paste (food)" label="paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339633" start="775" end="783" title="vindaloo" label="vindaloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="931" end="945" title="Indian cuisine" label="Indian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q654159" start="1010" end="1030" title="chicken tikka masala" label="chicken tikka masala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144935" start="1043" end="1048" title="Curry powder" label="curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q877661" start="1056" end="1067" title="masala chai" label="masala chai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566053" start="1075" end="1094" title="South Asian cuisine" label="South Asian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855470" start="1106" end="1117" title="Bangladeshi cuisine" label="Bangladeshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194855" start="1119" end="1127" title="Nepalese cuisine" label="Nepalese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089120" start="1129" end="1138" title="Pakistani cuisine" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234037" start="1143" end="1153" title="Sri Lankan cuisine" label="Sri Lankan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005639" start="1155" end="1178" title="Southeast Asian cuisine" label="Southeast Asian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187275" start="1187" end="1194" title="Burmese cuisine" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729345" start="1199" end="1212" title="Caribbean cuisine" label="the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1295" end="1299" title="Jerk (cooking)#Ingredients" label="Jerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906380" start="1392" end="1412" title="Montreal steak seasoning" label="Montreal steak spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083444" start="1461" end="1478" title="Old Bay Seasoning" label="Old Bay Seasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057832" start="1499" end="1510" title="celery salt" label="celery salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="1512" end="1524" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190222" start="1526" end="1551" title="Crushed red pepper" label="crushed red pepper flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127593" start="1557" end="1564" title="paprika" label="paprika"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="1587" end="1596" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="1623" end="1631" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="1643" end="1655" title="Mid-Atlantic States" label="Mid-Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="1660" end="1675" title="Southern United States" label="Southern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="1686" end="1697" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="1707" end="1717" title="Gulf Coast" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623066" start="1720" end="1737" title="Pumpkin pie spice" label="Pumpkin pie spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885460" start="1813" end="1830" title="Italian seasoning" label="Italian seasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376620" start="1880" end="1885" title="Tajín seasoning" label="Tajín"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072946" start="1906" end="1918" title="chili powder" label="chili powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="1920" end="1924" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="1941" end="1951" title="Lime (fruit)" label="lime juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q360459" start="1973" end="1978" title="Adobo" label="Adobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q725668" start="1982" end="1990" title="marinade" label="marinade"/>
<link wikidata="Q134283" start="2003" end="2010" title="oregano" label="oregano"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="2030" end="2037" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412533" start="2209" end="2221" title="Fines herbes" label="Fines herbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="2241" end="2248" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q51148" start="2250" end="2256" title="chives" label="chives"/>
<link wikidata="Q155814" start="2258" end="2266" title="tarragon" label="tarragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q218462" start="2272" end="2279" title="chervil" label="chervil"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570988" start="2312" end="2332" title="Beau monde seasoning" label="Beau monde seasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093931" start="2340" end="2352" title="onion powder" label="onion powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571204" start="2357" end="2370" title="celery powder" label="celery powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935156" start="2403" end="2414" title="Garlic salt" label="Garlic salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="2435" end="2441" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="2446" end="2456" title="table salt" label="table salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q913548" start="2459" end="2477" title="Herbes de Provence" label="Herbes de Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075478" start="2569" end="2582" title="Khmeli suneli" label="Khmeli suneli"/>
<link wikidata="Q206491" start="2634" end="2646" title="Lemon pepper" label="Lemon pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q196819" start="2659" end="2669" title="lemon zest" label="lemon zest"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="2679" end="2695" title="black peppercorn" label="black peppercorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358417" start="2717" end="2728" title="Mixed spice" label="Mixed spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934259" start="2813" end="2827" title="Mulling spices" label="Mulling spices"/>
<link wikidata="Q602006" start="2910" end="2923" title="Quatre épices" label="Quatre épices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521075" start="2986" end="2999" title="Seasoned salt" label="Seasoned salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12299302" start="3059" end="3070" title="Sharena sol" label="Sharena sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q157283" start="3095" end="3108" title="summer savory" label="summer savory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314986" start="3162" end="3170" title="Vadouvan" label="Vadouvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068389" start="3241" end="3247" title="Advieh" label="Advieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342397" start="3273" end="3288" title="Iranian cuisine" label="Iranian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036498" start="3293" end="3313" title="Iraqi cuisine" label="Mesopotamian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3316" end="3322" title="Afrinj" label="Afrinj"/>
<link wikidata="Q257508" start="3327" end="3336" title="Ethiopian cuisine" label="Ethiopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q538656" start="3384" end="3391" title="Baharat" label="Baharat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="3413" end="3424" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q818763" start="3427" end="3434" title="Berbere" label="Berbere"/>
<link wikidata="Q536829" start="3470" end="3476" title="Hawaij" label="Hawaij"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762278" start="3547" end="3554" title="Mitmita" label="Mitmita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067261" start="3638" end="3651" title="Ras el hanout" label="Ras el hanout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650627" start="3724" end="3728" title="Suya" label="Yaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="3732" end="3737" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650627" start="3764" end="3768" title="suya" label="suya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323731" start="3773" end="3782" title="chichinga" label="chichinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="3793" end="3801" title="sahelian" label="sahelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="3802" end="3813" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q148306" start="3883" end="3895" title="Za&amp;#x27;atar" label="Za&amp;#x27;atar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763698" start="3981" end="3993" title="Sesame" label="sesame seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q159546" start="4014" end="4019" title="Rhus coriaria" label="sumac"/>
<link wikidata="Q697230" start="4057" end="4062" title="Bumbu (seasoning)" label="Bumbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051492" start="4093" end="4110" title="Five-spice powder" label="Five-spice powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148919" start="4264" end="4272" title="Shichimi" label="Shichimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="4425" end="4432" title="Chinese_language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841320" start="4684" end="4689" title="Bafat" label="Bafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748734" start="4699" end="4718" title="Mangalorean cuisine" label="Mangalorean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068141" start="4721" end="4733" title="Chaat masala" label="Chaat masala"/>
<link wikidata="Q153584" start="4769" end="4774" title="chaat" label="chaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624" start="4777" end="4789" title="Garam masala" label="Garam masala"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="4829" end="4848" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343324" start="4851" end="4863" title="Kaala masala" label="Kaala masala"/>
<link wikidata="Q241933" start="4917" end="4929" title="Panch phoron" label="Panch phoron"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="5044" end="5063" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517449" start="5066" end="5081" title="Tandoori masala" label="Tandoori masala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509910" start="5280" end="5313" title="List of culinary herbs and spices" label="List of culinary herbs and spices"/>
<link wikidata="Q773108" start="5316" end="5325" title="Seasoning" label="Seasoning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803638" wikidata="Q6975023" url="?curid=803638" title="National Power Unity">
<text>National Alliance Justice (, NST), or simply Justice (), previously known as National Power Union (, NSS), sometimes referred to as Union of National Force, is a far-right ultranationalist political party in Latvia.

== History ==

It was founded in 2003 by Aigars Prūsis and Viktors Birze on the base of the human rights group Helsinki-86. Current leaders of NST are Viktors Birze, Vilnis Strods, Valters Grīviņš and Normunds Krafts.

In the 2005 municipal elections to the Liepāja city council, the NST received 400 votes, or 1.86% of the total, and no seats. In the 2006 parliamentary election, the NSS received 1172 votes, or 0.13% of the total, and no seats. NST

NST is known for a number of controversial activities. In 2005, it commemorated the 105th birthday of the controversial Latvian aviator and alleged World War II Nazi war criminal Herberts Cukurs, NST claims that they celebrated the aviation achievements of Cukurs and that there is no sufficient evidence to conclude that Cukurs was involved in war crimes.

NSS participated in the protests against the gay pride parade in Riga on July 22, 2006. Prior to the parade, the chairman of NST, Viktors Birze threatened that the anti-gay pride protests will not be limited to non-violent methods. , Birze and at least one other NST member are under investigation for attacks against the parade by throwing objects at the participants of the parade and police officers. After the events, NST admitted their presence in the anti-pride protests but denied that their members were the ones throwing objects at the pride participants.

On May 9, 2007, NST commemorated the anniversary of the end of World War II by marching towards the Monument to the Liberators of Soviet Latvia and Riga from the German Fascist Invaders and attempting to place a wreath made of barbed wire at the monument, to emphasize the ordeals of Latvia after the Soviet re-occupation of Latvia, but were prevented from placing the barbed wire wreath by the police.

==Election results==
===Saeima===
==See also==
*List of political parties in Latvia

== References ==
==External links==
*A July 17, 2006 LETA news item about the threat of violence - in Latvian. Retrieved 17 July 2006.
*&quot;Latvian capital bans gay parade,&quot; at CNN. Retrieved 19 July 2006.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6975023" start="0" end="25" title="National Power Unity" label="National Alliance Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975023" start="45" end="52" title="National Power Unity" label="Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975023" start="77" end="97" title="National Power Unity" label="National Power Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975023" start="132" end="155" title="National Power Unity" label="Union of National Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="162" end="171" title="far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="172" end="188" title="ultranationalist" label="ultranationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="189" end="204" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="208" end="214" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696826" start="258" end="271" title="Aigars Prūsis" label="Aigars Prūsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975023" start="276" end="289" title="Viktors Birze" label="Viktors Birze"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="309" end="321" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604577" start="328" end="339" title="Helsinki-86" label="Helsinki-86"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975023" start="368" end="381" title="Viktors Birze" label="Viktors Birze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="383" end="396" title="Vilnis Strods" label="Vilnis Strods"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="398" end="413" title="Valters Grīviņš" label="Valters Grīviņš"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="418" end="433" title="Normunds Krafts" label="Normunds Krafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q167668" start="475" end="482" title="Liepāja" label="Liepāja"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="775" end="788" title="Herberts Cukurs#Legacy and controversy" label="controversial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="797" end="804" title="aviator" label="aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="817" end="829" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="830" end="834" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q471495" start="848" end="863" title="Herberts Cukurs" label="Herberts Cukurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333343" start="1072" end="1096" title="Riga Pride and Friendship Days" label="gay pride parade in Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577054" start="1693" end="1778" title="Monument to the Liberators of Soviet Latvia and Riga from the German Fascist Invaders" label="Monument to the Liberators of Soviet Latvia and Riga from the German Fascist Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q192065" start="1820" end="1831" title="barbed wire" label="barbed wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932381" start="1894" end="1924" title="Soviet re-occupation of Latvia in 1944" label="Soviet re-occupation of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930753" start="2045" end="2080" title="List of political parties in Latvia" label="List of political parties in Latvia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803639" wikidata="Q84639" url="?curid=803639" title="Ernst Streeruwitz">
<text>Ernst Streeruwitz (born Ernst Streer Ritter von Streeruwitz 23 September 1874 in Mies – 19 October 1952 in Vienna) was an Austrian military officer, businessman, political scientist and politician. A member of the industrialist wing of the Christian Social Party, Streeruwitz served on the National Council from November 1923 to October 1930 and as chancellor and foreign minister from May to September 1929.

== Early life ==
Streeruwitz was born Ernst Streer Ritter von Streeruwitz on 23 September 1874, in the Bohemian city of Mies.

The child was the youngest son of Georg Adolf von Streeruwitz, a member of the Imperial Council and the city&#x27;s hereditary postmaster. The Streeruwitz family, originally from Friesland, had migrated to Bohemia during the Thirty Years&#x27; War and been ennobled for outstanding bravery during the Battle of Prague. Ever since, the family had been fiercely loyal to the Austrian Empire and provided officers for the army and career civil servants for the Mies municipal and regional administrations. In the 19th century, the family found itself strongly in support of German unification. Ernst Streeruwitz&#x27;s childhood was colored by the dissonance between the family&#x27;s ancient loyalty to the House of Habsburg and its newfound pan-Germanism.
The two positions had become difficult to reconcile after Austria&#x27;s defeat in the Battle of Königgrätz forced the Habsburgs to clamp down on civic nationalism as a matter of political survival.

The youngest son was perpetually sickly, but Streeruwitz was groomed for a career in diplomacy by his father. The boy, who was already bilingual in German and Czech, his mother was an ethnically-Czech daughter of the city bourgeoisie, was taught French from an early age and generally received a thorough education. He completed elementary school with distinction and so attended the local gymnasium on a scholarship. Two years before Streeruwitz graduated from the gymnasium in 1892 his father died. His mother saw no hope of getting the son admitted into the diplomatic service without the late patriarch&#x27;s political connections and so persuaded Streeruwitz to join the army instead.

== Career ==
=== Austria-Hungary ===

His secondary education completed, Streeruwitz moved to Vienna and enrolled at the Theresian Military Academy. He graduated with honors. Starting in 1895, he served as a lieutenant with the 7th Bohemian Dragoons (Duke of Lorraine&#x27;s), stationed in Lissa an der Elbe at the time. Streeruwitz received excellent evaluations from his superior officers and was encouraged to sit the entrance exam for the War College, graduating from which would have all but guaranteed a stellar career. Streeruwitz took the exam in 1899 and passed with flying colors. A mere year later, however, Streeruwitz&#x27;s health suffered a serious relapse after a demanding field training exercise. Streeruwitz lost his faith in his ability to withstand the rigors of military life and applied to be granted reservist status. His request was approved in 1901.

While waiting to be allowed to leave active service, Streeruwitz began studying mechanical engineering at the College of Technology and law at the University of Vienna. Friedrich Franz Joseph von Leitenberger, a fellow Bohemian officer whom Streeruwitz has befriended during his time as a lieutenant of the dragoons, hired Streeruwitz as a technical consultant as soon as the latter&#x27;s transfer to the reserve was final. Streeruwitz was tasked with helping to modernize Leitenberger&#x27;s factories. He reorganized Leitenberger&#x27;s obsolete textile printing plant in Josefsthal with some success and was made the manager of the factory in 1902.

His professional future now reasonably secure, Streeruwitz married Christine Strobl, a Bohemian from Prague.

Following Leitenberger&#x27;s death in a car accident in 1904, Streeruwitz found himself sidelined. He clashed with the company&#x27;s new owners as well as with their bankers. In 1913, he was kicked upstairs to a position in senior management, a promotion that forced him to move to Vienna again. In 1914, Streeruwitz finally quit. With the outbreak of World War I, he also volunteered to return to active military service. In October, Streeruwitz became managing director of a textile printing plant in Neunkirchen. A few days later, he was called up by the army, effective November.

Still in poor health and unfit for service at the front, Streeruwitz spent the war as an administrator. He helped reorganize the military mail service, worked to ensure the humane treatment of Austro-Hungarian prisoners of war, organized the use of enemy prisoners as agricultural laborers, co-edited a newspaper for captive Russians, and wrote a five-volume book on legal issues surrounding prisoners of war. Streeruwitz was considered highly competent and was decorated several times.

=== First Austrian Republic ===
Streeruwitz experienced the collapse of the empire as a personal catastrophe. He returned to his native Bohemia; in his autobiography, he would later claim that &quot;Bolshevik emissaries&quot; in Vienna had threatened to murder both him and his family. He nevertheless moved to Vienna a third time when it became clear that the Republic of Austria would not be able to press home its claim to the majority-German parts of Bohemia.

Streeruwitz resumed his management position in Neunkirchen and went on to prove himself a capable organizer yet again. He soon became the chairman of the employers&#x27; association of the Lower Austrian textile industry () and the association&#x27;s representative in the Federation of Austrian Industries ().

The quarrelsome labour relations and recurrent strikes of the era pushed Streeruwitz into the public spotlight. In terms of policy, Streeruwitz believed that the answer to Austria&#x27;s economic troubles was increased productivity; that belief led him to oppose social measures such as working time reductions and to advocate for a hard line against strikers. On a personal level, he appears to have combined genuine concern for workers&#x27; living conditions with unreconstructed aristocratic paternalism. The Social Democrats quickly became convinced that Streeruwitz was an enemy of the working class. The Christian Social Party appreciated his (implied but unambiguous) support for the economic policy of Chancellor Ignaz Seipel.

In 1924, Streeruwitz was appointed the chief curator () of the Lower Austrian regional mortgage bank (), a struggling lender of vital importance to the region&#x27;s agricultural sector. Streeruwitz turned the bank around. In 1929, he took the initiative in setting up a regional mortgage bank for the neighboring (and structurally-underserved) province of Burgenland.

=== Member of National Council ===

During the runup to the 1923 legislative elections, the Federation of Austrian Industries and the Christian Social Party negotiated an agreement of mutual support. The federation would assist the party financially; the party would run candidates sympathetic to the industrialists. Streeruwitz agreed to be added to the Christian Social candidates, pursuant to the agreement, and was elected to the National Council.

Except for his strong dislike for Marxism and his opposition to Social Democratic labour policy, Streeruwitz was ideologically at odds with his party.
Whereas Austrian independence had gradually become one of the Christian Social Party&#x27;s defining platform planks, Streeruwitz continued to support the integration of Austria into the German Reich. Catholic clericalism was another one of the party&#x27;s defining platform planks, but Streeruwitz, like most Austrian pan-Germans and like his father before him, was hostile to political Catholicism. Streeruwitz also was a poor fit socially. He looked down on the , which was the Christian Socials&#x27; core constituency and the faction&#x27;s main source of recruits. He criticised his caucus for what he thought of as its lack of unity and discipline; he ridiculed its members for their poverty. Even though he vocally despised leading Social Democrats such as Otto Bauer and Robert Danneberg, and the &quot;Arbeiter-Zeitung&quot; reciprocated with a string of personal attacks, Streeruwitz thought highly of Karl Renner and was ready to work with the opposing side if common ground could be found.

In his years as a legislator, Streeruwitz rarely rose to speak in plenary sessions but was active in several committees. He helped draft a number of significant statutes and published numerous opinion pieces arguing his policy positions.
Streeruwitz fought, in particular, for protective tariffs. Postwar hyperinflation was causing the country to be flooded with cheap imported goods. The glut endangered Austria&#x27;s struggling manufacturing sector, but the country was largely defenseless because of a number of free trade agreements that the empire&#x27;s successor states had hastily concluded immediately after its collapse.
Tariffs were controversial on both sides of the political spectrum. Labour politicians feared rising consumer prices. Shareholders of corporations that had become involuntary multinationals with the disintegration of the empire were worried about their interests abroad.
Streeruwitz won, and in 1925, significant customs barriers were put in place.

Streeruwitz&#x27;s second main concern was banking supervision. The hyperinflation of the 1920s caused a number of banks to fail but mostly only because the sector had already been weakened from years of corruption and general mismanagement. Social Democrats and German Nationalists demanded a rigorous crackdown. Streeruwitz&#x27;s own proposals, although moderate in comparison, were met with fierce opposition from within his own party.
The National Council eventually passed a bill that tightened the screws, but the statute was too little, too late. Streeruwitz&#x27;s failure indirectly caused the collapse of a bank owned by Anton Rintelen, the powerful governor of Styria. The lasting enmity of Rintelen that Streeruwitz thus earned for himself would later contribute to his downfall.

=== Chancellor ===
Still an outsider with no credible personal power base, Streeruwitz abruptly became chancellor in May 1929.

The Federal Constitutional Law of 1920 established Austria as an archetypal parliamentary republic. The positions of president and chancellor were separate. Both president and chancellor were chosen by the legislature and so neither of them had the prestige and authority that results from direct popular election. The president had considerable reserve powers but was expected to confine himself to acting as a figurehead. The chancellor was politically answerable to the National Council.
The law also established Austria as a country that was a federation in name but more or less unitary in reality.
The growing Austrofascist Heimwehr movement demanded a move to a presidential system with a strong leader, modelled on Benito Mussolini&#x27;s Fascist Italy and Miklós Horthy&#x27;s Regency Hungary. Resentful of the political and cultural dominance of the capital, the Heimwehr also demanded real effective federalism.

Vienna was home to two million people, almost one out of three Austrians at the time. The sixth-largest city in the world and the capital of a global power for five centuries, Vienna was a bustling cosmopolitan metropolis, even in times of economic hardship. Much of Vienna&#x27;s hinterland, on the other hand, was an agrarian poorly-industrialized backwater. Dislike for the capital&#x27;s intellectuals, Jews, and status was intense in some corners of the political right.

By early 1929, actors all over the political spectrum feared that the Heimwehr movement had become a threat to democracy. The ranks of those worried included parts of the Christian Social Party with which the Heimwehr movement was (then loosely) affiliated. The Social Democratic Party was willing to negotiate a constitutional reform that would meet the Heimwehr halfway. Ignaz Seipel, the chancellor who led the Christian Social Party, decided that he was the wrong person to preside over these negotiations. Seipel, nicknamed the &quot;prelate without mercy&quot; (&quot;&quot;) by friends and foes alike, was a hardline clericalist whose very personality would be an obstacle. Itn addition, his health was failing. Seipel resigned the chancellorship on 3 April 1929.

Finding a successor for Seipel proved difficult. Obvious candidates like Leopold Kunschak and Otto Ender declined to step up. Rintelen threw his hat into the ring but was too popular with the Heimwehr and too controversial everywhere else.
Streeruwitz emerged as the new leader mainly by default; having drafted his list of ministers, he was formally appointed on 4 May.
In theory, Streeruwitz had been dealt a strong hand. The coalition government that he led included the Christian Social Party, the German Nationalists and the Landbund, an alliance so broad that Streeruwitz could govern without Heimwehr support or toleration. In practice, the cabinet that Streeruwitz had managed to assemble was tantamount to a capitulation to Heimwehr demands. Even though Streeruwitz was for retaining the existing model of strong central government and limited devolution, his ministers were not representatives of ideological factions so much as representatives of provincial governments.

Streeruwitz&#x27;s inaugural address on 7 May mainly dealt with economic and foreign policy but also included a firm commitment to representative democracy. Ideological disputes should be settled, Streeruwitz declared, by the people&#x27;s elected delegates, not by extraparliamentary force. The statement was an unmistakable jab at the Heimwehr, a paramilitary force whose influence was based entirely on its ability to threaten violence. The implied espousal of a strong legislature also was a rejection of the idea of a dominant president. Although Streeruwitz also promised to assume &quot;the role of an honest broker&quot; (), the Heimwehr instantly decided that Streeruwitz was an enemy.

Streeruwitz&#x27;s government was seemingly successful at first. The ruling coalition and the Social Democrats reached compromises on a number of strategic issues. Tenancy law, unemployment insurance and the pension system were reformed. Tensions appeared to decrease, and the early summer was peaceful. On 18 August, however, a bloody street fight in Sankt Lorenzen im Mürztal, Styria, brought the belligerence to the surface again and heightened it to unprecedented levels. Both the
Heimwehr and the Schutzbund, the Social Democratic militia, had announced a rally for the same place and day. Competing Heimwehr and Schutzbund rallies were a semiregular occurrence, but the participants were usually kept in check by police. Even though he had been warned that the Sankt Lorenzen police would not have the numbers to keep the two factions apart, Governor Rintelen refused to prohibit the rallies or to arrange for the army to send assistance. The resulting clash ended with 3 dead and 55 injured, 27 of them severely. Rintelen immediately went to work using the disaster to undermine the chancellor.
The fallout left Streeruwitz discredited and the Heimwehr emboldened. The militia openly threatened a putsch if the government failed to comply with its demands for constitutional reform.

Streeruwitz petitioned his old industrialist allies to cut off the funding they had been providing to the Heimwehr, but the industrialists declined. Even Seipel, his former mentor, now turned against him. When Streeruwitz left Austria to represent the country at the Tenth General Assembly of the League of Nations, his opponents used his absence to co-ordinate his overthrow and to agree on a successor. Streeruwitz&#x27;s fate was sealed. Faced with vicious attacks from all sides, impossible demands and a threat on the part of the Landbund to leave the coalition, Streeruwitz resigned, effective 26 September.

== Later years ==
Streeruwitz did not stand for election to the National Council again; his tenure as a legislator thus ended with the 1930 legislative elections.
Nevertheless, Streeruwitz remained politically active. He traveled, lectured, and campaigned for the integration of Austria into the German Reich.
He also continued to hold political office. In 1927, Streeruwitz had been elected deputy chairman of the Chamber of Commerce (). In 1930, he was elected the chamber&#x27;s chairman proper.

Streeruwitz&#x27;s loyalties remained complicated. Although he still opposed the Christian Social Party&#x27;s policy of Austrian independence, a fact about which he was increasingly outspoken, he regularly sided with the Christian Socials and against both his fellow pan-Germans and his Chamber of Commerce peers in matters of economic policy. He supported the Austrofascist corporate state model of governance but only if he did not have to worry about the existence and influence of his chamber. The Christian Social party and later the Fatherland Front occasionally hinted that Streeruwitz was being considered for a political comeback but ultimately removed him even from his position as the chairman of the chamber. There was no room for independent professional lobbying groups in the Austrofascist system; in 1935, Streeruwitz was replaced by a government-appointed commissar.

Consistent in his pan-Germanism, Streeruwitz supported both the 1936 July Accords, an agreement between Austria and the Reich that turned the former into a vassal state of the latter, and the 1938 Anschluss, the military invasion that finally ended Austria&#x27;s existence as a sovereign state altogether. Streeruwitz approached the Nazi German government and offered his assistance, but the Nazis declined.

Streeruwitz subsequently retired from public life. He resumed his studies at the University of Vienna, graduating with a doctorate in political science in 1939.

In 1950, Streeruwitz suffered a stroke that left him permanently impaired. He died on 19 October 1952.

== Legacy ==
Streeruwitz has largely faded from public consciousness. When he is mentioned at all, he served mainly to illustrate how weak and short-lived thar the governments of the Austrian First Republic tended to be. The struggling democracy, shaken by crisis after crisis and in a permanent unofficial state of emergency, went through no fewer than 15 chancellors in twenty years. Even Ignaz Seipel, the dominant political figure of the era, was unseated after only two years in office. Streeruwitz was just one of several heads of government who fell short of even that.

== Selected publications ==
* 
* 
* 

== Citations ==

== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Ernst Streeruwitz CV on the website of the Austrian Parliament</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q84639" start="0" end="17" title="Ernst Streeruwitz" label="Ernst Streeruwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q84639" start="24" end="59" title="Ernst Streeruwitz" label="Ernst Streer Ritter von Streeruwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008750" start="81" end="85" title="Stříbro" label="Mies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="107" end="113" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="162" end="181" title="political science" label="political scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q692131" start="240" end="262" title="Christian Social Party (Austria)" label="Christian Social Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q871363" start="290" end="306" title="National Council (Austria)" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006398" start="349" end="359" title="chancellor of Austria" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468294" start="364" end="380" title="Foreign Minister of Austria" label="foreign minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="513" end="520" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008750" start="530" end="534" title="Stříbro" label="Mies"/>
<link wikidata="Q697775" start="616" end="632" title="Imperial Council (Austria)" label="Imperial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="716" end="725" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="762" end="784" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494380" start="838" end="854" title="Battle of Prague (1648)" label="Battle of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="910" end="925" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522713" start="1108" end="1126" title="German Question" label="German unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q154942" start="1379" end="1399" title="Battle of Königgrätz" label="Battle of Königgrätz"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="1411" end="1420" title="Habsburgs" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q59599" start="1438" end="1455" title="civic nationalism" label="civic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1640" end="1646" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="1651" end="1656" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="1882" end="1891" title="gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="2278" end="2284" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q568705" start="2305" end="2331" title="Theresian Military Academy" label="Theresian Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2412" end="2459" title="7th Bohemian Dragoons (Duke of Lorraine&amp;#x27;s)" label="7th Bohemian Dragoons (Duke of Lorraine&amp;#x27;s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018859" start="2474" end="2491" title="Lysá nad Labem" label="Lissa an der Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621721" start="2627" end="2638" title="Kriegsschule (Austria)" label="War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q689400" start="3171" end="3192" title="TU Wien" label="College of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="3208" end="3228" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3230" end="3269" title="Friedrich Franz Joseph von Leitenberger" label="Friedrich Franz Joseph von Leitenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141529" start="3610" end="3626" title="textile printing" label="textile printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706276" start="3636" end="3646" title="Josefův Důl (Mladá Boleslav District)" label="Josefsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="3816" end="3822" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4179" end="4190" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q265948" start="4330" end="4341" title="Neunkirchen, Austria" label="Neunkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="4622" end="4638" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="4737" end="4745" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="5099" end="5108" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="5261" end="5280" title="First Austrian Republic" label="Republic of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="5554" end="5567" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q873635" start="5638" end="5671" title="Federation of Austrian Industries" label="Federation of Austrian Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q179111" start="6190" end="6206" title="Social Democratic Party of Austria" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q692131" start="6288" end="6310" title="Christian Social Party (Austria)" label="Christian Social Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006398" start="6388" end="6398" title="Chancellor of Austria" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q78720" start="6399" end="6411" title="Ignaz Seipel" label="Ignaz Seipel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43210" start="6771" end="6781" title="Burgenland" label="Burgenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q487029" start="6844" end="6870" title="1923 Austrian legislative election" label="1923 legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q871363" start="7218" end="7234" title="National Council (Austria)" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="7271" end="7278" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7589" end="7597" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q747439" start="7598" end="7609" title="clericalism" label="clericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q834554" start="7767" end="7788" title="political Catholicism" label="political Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11730" start="8154" end="8164" title="Otto Bauer" label="Otto Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q87128" start="8169" end="8185" title="Robert Danneberg" label="Robert Danneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q627083" start="8201" end="8217" title="Arbeiter-Zeitung (Vienna)" label="Arbeiter-Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q11726" start="8302" end="8313" title="Karl Renner" label="Karl Renner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660368" start="8670" end="8688" title="protective tariffs" label="protective tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="8698" end="8712" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="8909" end="8919" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q698101" start="9638" end="9657" title="Greater German People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="German Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q84731" start="10007" end="10021" title="Anton Rintelen" label="Anton Rintelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41358" start="10048" end="10054" title="Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005391" start="10301" end="10327" title="Federal Constitutional Law (Austrian act)" label="Federal Constitutional Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="10373" end="10395" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q475658" start="10414" end="10423" title="President of Austria" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006398" start="10428" end="10438" title="Chancellor of Austria" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="10881" end="10888" title="unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q695482" start="10913" end="10926" title="Austrofascist" label="Austrofascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q695513" start="10927" end="10935" title="Heimwehr" label="Heimwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="10966" end="10985" title="presidential system" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="11020" end="11036" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="11044" end="11057" title="Kingdom of Italy under Fascism (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q117144" start="11062" end="11075" title="Miklós Horthy" label="Miklós Horthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="11083" end="11098" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–46)" label="Regency Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q78720" start="12071" end="12083" title="Ignaz Seipel" label="Ignaz Seipel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12543" end="12559" title="Leopold Kunschak" label="Leopold Kunschak"/>
<link wikidata="Q698104" start="12564" end="12574" title="Otto Ender" label="Otto Ender"/>
<link wikidata="Q277915" start="13000" end="13008" title="Landbund" label="Landbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q687943" start="14501" end="14526" title="Sankt Lorenzen im Mürztal" label="Sankt Lorenzen im Mürztal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41358" start="14528" end="14534" title="Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q683519" start="14651" end="14661" title="Republikanischer Schutzbund" label="Schutzbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="15353" end="15359" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="15737" end="15754" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q459167" start="16190" end="16216" title="1930 Austrian legislative election" label="1930 legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q155812" start="16319" end="16363" title="pan-Germanism" label="integration of Austria into the German Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q176495" start="16917" end="16946" title="Federal State of Austria" label="Austrofascist corporate state"/>
<link wikidata="Q695482" start="17095" end="17111" title="Fatherland Front (Austria)" label="Fatherland Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="17638" end="17647" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="17985" end="18002" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817650" start="18862" end="18881" title="Austrian Parliament" label="Austrian Parliament"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803641" wikidata="Q15707101" url="?curid=803641" title="History and Technology">
<text>The relationship between history and technology is multifaceted and complex. History provides context for understanding the development and impact of technology, while technology can shape historical events and societal change. The role of history in understanding technology, and vice versa, is crucial for recognizing the significance of innovation, identifying patterns in technological progress, and avoiding the pitfalls of technological advancement.

== Reference &amp; External link ==
WC Engineering LLC 

History and Technology is a quarterly peer-reviewed academic journal devoted to publishing papers on all aspects of the history of technology. It was established in 1983. One of the founding editors was Pietro Redondi. The subjects range from ancient and classical times to the present day. Previously published by Gordon &amp; Breach, the current publisher is Taylor &amp; Francis.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="552" end="563" title="peer review" label="peer-review"/>
<link wikidata="Q737498" start="566" end="582" title="academic journal" label="academic journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q465352" start="634" end="655" title="history of technology" label="history of technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9059577" start="717" end="731" title="Pietro Redondi" label="Pietro Redondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q880582" start="875" end="895" title="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis" label="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803643" wikidata="Q1133170" url="?curid=803643" title="Robert William Wilcox">
<text>Robert William Kalanihiapo Wilcox (February 15, 1855 – October 23, 1903), nicknamed the Iron Duke of Hawaii, was a Hawaiian revolutionary soldier and politician, who led uprisings against both the government of the Hawaiian Kingdom under King Kalākaua and the Republic of Hawaii under Sanford Dole, what are now known as the Wilcox rebellions. He was later elected the first delegate to the United States Congress for the Territory of Hawaii.

==Early life==
Wilcox was born February 15, 1855, on the island of Maui. His father, Captain William Slocum Wilcox (1814–1910) was an American from Newport, Rhode Island. His mother was a Hawaiian from Maui, named Kalua, who was the daughter of Makole and Haupa. Through Kalua&#x27;s father, Makole, Wilcox was the great-great-great-grandson of the late-17th century Hawaiian king Keaweʻīkekahialiʻiokamoku. Wilcox&#x27;s grandmother, Haupa, was descended from Umi-a-Liloa of Maui (not to be confused with the king of Hawaii Island) and Lonomakaihonua.

He attended Haleakala Boarding School in the town of Makawao. Upon completion of his studies, Wilcox became a teacher at a Maui country school. In 1880, Wilcox was elected to the royal legislature in Honolulu on the island of Oahu. He represented the citizens of Wailuku and its neighboring Maui towns.

==Military career==
In 1881, King David Kalākaua selected Wilcox and two other part-Hawaiian young men to study at the Royal Military Academy at Turin in the Kingdom of Italy as a part of the Education of Hawaiian Youths Abroad program. By the time he completed his training in 1885, he achieved the rank of sublieutenant of artillery. Impressed with his military skills, Italian officials sent Wilcox to the Royal Application School for Engineer and Artillery Officers.

===Planned rebellion of 1888===
In 1888, the Reform Party (which later became the Hawaii Republican Party) took power in the Hawaiian Kingdom. Through what was called the Bayonet Constitution, they removed most political authority from the monarch, and placed income and property requirements on voters limiting the electorate to only wealthy native Hawaiians, Americans, and Europeans. The Reform Party ended costly programs such as Wilcox&#x27;s training in Italy. On August 29, 1887, Wilcox received his orders to return home. Returning to Hawaii in October with his wife Gina Sobrero, a baroness closely related to Italy&#x27;s Colonna family, he began a short-lived career as a surveyor. He had now lost confidence that Kalākaua was strong enough to protect the interests of the Hawaiian people. Wilcox along with Charles Wilson and Sam Nowlein, planned a coup d&#x27;état to replace Kalākaua with his sister Liliuokalani, but the plot was never executed. On February 11, 1888, Wilcox left Hawaii intending to return to Italy with his wife.

===Rebellion of 1889===

Instead of returning to Italy, Wilcox took up residence in San Francisco, California, and worked as a surveyor while his wife Gina earned extra money teaching French and Italian. When he decided to return to Hawaii in the spring of 1889, Gina refused to go with him, and took their daughter back to Italy.

Wilcox planned and this time executed another attempt to force King Kalākaua to sign a new constitution to replace the 1887 Document on July 30, 1889. Kalākaua, apparently aware of the plot, avoided the palace, afraid that the rebellion would replace him with his sister Liliuokalani. Thus stymied, Wilcox was finally confronted by the Honolulu Rifles militia unit. After a pitched battle, Wilcox surrendered. In October 1889, he was tried for treason before judge Albert Francis Judd but acquitted by the jury. Being one of the few leaders to stand up to the conservative royalist Reform Party earned him respect among the people. The American minister John L. Stevens, who called Wilcox a &quot;half breed&quot;, wrote: &quot;The trial is tending plainly to show that the Hawaiians are numerously in sympathy with Wilcox.&quot; He helped form a new political party called the &quot;National Reform Party&quot; which advocated restoring power to the monarch. Wilcox was again elected to the royal legislature where he served from 1890 to 1893 representing the island of Oahu. However, the conservatives in the original Reform Party, backed by the economic resources of the &quot;Big Five&quot; industrial corporations remained in power.

In 1891, King Kalākaua died and his sister Liliuokalani became ruling monarch, swearing to uphold the 1887 Constitution. Wilcox was angered that Queen Liliuokalani did not choose him to be in her government, and he then formed his own National Liberal Party in November 1891. Although he did not explicitly advocate ending the Monarchy, the party advocated restoring power to the people even if it meant a republican form of government. After the elections of February 1892, when only 14,000 people were allowed to vote, letters and petitions demanded reforms to the Constitution of the Kingdom. On May 20, 1892, Wilcox and associates were arrested and charged with conspiring to set up a republic. A month later the charges were dropped and he was released.

Back in the Legislature, he backed a measure that would strip power from the cabinet, and by August 1892, the ministers had resigned. Wilcox founded a newspaper called &quot;The Liberal&quot; from September 1892 to April 1893. He edited the section in the Hawaiian language while an English language section had several other editors. The paper attacked the extravagant lifestyle enjoyed by the Royal Family while the common people were suffering the effects of an economic slowdown.

On November 1, 1892, Queen Liliuokalani appointed a new cabinet, and two hours later the Legislature (including Wilcox) voted to remove them from office. On November 8, 1892, a new government acceptable to the Legislature was formed. Wilcox no longer directly attacked the Queen, but advocated modernization, and was quoted in the &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot; that &quot;...we should take some steps to secure commercial and political protection from some foreign country.&quot;

By the end of 1892, &quot;The Liberal&quot; expressed support for the Queen. On January 12 another vote of no confidence allowed the Queen to appoint another cabinet of monarchists. On January 14 Liliuokalani suspended the Legislature and told the cabinet to sign a new proposed constitution that would restore political power back to her. The cabinet advised against it, and delayed any action. On January 17, 1893, the Committee of Safety, backed by the Honolulu Rifles militia unit took over the palace by force. During this time Wilcox, who was then a politician, was requested by Liliuokalani for his previous training in artillery to be put in command of the field pieces of the Royal Guard as they prepared themselves to defend the Queen. Before any shots were fired, Queen Liliuokalani surrendered to avoid bloodshed.

===Rebellion of 1895===

Following the overthrow, &quot;The Liberal&quot; resumed publication January 25, 1893. The English language editor Clarence Ashford supported the Provisional Government of Hawaii, and expressed the view that the Queen had brought about her own downfall. On January 28 the paper argued for becoming a state of the United States, but protested the lack of any native Hawaiians as leaders of the new government. Neither the monarchy nor the provisional government was a representative democracy. Editorials in February proposed becoming part of the state of California, which would enable popular elections.

However, the &quot;Big Five&quot; who dominated the economy wanted to avoid statehood, since as a territory they would not be subject to the American labor laws. They depended on cheap labor for their sugarcane plantations in Hawaii for example. By March 1893 American President Grover Cleveland decided against annexation anyway. &quot;The Liberal&quot; attacked the efforts of Princess Kaiulani when she travelled to America to argue for supporting re-instating the monarchy. Wilcox applied for a position in the new government but was denied. The newspaper shut down on April 15, 1893. Rumors circulated that Wilcox was preparing to proclaim a liberal republic.

The leaders of the overthrow proclaimed their own Republic of Hawaii on July 4, 1894. By the end of the year, royalists were planning a counter-revolution to restore Liliuokalani. The key conspirators were Sam Nowlein, head of the Queen&#x27;s guard, Charles T. Gulick, advisor to both Kalākaua and Liliuokalani, and William H. Rickard, a sugar planter of British parentage. They needed a military leader, and approached Wilcox. At first he hesitated, but since he was frustrated with lack of progress on annexation as well as spurned by the republic, he agreed to lead the forces into battle.

Royalist and republican forces clashed at the base of Diamond Head on January 6 and 7, 1895, and in Mōiliili on January 7. Mānoa was the scene of battle on January 9. Casualties were minor, and only C. L. Carter, a member of a prominent island family, was killed. The royalists were quickly routed and Wilcox spent several days in hiding before being captured. All royalist leaders had been arrested by January 16, when Liliuokalani was taken into custody at Washington Place and imprisoned in Iolani Palace. Wilcox was arrested and tried for treason. This time he was convicted on February 23, 1895, and was sentenced to death with five other leaders. Some were freed due to giving testimony against the others, and his sentence was commuted to 35 years in prison. On January 1, 1898, he was pardoned by Sanford B. Dole, President of the Republic, who had previously pressured Liliʻuokalani to abdicate in exchange for his life and freedom, as well as for the lives of the others who had been sentenced to death.

==Congress==
On July 4, 1898, by passing the Newlands Resolution, the United States officially annexed Hawaii, and Republic President Dole appointed provisional Governor. The Hawaiian Organic Act of April 30, 1900, created the office of delegate to Congress for the newly organized Territory of Hawaii. Wilcox organized an election campaign for the office. Helping transform previously anti-annexation native Hawaiian political clubs into the Hawaiian Independent Party (later called the Home Rule Party of Hawaii), he advocated for &quot;Equal rights for the People.&quot; Opponents accused him of bigamy since his first marriage in Italy had been annulled only by the Roman Catholic Church. The Republican Party of Hawaii nominated wealthy rancher and former cabinet minister Samuel Parker, and the Democratic Party of Hawaii nominated Prince David Kawānanakoa. Wilcox easily won the election to the 57th United States Congress. He hoped that his seat in the national capital in Washington, D.C. could be used to advocate for native Hawaiians, a community that he feared would be neglected by the American government. Asked to contribute a short autobiography for the Congressional Directory, instead of the usual bland list of credentials, he described himself as &quot;an indefatigable and fearless leader for his countrymen.&quot; He called the current government of the Hawaii Territory &quot;the Dole oligarchy.&quot; Later versions of his biography removed the editorial remarks.

However, on his arrival, he quickly found himself an outsider. English was his second language, and his populist rhetoric gave him few allies in Congress, which dealt with slow deal-making. His service was also clouded by charges that he did not support the US effort in the Philippines during the Philippine–American War. Wilcox served in Congress for one term, from November 6, 1900, to March 3, 1903.

Although he was also endorsed by the Democratic Party in the 1902 election, he was defeated by Prince Jonah Kūhiō Kalanianaole of the Republican Party.

==Family and personal life==
Wilcox married two noble women. His first wife was an Italian baroness and his second wife a Hawaiian princess. Wilcox&#x27;s first wife was Baronessa Gina Sobrero, eldest daughter of Baron Lorenzo Sobrero of Piedmont and Princess Vittoria Colonna di Stigliano of Naples. His daughter from his first marriage died shortly after his breakup with Baronessa Gina Sobrero. On August 20, 1896, Wilcox married Theresa Owana Kaohelelani Laanui (1860–1944), who was descended from a brother of King Kamehameha I.
They had a son and a daughter, Robert Kalanikupuapaikalaninui Keōua Wilcox (1893–1934) and Virginia Kahoa Kaahumanu Kaihikapumahana (1895–1954). Another daughter Elizabeth Kaakaualaninui died young in 1898.

In 1900 Wilcox converted to Roman Catholicism and was baptized.
==Memorials==

The same year he left Congress, Wilcox ran for high sheriff of Honolulu. Wilcox had been in declining health for sometime, while making a campaign speech he suffered a hemorrhage, and died a few days later on October 23, 1903.
He was buried at the Honolulu Catholic Cemetery. In 1993, a bronze statue of Wilcox was unveiled at Fort Street Mall, . The inscription says &quot;He was regarded by many of his countrymen as a national hero&quot;. The statue now stands prominently in downtown Honolulu at Wilcox Park, also named in his honor in 1989, at the centennial of the &quot;Wilcox Rebellion&quot;.

==Ancestry==
==See also==
*List of Asian Americans and Pacific Islands Americans in the United States Congress

==References==
== Further reading ==
*

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1133170" start="0" end="33" title="Robert William Wilcox" label="Robert William Kalanihiapo Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133170" start="88" end="107" title="Robert William Wilcox" label="Iron Duke of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="115" end="123" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="215" end="231" title="Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Hawaiian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q163080" start="238" end="251" title="Kalākaua" label="King Kalākaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057542" start="260" end="278" title="Republic of Hawaii" label="Republic of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q333691" start="285" end="297" title="Sanford B. Dole" label="Sanford Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000332" start="325" end="342" title="Wilcox rebellions" label="Wilcox rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="391" end="413" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q547795" start="422" end="441" title="Territory of Hawaii" label="Territory of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q188705" start="511" end="515" title="Maui" label="Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="592" end="613" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q188705" start="646" end="650" title="Maui" label="Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382362" start="825" end="850" title="Keaweʻīkekahialiʻiokamoku" label="Keaweʻīkekahialiʻiokamoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q20526124" start="954" end="975" title="Umi-a-Liloa" label="king of Hawaii Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425873" start="1051" end="1058" title="Makawao, Hawaii" label="Makawao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896145" start="1177" end="1194" title="Legislature of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="royal legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="1198" end="1206" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="1224" end="1228" title="Oahu" label="Oahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087831" start="1261" end="1268" title="Wailuku, Hawaii" label="Wailuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q163080" start="1331" end="1350" title="Kalākaua" label="King David Kalākaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934874" start="1421" end="1443" title="Military Academy of Modena" label="Royal Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="1447" end="1452" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="1460" end="1476" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29075351" start="1494" end="1529" title="Education of Hawaiian Youths Abroad" label="Education of Hawaiian Youths Abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="1627" end="1636" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684363" start="1856" end="1879" title="Hawaii Republican Party" label="Hawaii Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="1899" end="1915" title="Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Hawaiian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556201" start="1945" end="1965" title="1887 Constitution of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Bayonet Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2349" end="2361" title="Gina Sobrero" label="Gina Sobrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q327202" start="2406" end="2413" title="Colonna family" label="Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="2635" end="2651" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q107288" start="2688" end="2700" title="Liliʻuokalani" label="Liliuokalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2870" end="2875" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2905" end="2930" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3005" end="3011" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="3016" end="3023" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556201" start="3272" end="3285" title="1887 Constitution of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="1887 Document"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896699" start="3489" end="3504" title="Honolulu Rifles" label="Honolulu Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710227" start="3618" end="3637" title="Albert Francis Judd" label="Albert Francis Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243707" start="3807" end="3822" title="John L. Stevens" label="John L. Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="4224" end="4228" title="Oahu" label="Oahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905696" start="4327" end="4347" title="Big Five (Hawaii)" label="&amp;quot;Big Five&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q107288" start="4435" end="4447" title="Liliʻuokalani" label="Liliuokalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556201" start="4494" end="4511" title="1887 Constitution of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="1887 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556201" start="4959" end="4986" title="1887 Constitution of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Constitution of the Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="5408" end="5425" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5435" end="5451" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="5974" end="5996" title="San Francisco Examiner" label="San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684543" start="6544" end="6563" title="Committee of Safety (Hawaii)" label="Committee of Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="6750" end="6759" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593459" start="7121" end="7153" title="Provisional Government of Hawaii" label="Provisional Government of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="7530" end="7540" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="7782" end="7791" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634955" start="7792" end="7813" title="Sugar plantations in Hawaii" label="plantations in Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="7860" end="7876" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277319" start="7960" end="7977" title="Kaʻiulani" label="Princess Kaiulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057542" start="8297" end="8315" title="Republic of Hawaii" label="Republic of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8453" end="8464" title="Sam Nowlein" label="Sam Nowlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082814" start="8498" end="8515" title="Charles T. Gulick" label="Charles T. Gulick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020046" start="8564" end="8582" title="William H. Rickard" label="William H. Rickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q944686" start="8896" end="8908" title="Diamond Head, Hawaii" label="Diamond Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273127" start="8965" end="8970" title="Manoa" label="Mānoa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9041" end="9053" title="C. L. Carter" label="C. L. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972130" start="9301" end="9317" title="Washington Place" label="Washington Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q423525" start="9336" end="9349" title="ʻIolani Palace" label="Iolani Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q333691" start="9647" end="9662" title="Sanford B. Dole" label="Sanford B. Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="9737" end="9745" title="Abdication" label="abdicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341456" start="9902" end="9921" title="Newlands Resolution" label="Newlands Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020515" start="10032" end="10052" title="Hawaiian Organic Act" label="Hawaiian Organic Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="10106" end="10114" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q547795" start="10139" end="10158" title="Territory of Hawaii" label="Territory of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888672" start="10345" end="10370" title="Home Rule Party of Hawaii" label="Home Rule Party of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="10491" end="10496" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10527" end="10548" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684363" start="10554" end="10580" title="Hawaii Republican Party" label="Republican Party of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412349" start="10635" end="10648" title="Samuel Parker (Hawaii politician)" label="Samuel Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255715" start="10658" end="10684" title="Democratic Party of Hawaii" label="Democratic Party of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329187" start="10695" end="10719" title="David Kawānanakoa" label="Prince David Kawānanakoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640851" start="10759" end="10786" title="57th United States Congress" label="57th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="10838" end="10854" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="10956" end="10975" title="Federal government of the United States" label="American government"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="11621" end="11632" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="11644" end="11667" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702876" start="11846" end="11877" title="Jonah Kūhiō Kalanianaʻole" label="Prince Jonah Kūhiō Kalanianaole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782871" start="12337" end="12369" title="Theresa Laʻanui" label="Theresa Owana Kaohelelani Laanui"/>
<link wikidata="Q214910" start="12424" end="12436" title="Kamehameha I" label="Kamehameha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896657" start="12973" end="12999" title="Honolulu Catholic Cemetery" label="Honolulu Catholic Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303462" start="13204" end="13221" title="downtown Honolulu" label="downtown Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562391" start="13354" end="13437" title="List of Asian Americans and Pacific Islands Americans in the United States Congress" label="List of Asian Americans and Pacific Islands Americans in the United States Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803652" wikidata="Q101201" url="?curid=803652" title="Fritz Theilen">
<text>Fritz Theilen (27 September 1927 – 18 April 2012) was a German member of the anti-Nazi resistance group the Edelweißpiraten during World War II. Born to working-class parents, he joined the Deutsches Jungvolk division of the Hitler Youth in 1937, and was excluded for resisting orders in 1940. He started an apprenticeship at the local Ford Motor Company auto plant in 1941. In 1942 he joined the Edelweißpiraten. He was imprisoned at the Gestapo&#x27;s Cologne headquarters—the EL-DE Haus—in 1943. After managing to escape from prison, he survived in the underground until 1945. Ford only re-employed him after the British occupation force exerted pressure on the company&#x27;s management.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q101201" start="0" end="13" title="Fritz Theilen" label="Fritz Theilen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="82" end="86" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="87" end="97" title="resistance movement" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q153349" start="108" end="123" title="Edelweißpiraten" label="Edelweißpiraten"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="131" end="143" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q650203" start="190" end="208" title="Deutsches Jungvolk" label="Deutsches Jungvolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q38791" start="225" end="237" title="Hitler Youth" label="Hitler Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="336" end="354" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="439" end="446" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q615547" start="479" end="489" title="EL-DE Haus" label="EL-DE Haus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="529" end="535" title="prison" label="prison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803655" wikidata="Q2349439" url="?curid=803655" title="Say You'll Be There">
<text>&quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; is a song recorded by the English girl group Spice Girls for their debut studio album &quot;Spice&quot; (1996). The Spice Girls co-wrote the song with Eliot Kennedy after the group left Heart Management in 1995. Later, Jonathan Buck also received a songwriting credit. Produced by production duo Absolute, the song incorporates a mix of dance-pop and R&amp;B influences. It also includes a harmonica solo played by Judd Lander. Once considered by the group&#x27;s record label Virgin Records to be the group&#x27;s debut single, it was released as the second single from &quot;Spice&quot; on 26 September 1996.

The lyrics provide a female-first perspective on relationships. The song received mixed reviews from music critics, many of whom praised it for its catchiness, while others were critical of its production. It was a commercial success worldwide, reaching the top ten in most of the charts that it entered. The song became the Spice Girls&#x27; second number-one in the United Kingdom. In the United States, it debuted at number five on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, setting, at the time, a record for the highest entry by a British act on the chart; it later peaked at number three. It was certified double platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) in the United Kingdom, platinum in New Zealand, and was further certified gold in five other countries.

The music video was inspired by the films &quot;Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!&quot; (1965) and &quot;Pulp Fiction&quot; (1994), and features the group as a band of female techno-warriors who use martial arts and high-tech ninja-influenced weapons to capture a hapless male. It includes symbols of male &quot;disempowerment&quot;, and serves as an example of solidarity and the group&#x27;s bonding. It received positive reactions and was nominated for numerous awards including the 1996 &quot;Smash Hits&quot; Poll Winners Party, the 1997 MTV Video Music Awards, and the 1997 Brit Awards.

==Background==
In March 1994, father-and-son team Bob and Chris Herbert, together with financer Chic Murphy, working under the business name of Heart Management, decided to create a girl group to compete with the boy bands that dominated the British pop music scene of the time. They placed an advertisement in &quot;The Stage&quot;, which asked the question: &quot;Are you street smart, extrovert, ambitious, and able to sing and dance?&quot; After receiving hundreds of replies, the management had narrowed their search to a group of five girls: Victoria Adams, Melanie Brown, Melanie Chisholm, Geri Halliwell, and Michelle Stephenson. The group moved to a house in Maidenhead and received the name Touch. Stephenson was eventually fired because she lacked the drive of the other group members. She was replaced by Emma Bunton. In November, the group—now named Spice—persuaded their managers to set up a showcase in front of industry writers, producers, and A&amp;R men at the Nomis Studios in Shepherd&#x27;s Bush, London, where they received an &quot;overwhelmingly positive&quot; reaction.

Due to the large interest in the group, the Herberts quickly set about creating a binding contract for them. Encouraged by the reaction they had received at the showcase, all five members delayed signing contracts on the legal advice from, amongst others, Victoria Beckham&#x27;s father, Anthony Adams. In late March 1995, because of the group&#x27;s frustration at their management&#x27;s unwillingness to listen to their visions and ideas, they parted from Heart Management. In order to ensure they kept control of their own work, the group retrieved the master recordings of their discography from the management offices. The next week they were supposed to meet with Sheffield-based songwriter and record producer Eliot Kennedy. Chris Herbert arranged the session weeks before the group&#x27;s departure.

==Writing and recording==
Without access to Herbert&#x27;s address book, the only information the group had about Kennedy was that he lived in Sheffield. Brown and Halliwell drove there the day after their departure from Heart Management, then looked for a phone book in a service station, and called recording studios in the area, Eliot was the third Kennedy they called. That evening they went to his house and persuaded him to work with them, the rest of the group travelled to Sheffield the next day. Kennedy commented about the session:

None of them played instruments, so I was left to do the music and get that vibe together. What I said to them was, &#x27;Look, I&#x27;ve got a chorus—check this out.&#x27; And I&#x27;d sing them the chorus and the melody—no lyrics or anything—and straight away five pads and pencils came out and they were throwing lines at us. Ten minutes later, the song was written. Then you go through and refine it. Then later, as you were recording it you might change a few things here and there. But pretty much it was a real quick process. They were confident in what they were doing, throwing it out there.

The group stayed at Kennedy&#x27;s house for the most part of the week. He named his studio Spice, after the group, because it had never been used before. Together, they composed their first two songs without Heart Management, &quot;Love Thing&quot;, and &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot;. The girls met with artist manager Simon Fuller, who signed them with 19 Entertainment in May 1995. The group considered a variety of record labels, and signed a deal with Virgin Records in July. Paul Wilson and Andy Watkins—the songwriters and production duo known as Absolute—would later produce the song and recorded it at Olympic Studios in Barnes, London. Fuller then sent the song, to audio engineer Mark &quot;Spike&quot; Stent to be remixed.

In December 1996, while charting across Europe, &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; became the focus of a controversy when Israeli soldier Idit Shechtman accused the group of copying her song (, &quot;Come to Me&quot;), an alleged similar song released in 1995 in Israel. Shechtman hired lawyers and threatened to sue. A spokesman of the group later declared: &quot;Where there&#x27;s a hit, there&#x27;s a writ. There&#x27;s always someone who crawls out of the woodwork claiming to have written a hit song. We look forward to seeing her in court.&quot;

The chorus of &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; uses a highly similar melody to the song &quot;What U R 2 Me&quot;, performed by R&amp;B group After 7. American singer-songwriter Jonathan David Buck (Jon B.), wrote and produced the track for After 7&#x27;s third album &quot;Reflections&quot;, released in July 1995. Buck was later added to the songwriting credits of the song in the group&#x27;s &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; album, and the reissue of &quot;Girl Power! Live in Istanbul&quot; on DVD, both released in 2007. He is not credited in previous releases of the song, including the single and the &quot;Spice&quot; album.

==Composition and lyrics==
&quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; is a midtempo dance-pop song, with influences from R&amp;B. It is written in the key of D major, with a time signature set in common time, and moves at a moderate tempo of 108 beats per minute. The song is constructed in strophic form, using the sequence Bm–E–Gm–D as its chord progression during the verses and the chorus. Musically, many critics noted the West Coast hip hop inspired synth-sounds, and the G-funk-infused production. The track incorporates sound effects from turntablism during the song&#x27;s introduction and the verses. The verses are divided in two sections, the first one is sung in a declamatory-style by Bunton and Brown in the first verse and by Halliwell during the second verse. Beckham sings the lyrical half of each verse with a &quot;more seductive&quot; and &quot;breathy&quot; vocal timbre. A bridge follows after the second chorus. It includes an instrumental interlude from a harmonica, which some critics compared it to the work of Stevie Wonder, and a two-bar rapped section. The song closes with a coda, which consists of the group singing the chorus repeatedly until the song gradually fades out, while Chisholm adds the ad libs between the other girls&#x27; harmonies.

The instrumentation includes a drum kit with syncopated handclaps and a prominent synthesizer sound, sparse use of rhythm guitar and funk bass, string glissandos and a vibraphone. Production duo Absolute played all the instruments, except for the harmonica, which was played by Judd Lander, who also played it on Culture Club&#x27;s &quot;Karma Chameleon&quot; (1983). The main melody and lyrical rhythm of the song is highly similar to After 7&#x27;s song &quot;What U R 2 Me&quot;. As a result, Jon B—the song&#x27;s composer and producer, later received songwriting credits on &quot;Say You&#x27;ll be There&quot;.

The lyrics of the song, according to Brown, are about relationships—whether friendship or romantic—and to be there for each other. She commented, &quot;you don&#x27;t have to give them all the &#x27;I love you&#x27; bit, because what&#x27;s important is if you&#x27;re there for each other&quot;. Chisholm commented that the inspiration for the song came from their own experiences as a group, and how they have been there for each other. According to musicologist Sheila Whiteley, the group presented an image that &quot;exuded a brash confidence that was attractive to their teenage fans&quot; and added that they made &quot;an emphasis on stating where they come from and what they stand for&quot;. She commented that in the song&#x27;s narrative, the Spice Girls opted for friendship over love, and the clear message is that &quot;the relationship can be channelled and controlled by the girl&quot;. Author Juan de Ribera Berenguer, said that &quot;love was a constant theme&quot; in the group&#x27;s songs, but added that &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; holds a different approach to the subject, as it &quot;highlights the female perspective&quot;. Tom Ewing from the e-zine &quot;Freaky Trigger&quot;, believed that &quot;Say You&#x27;ll be There&quot; has a common theme with other pop songs, but pointed out the opening lines &quot;Last time that we had this conversation / I decided we should be friends&quot;, as what sets it apart from their counterparts, as the song&#x27;s main idea is that the choice is made by the female. Anna Louise Golden wrote in her book &quot;The Spice Girls&quot;, that the lyrics were another example of the group&#x27;s Girl Power philosophy, as it mixed &quot;interpersonal romance and personal strength&quot;.

==Release and promotion==
Virgin Records planned a major campaign for the group&#x27;s debut to promote them as their new high-profile act. Ashley Newton, the label&#x27;s head of A&amp;R and other executives preferred &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; to be released as the first single, as they considered it a &quot;much cooler&quot; track than the group&#x27;s choice, &quot;Wannabe&quot;. Fuller agreed with the label, but the group was adamant with their decision and refused. After a period of indecision about the release, Fuller and the executives at Virgin relented, and &quot;Wannabe&quot; was chosen as their first single. Brown mentions in her autobiography that the group was also indecisive about the choice for the second single; as &quot;Love Thing&quot; was considered at one point to be released instead.

At the end of September 1996, &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; was sent to British radio, and the accompanying music video added to the programming of MTV and The Box, while the Spice Girls were in Hong Kong doing a promotional tour in the Far East. At the beginning of October, the song started to receive intensive airplay across the UK, appearing on the playlists of 46 ILR stations—including Capital FM, and Radio 1″ A-list. On 11 October 1996, the group performed the song on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; and during the following week, did interviews and appeared on British television programmes that included &quot;The Chart Show&quot;, &quot;The Big Breakfast&quot;, &quot;The Noise&quot;, &quot;Live &amp; Kicking&quot;, &quot;The O-Zone&quot;, &quot;Newsround&quot;, &quot;The Disney Club&quot;, &quot;After 5&quot;, &quot;WOW!&quot;, and &quot;GMTV&quot;.

The single was commercially released in the UK on 14 October 1996 in three single versions. The first one, a CD maxi single included the single mix of the track, a remix by record producer Junior Vasquez, an instrumental take, and the B-side &quot;Take Me Home&quot;, written by the group with Absolute. The second version, released in a digipak, came with a signed poster and included the single mix, and three club remixes of the track produced by Vasquez, D Mob, and Linslee Campbell. The third version was a cassette single, featuring the single mix, the B-side &quot;Take Me Home&quot;, and the Junior&#x27;s Main Pass remix.

Following the physical release of the single, the group did a promotional tour across Europe for both, the song and their debut album &quot;Spice&quot;, set to be released at the beginning of November. During the last week of the month, they recorded two additional performances for &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; on 23 and 30 October, and visited France, Italy, Norway, and Sweden, where they did a series of interviews and appearances on television shows. The first week of November, the group did a televised performance in Germany, and a photo shoot for teen magazine &quot;Bravo&quot;. For the US release of the single, which occurred on 6 May 1997, the group did a week of promotion in North America. They made televised appearances on the &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot;, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; and &quot;Live with Regis and Kathie Lee&quot;, and then traveled to Acapulco, Mexico, to perform on the television show &quot;Siempre en Domingo&quot;.

==Critical reception==
The song received mixed reviews from music critics; many of whom praised &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; for its catchiness, while others were critical of its production. Kristy Barker from &quot;Melody Maker&quot; named it Single of the Week, saying, &quot;Less instant/insistent than &#x27;Wannabe&#x27;, &#x27;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&#x27; is nevertheless this year&#x27;s Glorious Pop Rush Number Three, behind their debut and Livin&#x27; Joy&#x27;s &#x27;Don&#x27;t Stop Movin&#x27;&#x27;.&quot; Alan Jones from &quot;Music Week&quot; wrote, &quot;After a tinkly cocktail bar piano intro, it moves through a Zapp-like phase right into Eternal territory. It&#x27;s somewhat more sophisticated than &#x27;Wannabe&#x27; and is likely to further their career, though some who liked the quirkiness of the first hit may pass.&quot; Dele Fadele of &quot;NME&quot; dubbed it as a &quot;monstrously catchy tune&quot;, and lauded it as &quot;state-of-the-art pop music for &#x27;96&quot;. &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s Christopher John Farley was mixed on the track, although he called the song&#x27;s groove &quot;penetrating&quot;, he believed that it resembled too close to the work of Earth, Wind and Fire. &quot;Richmond Times-Dispatch&quot; critic Melissa Ruggieri, considered the song &quot;a harmless, mid-tempo foot-tapper&quot; that was made for Top 40 radio. Edna Gundersen of the &quot;USA Today&quot; dismissed the group&#x27;s debut as &quot;assembly-line dance-pop&quot;, but singled out &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; as one of the album&#x27;s highlights. &quot;The Atlanta Journal-Constitution&quot; writer Steve Dollar criticized the song, describing it as &quot;pure confection more sugar really than spice&quot;, he also noted influences of Stevie Wonder in the harmonica solo. Greg Kot of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; was unimpressed with their debut album, he considered the song&#x27;s &quot;G-funk synth&quot; as simply part of &quot;a compendium of slick secondhand urban pop&quot;. When comparing the song to &quot;Wannabe&quot;, &quot;Billboard&quot;″s critic Larry Flick thought it was as &quot;immediately infectious&quot; but &quot;not nearly as silly and novelty-driven&quot;. Barry Walters of &quot;The Village Voice&quot; also compared the two songs. He found &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; to be &quot;even catchier&quot; than &quot;Wannabe&quot;. Reviewing the single, David Browne of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; rated it a B+, describing the melody as &quot;delectably frothy&quot;, but was at the same time confused by the song&#x27;s lyrical content. Ken Tucker from the same publication, was more negative calling its P-Funk production &quot;a bid for street cred&quot;.

Retrospective reviews from critics have been generally positive. Reviewing their debut album &quot;Spice&quot;, Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic was surprised at how the song&#x27;s &quot;sultry soul&quot; was &quot;more than just a guilty pleasure&quot;, while Brian Grosz from Albumism called it a &quot;a great disco track&quot;. In a review of the group&#x27;s 2007 compilation album &quot;Greatest Hits&quot;, the &quot;NME&quot; said that it is a &quot;fine song in any age&quot;. Alexis Petridis of &quot;The Guardian&quot; felt it was more polished than &quot;Wannabe&quot; and described the melody as &quot;instantly memorable&quot;. The &quot;Evening Standard&quot; reviewer Jessie Thompson deemed the song as one of the group&#x27;s best, praising the song&#x27;s lyrical content and the harmonica solo. Writing for &quot;Billboard&quot;, Jason Lipshutz complimented the song&#x27;s production, calling the hook &quot;enormously catchy&quot; and the instrumental arrangement &quot;smart-but-simple&quot;. Anne T. Donahue of Vulture.com depicted it as &quot;the perfect middle-ground&quot; between the group&#x27;s slower ballads and their upbeat singles, she added that &quot;over 20 years later, we still remember the words to &#x27;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&#x27;&quot;. On a 2018 ranking of the group&#x27;s songs, the &quot;NME&quot; writer El Hunt placed it at the top of the group&#x27;s whole catalog, and characterized it as the &quot;essence of everything that girl power stood for&quot;. &quot;Q magazine&quot; ranked &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; at number 93 in their 2003 list of the &quot;1001 Best Songs Ever&quot;. &quot;Time Out&quot; placed the song at number 39 on their 2015 list of &quot;The 50 best &#x27;90s songs&quot;. Laura Richards felt that the song epitomized the group&#x27;s musical style of blending pop with R&amp;B, considering it &quot;pure genius&quot;. On &quot;Billboard&quot;″s 2017 list of the &quot;100 Greatest Girl Group Songs of All Time&quot;, it ranked at number 25.

==Commercial performance==

&quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; was released in the UK once the popularity of &quot;Wannabe&quot; began to fade. The high anticipation for their second single assured its commercial success. A week before the release, reports gave the single advanced sales of 334,000 copies—the highest Virgin Records had ever recorded for a single, while the song entered the top ten of the UK Airplay Chart. It debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number one, selling 349,000 copies. It was the group&#x27;s first single to debut at number one, staying at the top position for two weeks, 12 weeks inside the top 40, and 17 weeks inside the top 75. By the end of October 1996, the single had sold 750,000 copies, receiving a double platinum certification from the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for sales and streams exceeding 1,200,000 units in the UK as of June 2023.

&quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; was commercially successful in the rest of Europe. On 16 November 1996 it reached the top of the Eurochart Hot 100, remaining there for two weeks. It topped the singles chart in Finland, peaked inside the top ten in Austria, Belgium (both the Flemish and Walloon charts), Denmark, France, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland, and the top 20 in Germany and Iceland. The song was also a radio hit across the continent, reaching the top position of the European Hit Radio Top 40 for six weeks, topping the airplay charts in the Benelux region, France, and Scandinavia, peaking inside the top five in the German-speaking countries, Hungary, and the UK, and inside the top 20 in Italy, Poland, and Spain. The song debuted on the Official New Zealand Music Chart at number two on 10 November 1996 (the same week &quot;Wannabe&quot; reached the top spot), stayed 10 weeks inside the top 10, and spent 23 weeks on the chart in total. In Australia, the single debuted in January 1997 on the ARIA Singles Chart at number 23, peaking 13 weeks later at number 12. It remained on the chart for five months, and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) for selling 35,000 units in 1997.

In March 1997, &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; debuted on the Canadian &quot;RPM&quot; singles chart at number 90, reaching a peak of number five in its 12th week. It ended at the 35th position on the year-end chart. In the United States, the song started to receive airplay from 15 radio stations in March 1997, when &quot;Wannabe&quot; was topping the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. It debuted on the Hot 100 Airplay chart at number 65 on 5 April 1997, a month before it was commercially released. The song set a record on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, when it debuted on 24 May 1997 at number five, with sales of nearly 60,000 copies. At the time, this was the highest entry by a British act on the Hot 100. &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; peaked at number six on the Hot 100 Airplay and at number four on the Hot Singles Sales, peaking at number three on the Hot 100 for three consecutive weeks. It ended at the 28th position on the year-end chart, selling 900,000 copies by December 1997, and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The song peaked at number two on the Mainstream Top 40 and had crossover success, reaching number three on the Rhythmic Top 40 and number nine on the Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales chart.

==Music video==

The music video for &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; was directed by Vaughan Arnell, produced by Adam Saward and filmed on 7–8 September 1996, in the Mojave Desert, located in California. It was inspired by the films &quot;Pulp Fiction&quot; and &quot;Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!&quot;, the latter in which led the girls to adopt fictional identities, an idea that Halliwell came up with. The video features the group as a band of female techno-warriors, who use martial arts and high-tech ninja influenced weapons to capture a hapless male, played by American model Tony Ward, who happens to appear in a Petty blue Dodge Charger Daytona. The clip is presented as a narrative, with movie credits at the start introducing the Spice Girls as fantastic characters.

Chisholm played &quot;Katrina Highkick&quot;, Halliwell&#x27;s alter ego was &quot;Trixie Firecracker&quot;, Bunton took on the role of &quot;Kung Fu Candy&quot;, Adams played &quot;Midnight Miss Suki&quot; (wearing a black PVC catsuit which would attract the attention of her future husband, David Beckham), and &quot;Blazin&#x27; Bad Zula&quot; was Brown&#x27;s alter ego. The shots of male bondage are unexplained, and function as symbols of male disempowerment, just as the rest of the clip serves to assert the power and fighting abilities of the women. At the end the group captures a confused ice cream man who appears in his pick-up truck. He is carried off on the roof of the car as a trophy. An alternate version of the video exists that removes the male bondage scenes and replaces them with other shots of the girls.

The video won for Best Pop Video at the 1996 &quot;Smash Hits&quot; Poll Winners Party, for British Video of the Year at the 1997 Brit Awards, and was nominated for the Viewer&#x27;s Choice at the 1997 MTV Video Music Awards. It won the Fan.tastic Video honour—given by online &quot;Billboard&quot; readers—at the 1997 &quot;Billboard&quot; Music Video Awards, and was also nominated for Best New Artist in a Video and Best Pop/Rock Clip. In January 1999, the music video was ranked number eight in VH1&#x27;s &quot;All-Time Greatest Music Videos in History&quot;.

==Live performances==

The song was performed many times on television programmes, in both Europe and North America, such as &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;, &quot;Live &amp; Kicking&quot;, &quot;The Noise&quot;, &quot;An Audience with...&quot;, MTV&#x27;s &quot;The Grind&quot;, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot;, and MuchMusic″s &quot;Intimate and Interactive&quot;. Their appearance at &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; on 12 April 1997, was the first time &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; was performed with a live band—their previous performances have all been either lip-synched or sung to a recorded backing track. The group have performed the song at the 1996 &quot;Smash Hits&quot; Poll Winners Party, the 1997 Prince&#x27;s Trust Gala, the 1997 San Remo Festival, and the 1997 MTV Video Music Awards.

In October 1997, the group performed it as the fifth song of the Spice Girls&#x27; first live concert at the Abdi İpekçi Arena in Istanbul, Turkey. The performance was broadcast on Showtime in a pay-per-view event titled &quot;Spice Girls in Concert Wild!&quot;, and was later included in the VHS and DVD release &quot;Girl Power! Live in Istanbul&quot;. The Spice Girls performed the song in November 1997, as part of their setlist for the &quot;Two Nations in Concert&quot; charity event held in Johannesburg, South Africa, presented by the Nations Trust foundation. At the 2000 Brit Awards, the group performed &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; at the end of the show as part of their setlist for winning the award for Outstanding Contribution to Music.

The Spice Girls have performed the song on their four tours, the Spiceworld Tour, the Christmas in Spiceworld Tour, the Return of the Spice Girls Tour, and the Spice World – 2019 Tour. For the Spiceworld Tour, during their performance of &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot;, the group dressed in costumes with tailcoat shapes designed by British stylist Kenny Ho. They danced using walking sticks, in a segment inspired by Liza Minnelli&#x27;s performance in the 1972 movie &quot;Cabaret&quot;. The performance at the Spiceworld Tour&#x27;s final concert can be found on the video: &quot;Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium&quot;, filmed in London, on 20 September 1998, and released on VHS around two months later. For the Return of the Spice Girls Tour, it was performed as the third song from the show&#x27;s opening segment. The group dressed in tight bronze and copper-coloured outfits made by Italian fashion designer Roberto Cavalli. For the Spice World – 2019 Tour, the group performed the song dressed in gold and silver outfits designed by Gabriella Slade.

==Legacy==
Victoria Adams&#x27; appearance in her black PVC catsuit first attracted the attention of David Beckham; the pair would eventually marry in July 1999.

==Formats and track listings==
* UK CD1; Australian, Brazilian, European, Japanese, South African, and Thai CD; digital EP 1
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 3:56
# &quot;Take Me Home&quot; – 4:07
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 8:33
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 3:56

* UK CD2
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 3:56
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 7:01
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 4:09
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 8:29

* European and French 2-track CD
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 3:56
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 8:33

* US CD
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 3:56
# &quot;Take Me Home&quot; – 4:07

* Digital EP 2 
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 7:01
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 4:09
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 8:29

* Italian 12-inch 
:A1. &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 3:56
:A2. &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 8:29
:B1. &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 4:09
:B2. &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 8:30

* US 12-inch
:A1. &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 3:56
:A2. &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 8:33
:A3. &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 4:09
:B1. &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 8:29
:B2. &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 8:30

* UK and Australian cassette 
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 3:56
# &quot;Take Me Home&quot; – 4:07
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 8:33
* US cassette
# &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 3:56
# &quot;Take Me Home&quot; – 4:07
==Credits and personnel==
Credits of &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; adapted from the booklet of &quot;Spice&quot;:
*Spice Girls lyrics, vocals
*Eliot Kennedy lyrics
*Jon B. lyrics
*Absolute all instruments, production

*Judd Lander harmonica
*Mark &quot;Spike&quot; Stent audio mixing
*Jeremy Wheatley recording engineer
*Adam Brown assistant

Credits of the B-side and the remixes adapted from the liner notes of the &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; CD singles UK CD1 and UK CD2:
&quot;Take Me Home&quot;
*Spice Girls lyrics, vocals
*Absolute lyrics, production, audio mixing

&quot;Junior&#x27;s Main Pass&quot;, &quot;Junior&#x27;s Dub Girls&quot; , and &quot;Junior&#x27;s X-Beats&quot; 
*Junior Vasquez remixing, post-production
*Curt Frasca audio mixing 
*Joe Moskowitz keyboards, programming

&quot;Spice of Life Mix&quot;
*Dancin&#x27; Danny D remixing, additional production
*Roger King programming
*Dave Burnham recording engineer

&quot;Linslee&#x27;s Extended Mix&quot;
*Linslee Campbell remixing, additional production
==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===


==Certifications and sales==




==Release history==
==References==
===Citations===
====Bibliography====
*
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2349439" start="6" end="30" title="Say You&amp;#x27;ll Be There" label="Say You&amp;#x27;ll Be There"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="82" end="93" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q818781" start="129" end="134" title="Spice (album)" label="Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288763" start="188" end="201" title="Eliot Kennedy" label="Eliot Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059549" start="256" end="269" title="Jon B." label="Jonathan Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q727927" start="333" end="341" title="Absolute (production team)" label="Absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q211756" start="374" end="383" title="dance-pop" label="dance-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="388" end="395" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="427" end="436" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q270827" start="437" end="441" title="Solo (music)" label="solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18640339" start="452" end="463" title="Judd Lander" label="Judd Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="514" end="528" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591288" start="750" end="763" title="Music journalism" label="music critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1088" end="1117" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="1253" end="1268" title="Music recording certification" label="double platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="1276" end="1305" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215958" start="1465" end="1494" title="Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!" label="Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!"/>
<link wikidata="Q104123" start="1518" end="1530" title="Pulp Fiction" label="Pulp Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544220" start="1904" end="1945" title="Smash Hits Poll Winners Party" label="&amp;quot;Smash Hits&amp;quot; Poll Winners Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q917679" start="1951" end="1978" title="1997 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1997 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117668" start="1988" end="2004" title="1997 Brit Awards" label="1997 Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932766" start="2057" end="2060" title="Bob Herbert (manager)" label="Bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106862" start="2065" end="2078" title="Chris Herbert" label="Chris Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q216337" start="2220" end="2229" title="boy bands" label="boy bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235126" start="2324" end="2333" title="The Stage" label="The Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q19810" start="2555" end="2569" title="Victoria Beckham" label="Victoria Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q236005" start="2571" end="2584" title="Mel B" label="Melanie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q151830" start="2586" end="2595" title="Melanie C" label="Melanie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845" start="2604" end="2618" title="Geri Halliwell" label="Geri Halliwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q465665" start="2624" end="2643" title="Michelle Stephenson" label="Michelle Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q238803" start="2675" end="2685" title="Maidenhead" label="Maidenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q219878" start="2824" end="2835" title="Emma Bunton" label="Emma Bunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q336181" start="2913" end="2921" title="Variety show" label="showcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="2967" end="2974" title="Artists and repertoire" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026182" start="3003" end="3023" title="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush" label="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048111" start="3660" end="3676" title="master recording" label="master recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="3774" end="3783" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288763" start="3821" end="3834" title="Eliot Kennedy" label="Eliot Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="4476" end="4487" title="Musical instrument" label="instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q191609" start="4600" end="4606" title="refrain" label="chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320883" start="5370" end="5384" title="artist manager" label="artist manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q367691" start="5385" end="5397" title="Simon Fuller" label="Simon Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595694" start="5420" end="5436" title="19 Entertainment" label="19 Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="5522" end="5536" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q727927" start="5619" end="5627" title="Absolute (production team)" label="Absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q943742" start="5676" end="5691" title="Olympic Studios" label="Olympic Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q668140" start="5695" end="5701" title="Barnes, London" label="Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355977" start="5756" end="5784" title="Spike Stent" label="Mark &amp;quot;Spike&amp;quot; Stent"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="6490" end="6497" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690451" start="6504" end="6511" title="After 7" label="After 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059549" start="6540" end="6559" title="Jonathan David Buck" label="Jonathan David Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307261" start="6636" end="6647" title="Reflections (After 7 album)" label="Reflections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422534" start="6764" end="6777" title="Greatest Hits (Spice Girls album)" label="Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277210" start="6816" end="6844" title="Girl Power! Live in Istanbul" label="Girl Power! Live in Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q818781" start="6970" end="6975" title="Spice (album)" label="Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q211756" start="7068" end="7077" title="dance-pop" label="dance-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="7105" end="7112" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q682779" start="7142" end="7149" title="D-flat major" label="D major"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="7158" end="7172" title="time signature" label="time signature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7230" end="7246" title="Tempo#Dance music – Beats per minute" label="beats per minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707253" start="7275" end="7288" title="strophic form" label="strophic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="7326" end="7343" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7355" end="7361" title="Song structure#Verse" label="verses"/>
<link wikidata="Q191609" start="7370" end="7376" title="Refrain" label="chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q429264" start="7412" end="7430" title="West Coast hip hop" label="West Coast hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045541" start="7462" end="7468" title="G-funk" label="G-funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046801" start="7531" end="7542" title="turntablism" label="turntablism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800792" start="7566" end="7578" title="Introduction (music)" label="introduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328163" start="7844" end="7863" title="Breathy voice" label="&amp;quot;breathy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="7870" end="7876" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109478" start="7880" end="7886" title="Bridge (music)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="7935" end="7947" title="instrumental" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="7965" end="7974" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="8022" end="8035" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="8051" end="8057" title="Rapping" label="rapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="8090" end="8094" title="Coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q848346" start="8179" end="8188" title="Fade (audio engineering)" label="fades out"/>
<link wikidata="Q310735" start="8214" end="8221" title="Ad libitum" label="ad libs"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="8252" end="8261" title="harmonies" label="harmonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q617028" start="8268" end="8283" title="Instrumentation (music)" label="instrumentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="8295" end="8303" title="drum kit" label="drum kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="8309" end="8319" title="Syncopation" label="syncopated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322478" start="8320" end="8329" title="Clapping" label="handclaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="8346" end="8357" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q670969" start="8379" end="8392" title="rhythm guitar" label="rhythm guitar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8397" end="8406" title="Funk#Bass" label="funk bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q471744" start="8415" end="8424" title="glissando" label="glissando"/>
<link wikidata="Q206987" start="8432" end="8442" title="vibraphone" label="vibraphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18640339" start="8542" end="8553" title="Judd Lander" label="Judd Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q50037" start="8577" end="8589" title="Culture Club" label="Culture Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q917304" start="8603" end="8618" title="Karma Chameleon" label="Karma Chameleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="8642" end="8648" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059549" start="8761" end="8766" title="Jon B" label="Jon B"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175747" start="9348" end="9363" title="Sheila Whiteley" label="Sheila Whiteley"/>
<link wikidata="Q847906" start="10062" end="10068" title="Online magazine" label="e-zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591267" start="10075" end="10089" title="Freaky Trigger" label="Freaky Trigger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10550" end="10560" title="Girl Power#Spice Girls and scholarship" label="Girl Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="10823" end="10830" title="Artists and repertoire" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q418833" start="11025" end="11032" title="Wannabe" label="Wannabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297082" start="11626" end="11629" title="MTV (European TV channel)" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719573" start="11634" end="11641" title="The Box (British and Irish TV channel)" label="The Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016767" start="11848" end="11851" title="Independent Local Radio" label="ILR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035441" start="11871" end="11881" title="Capital (radio network)" label="Capital FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="11887" end="11894" title="BBC Radio 1" label="Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="11962" end="11977" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722215" start="12096" end="12110" title="The Chart Show" label="The Chart Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717547" start="12124" end="12141" title="The Big Breakfast" label="The Big Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754269" start="12155" end="12164" title="The Noise (British TV series)" label="The Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256896" start="12178" end="12196" title="Live &amp;amp; Kicking" label="Live &amp;amp; Kicking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754556" start="12210" end="12220" title="The O-Zone" label="The O-Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234400" start="12234" end="12243" title="Newsround" label="Newsround"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12257" end="12272" title="List of GMTV programmes#The Disney Club" label="The Disney Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954025" start="12307" end="12311" title="WOW! (TV series)" label="WOW!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734852" start="12329" end="12333" title="GMTV" label="GMTV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12451" end="12465" title="Maxi single#CD maxi singles" label="CD maxi single"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313495" start="12531" end="12545" title="Junior Vasquez" label="Junior Vasquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q727927" start="12636" end="12644" title="Absolute (production team)" label="Absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q63367831" start="12680" end="12687" title="digipak" label="digipak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207093" start="12801" end="12806" title="D Mob" label="D Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246734" start="12854" end="12869" title="cassette single" label="cassette single"/>
<link wikidata="Q818781" start="13114" end="13119" title="Spice (album)" label="Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q593268" start="13549" end="13554" title="Bravo (magazine)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="13723" end="13753" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047206" start="13767" end="13796" title="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show" label="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q166888" start="13813" end="13843" title="Live with Regis and Kathie Lee" label="Live with Regis and Kathie Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="13872" end="13888" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q56788" start="13930" end="13948" title="Siempre en Domingo" label="Siempre en Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591288" start="14017" end="14030" title="Music journalism" label="music critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="14181" end="14193" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q418833" start="14277" end="14284" title="Wannabe" label="Wannabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835554" start="14417" end="14432" title="Livin&amp;#x27; Joy" label="Livin&amp;#x27; Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291934" start="14446" end="14473" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop Movin&amp;#x27; (Livin&amp;#x27; Joy song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop Movin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328489" start="14509" end="14519" title="Music Week" label="Music Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q540500" start="14626" end="14633" title="Eternal (group)" label="Eternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104876707" start="14817" end="14828" title="Dele Fadele" label="Dele Fadele"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="14838" end="14841" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="14976" end="14980" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112643" start="15003" end="15026" title="Christopher John Farley" label="Christopher John Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501482" start="15086" end="15092" title="Groove (music)" label="groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q28974" start="15173" end="15193" title="Earth, Wind and Fire" label="Earth, Wind and Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331013" start="15201" end="15224" title="Richmond Times-Dispatch" label="Richmond Times-Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q427487" start="15340" end="15352" title="Contemporary hit radio" label="Top 40 radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340048" start="15354" end="15368" title="Edna Gundersen" label="Edna Gundersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="15382" end="15391" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q818781" start="15425" end="15430" title="Spice (album)" label="debut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092348" start="15569" end="15601" title="The Atlanta Journal-Constitution" label="The Atlanta Journal-Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="15752" end="15765" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028115" start="15789" end="15797" title="Greg Kot" label="Greg Kot"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="15811" end="15826" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045541" start="15909" end="15915" title="G-funk" label="G-funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="16056" end="16065" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q92554297" start="16081" end="16092" title="Larry Flick" label="Larry Flick"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="16225" end="16242" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231828" start="16404" end="16416" title="David Browne (journalist)" label="David Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="16426" end="16446" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388629" start="16594" end="16604" title="Ken Tucker" label="Ken Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353842" start="16662" end="16668" title="Parliament-Funkadelic" label="P-Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="16828" end="16851" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="16857" end="16865" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="17035" end="17040" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422534" start="17115" end="17128" title="Greatest Hits (Spice Girls album)" label="Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721514" start="17208" end="17223" title="Alexis Petridis" label="Alexis Petridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="17233" end="17245" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="17374" end="17390" title="Evening Standard" label="Evening Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q127124" start="17639" end="17643" title="Hook (music)" label="hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q27881700" start="17756" end="17767" title="Vulture.com" label="Vulture.com"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18201" end="18211" title="Girl Power#Spice Girls and scholarship" label="girl power"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="18235" end="18245" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="18375" end="18383" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="18579" end="18586" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="19197" end="19213" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="19532" end="19561" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q266102" start="19778" end="19795" title="European Hot 100 Singles" label="Eurochart Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="20235" end="20242" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="20263" end="20274" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14918641" start="20434" end="20466" title="Official New Zealand Music Chart" label="Official New Zealand Music Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="20692" end="20710" title="ARIA Charts" label="ARIA Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q550239" start="20834" end="20875" title="Australian Recording Industry Association" label="Australian Recording Industry Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344164" start="21000" end="21003" title="RPM (magazine)" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="21277" end="21306" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356902" start="21326" end="21341" title="Hot 100 Airplay" label="Hot 100 Airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630676" start="21746" end="21763" title="Hot Singles Sales" label="Hot Singles Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="21935" end="21949" title="RIAA certification" label="certified gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="21957" end="21998" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q862774" start="22044" end="22061" title="Mainstream Top 40 (Pop Songs)" label="Mainstream Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q504635" start="22070" end="22079" title="Crossover (music)" label="crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325418" start="22118" end="22133" title="Rhythmic Top 40" label="Rhythmic Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580002" start="22157" end="22191" title="Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales" label="Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878579" start="22290" end="22304" title="Vaughan Arnell" label="Vaughan Arnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="22371" end="22384" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="22397" end="22407" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q104123" start="22444" end="22456" title="Pulp Fiction (film)" label="Pulp Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215958" start="22473" end="22502" title="Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!" label="Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="22661" end="22667" title="Technology" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="22703" end="22712" title="high-tech" label="high-tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9402" start="22713" end="22718" title="ninja" label="ninja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577525" start="22790" end="22799" title="Tony Ward (entertainer)" label="Tony Ward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22828" end="22838" title="Petty Enterprises#Petty Blue" label="Petty blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234165" start="22839" end="22860" title="Dodge Charger Daytona" label="Dodge Charger Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q201662" start="23049" end="23058" title="alter ego" label="alter ego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051317" start="23214" end="23221" title="catsuit" label="catsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520" start="23279" end="23292" title="David Beckham" label="David Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544220" start="23861" end="23902" title="Smash Hits Poll Winners Party" label="&amp;quot;Smash Hits&amp;quot; Poll Winners Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605955" start="23908" end="23933" title="Brit Award for British Video of the Year" label="British Video of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117668" start="23941" end="23957" title="1997 Brit Awards" label="1997 Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q667066" start="23985" end="24005" title="MTV Video Music Award – Viewer&amp;#x27;s Choice" label="Viewer&amp;#x27;s Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q917679" start="24013" end="24040" title="1997 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1997 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="24130" end="24175" title="Billboard Music Award" label="1997 &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Music Video Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="24315" end="24318" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="24513" end="24528" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256896" start="24542" end="24560" title="Live &amp;amp; Kicking" label="Live &amp;amp; Kicking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754269" start="24574" end="24583" title="The Noise (British TV series)" label="The Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749828" start="24597" end="24616" title="An Audience with..." label="An Audience with..."/>
<link wikidata="Q7738308" start="24641" end="24650" title="The Grind (TV series)" label="The Grind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047206" start="24664" end="24693" title="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show" label="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857828" start="24705" end="24714" title="Much (TV channel)" label="MuchMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057647" start="24723" end="24747" title="Intimate and Interactive" label="Intimate and Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="24781" end="24800" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556133" start="24961" end="24972" title="Lip sync" label="lip-synched"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027843" start="24995" end="25008" title="backing track" label="backing track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758242" start="25108" end="25132" title="The Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust" label="Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744146" start="25138" end="25160" title="Sanremo Music Festival 1997" label="1997 San Remo Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q917679" start="25170" end="25197" title="1997 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1997 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q308162" start="25309" end="25326" title="Abdi İpekçi Arena" label="Abdi İpekçi Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="25330" end="25346" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul, Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="25381" end="25389" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277210" start="25519" end="25547" title="Girl Power! Live in Istanbul" label="Girl Power! Live in Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="25698" end="25724" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg, South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632235" start="25776" end="25792" title="2000 Brit Awards" label="2000 Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609312" start="26026" end="26041" title="Spiceworld Tour" label="Spiceworld Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531737" start="26047" end="26075" title="Christmas in Spiceworld Tour" label="Christmas in Spiceworld Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471509" start="26081" end="26111" title="Return of the Spice Girls" label="Return of the Spice Girls Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q60978693" start="26121" end="26144" title="Spice World – 2019 Tour" label="Spice World – 2019 Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q112053" start="26272" end="26280" title="tailcoat" label="tailcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391082" start="26316" end="26324" title="Kenny Ho (stylist)" label="Kenny Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q14441" start="26385" end="26398" title="Liza Minnelli" label="Liza Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q918363" start="26442" end="26449" title="Cabaret (1972 film)" label="Cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656511" start="26550" end="26585" title="Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium" label="Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="26649" end="26652" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q352539" start="26886" end="26901" title="Roberto Cavalli" label="Roberto Cavalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054040" start="27080" end="27097" title="Catsuits and bodysuits in popular media" label="black PVC catsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520" start="27131" end="27144" title="David Beckham" label="David Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q602446" start="28914" end="28920" title="lyrics" label="lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="28922" end="28928" title="Singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288763" start="28930" end="28943" title="Eliot Kennedy" label="Eliot Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059549" start="28952" end="28958" title="Jon B." label="Jon B."/>
<link wikidata="Q727927" start="28967" end="28975" title="Absolute (production team)" label="Absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="28993" end="29003" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q18640339" start="29006" end="29017" title="Judd Lander" label="Judd Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="29018" end="29027" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355977" start="29029" end="29057" title="Mark Stent" label="Mark &amp;quot;Spike&amp;quot; Stent"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="29058" end="29070" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="audio mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="29088" end="29106" title="Audio engineer" label="recording engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="29185" end="29196" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q719645" start="29241" end="29250" title="CD single" label="CD single"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313495" start="29483" end="29497" title="Junior Vasquez" label="Junior Vasquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="29498" end="29503" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q648877" start="29508" end="29523" title="post-production" label="post-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195736" start="29525" end="29536" title="Curt Frasca" label="Curt Frasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343007" start="29566" end="29575" title="Electronic keyboard" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289786" start="29577" end="29588" title="Programming (music)" label="programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207093" start="29621" end="29641" title="D Mob" label="Dancin&amp;#x27; Danny D"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803657" wikidata="Q697775" url="?curid=803657" title="Imperial Council (Austria)">
<text>The Imperial Council was the legislature of the Austrian Empire from 1861 until 1918. It was a bicameral body: the upper house was the House of Lords (), and the lower house was the House of Deputies (). To become law, bills had to be passed by both houses, signed by the government minister responsible, and then granted royal assent by the Emperor. After having been passed, laws were published in the &quot;Reichsgesetzblatt&quot; (lit. Reich Law Gazette). In addition to the Imperial Council, the fifteen individual crown lands of Cisleithania had their own diets ().

The seat of the Imperial Council from 4 December 1883 was in the Parliament Building on Ringstraße in Vienna. Prior to the completion of this building, the House of Lords met in the Estates House of Lower Austria, and the House of Deputies met in a temporary wooden building designed by Ferdinand Fellner on Währinger Straße. The Imperial Council was dissolved on 12 November 1918, following Austria-Hungary&#x27;s defeat in the First World War.

==Establishment==
In the course of the Revolutions of 1848, representatives from those crown lands of the Austrian Empire incorporated in the German Confederation met in an &quot;Imperial Diet&quot; at Vienna. The convention was inaugurated by Archduke John on 22 July 1848 and after the Vienna Uprising of October moved to Kroměříž () in Moravia. It not only abolished the last remnants of serfdom in the Austrian lands, but also undertook to draw up a constitution that would reflect the Empire&#x27;s character of a multinational state, especially in view of the Austroslavic movement led by the Czech politician František Palacký.

On 4 March 1849, however, minister-president Felix zu Schwarzenberg took the initiative and imposed the March Constitution, which promised the equality of all Austrian people and also provided for a bicameral &quot;Imperial Diet&quot;. It was nevertheless only a sidestep, as Schwarzenberg three days later forcefully disbanded the Kremsier Parliament and finally had the constitution annulled with the New Year&#x27;s Eve Patent () of 1851. Emperor Franz Joseph went on to rule with absolute power. In place of the Imperial Diet, he installed an &quot;Imperial Council&quot; (), whose members were appointed on his authority.

In the 1850s, chronic fiscal malaise became acute. The dire nature of the situation was revealed to the Emperor after the Second Italian War of Independence and the bloody defeat of Austrian forces at the 1859 Battle of Solferino. To calm the domestic front and to gain the support of wealthy Bourgeoisie, Franz Joseph issued the October Diploma in 1860. An &quot;Imperial Diet&quot;, still meant as a conciliatory body, was supposed to have 100 delegates elected by provincial diets that were to be established for each Austrian crown land. This electoral system, however, satisfied neither the bourgeois liberals nor the Hungarian nobility, who refused to accept any authority higher than the Hungarian Diet.

For this reason, the Diploma was discarded and replaced by the February Patent of 1861, which was drafted by liberal minister-president Anton von Schmerling. This established a bicameral Imperial Council: the upper house was the House of Lords (), and the lower house was the House of Deputies ().

==House of Lords==

The House of Lords was convened for the first time on 29 April 1861. It was similar in form to the present day House of Lords of the United Kingdom. It met in the Palais Niederösterreich in Vienna until the Parliament Building was completed in 1883. The House of Lords was composed of:

*Archdukes of the Imperial House
*Lords spiritual – influential Catholic archbishops and bishops of various cities, some in the Latin Church and others in one of the Eastern Catholic Churches
*Hereditary peers – selected from certain families among the hereditary landowning nobility
*Life peers – citizens of Austria appointed to the House for life by the Emperor, for services to the state, the church, science, or art
The last meeting of the House of Lords was held on 30 October 1918. The meeting was adjourned within five minutes. The House of Lords chamber of the Parliament Building was destroyed by bombing during the Second World War. It was rebuilt in a contemporary style, and serves as the chamber of the now democratically elected National Council of the Republic of Austria.

==House of Deputies==

Upon establishment of the Imperial Council by the February Patent, elections to the House of Deputies were conducted through a system of &quot;curiae&quot;. In this system, there were 343 deputies elected by the diets of the crown lands. The diets themselves were elected by four curiae. The curiae were essentially assemblies of certain social classes. There was one curia for the landowning class, one curia for the chambers of commerce, one curia for the towns and cities, and one curia for rural communities. Each curia would elect a select number of deputies to the diets, which would in turn elect deputies to the Imperial Council. To be part of the curia of the cities and the curia of the rural communities, a man had to pay at least ten guilders in tax. This system was rejected by Hungary, as with the October Diploma, and Hungary never sent any delegates to the Council. The February Patent was suspended in 1865.

With the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867, Hungary would no longer send deputies to the Imperial Council. Instead, the Empire was reorganised into two equal parts: Cisleithania and Transleithania. Cisleithania consisted of the Austrian part of the Empire, officially &quot;The Kingdoms and Lands Represented in the Imperial Council&quot;. Transleithania consisted of the Kingdom of Hungary and its subordinate, the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia. Instead of a subordinate regional diet, Hungary was granted its own parliament, and essentially attained the status of &quot;sovereign state&quot;. The curia system, however, remained in place. At this point, the Council had extensive legislative powers in all Cisleithanian matters. Appointment and dismissal of the government of the Cisleithania and the Minister-President remained the right of the emperor. The number of deputies each diet sent to the Imperial Council was set by the Compromise. There were 203 deputies in total: 

*54 from the Kingdom of Bohemia
*5 from the Kingdom of Dalmatia
*38 from the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria,
*18 from the Archduchy of Lower Austria
*10 from the Archduchy of Upper Austria
*3 from the Duchy of Salzburg
*13 from the Duchy of Styria
*5 from the Duchy of Carinthia
*6 from the Duchy of Carniola
*5 from the Duchy of Bukovina
*22 from the Margraviate of Moravia
*6 from the Duchy of Upper and Lower Silesia
*10 from the Princely County of Tyrol
*2 from Vorarlberg
*2 from the Margraviate of Istria
*2 from the Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca
*2 from Imperial Free City of Trieste
The next great change to the Imperial Council came in 1873. The number of deputies was increased from 203 to 353. Deputies would no longer be elected by the diets of the crown lands. Instead, they would be directly elected through the curia system for six year terms. The curia of the landowners elected 85 deputies, that of the chambers of commerce 21, that of cities 118, and that of the rural communities 128. Overall, only 6% of the population of the Empire could vote in these elections. Tax requirements for entry into the curiae remained the same, but was lowered to five guilders in 1883.

On October 10, 1893, minister-president Eduard Taaffe, 11th Viscount Taaffe submitted a bill in the House of Deputies that intended to abolish the fourth curia, and introduce universal suffrage in the third curia for those men below the five guilder threshold. This was fervently opposed, and was not passed into law. Despite this, the number of deputies was increased to 425 on 14 June 1896 through reforms by minister-president Count Kasimir Felix Badeni. A fifth curia was added, which granted universal suffrage to all men over the age of 24. This curia elected 72 deputies, shifting the balance of power away from the nobility.

Minister-president Paul Gautsch von Frankenthurn introduced the final electoral reform in the history of the House of Deputies in 1906, after mass demonstrations by the rising Social Democratic Party, and despite fierce opposition in the House of Lords. Universal suffrage for men was introduced, and the curia system was abolished. The number of deputies was raised to 516, and seats were allotted once again based on the crown lands.

Universal suffrage allowed greater representation for members of the working class, and diminished the power of the German-speaking bourgeoisie. Whilst this was an advance for democracy, it resulted in the splintering of the House of Deputies into numerous factions based on nationality and ideology, which made it dysfunctional. Throughout its existence, the effectiveness of the Imperial Council suffered heavily from conflicts between and within the numerous constituent nationalities of the Empire. Governments of Cisleithania had to rely on loose &quot;ad hoc&quot; alliances, often with the support of the Polish representatives (&quot;Polenklub&quot;), and there were as many as 29 Minister-Presidents between 1867 and 1918.

==Dissolution==
From the July Crisis in 1914, the Imperial Council was suspended. It remained so for the duration of the First World War, until it was finally reconvened in May 1917. It was permanently dissolved on 12 November 1918, the day after the &quot;de facto&quot; abdication of Emperor Charles.

==See also==
*Diet of Hungary
*Imperial Diet (Austria)
*Moravian Diet
*Parliament of Croatia

==Footnotes==

=== Notes ===
=== In-line citations ===
=== General references ===
*

==External links==
* AEIOU Encyclopedia on Reichsrat (Imperial Council)
* Website of the Austrian parliament 
* AEIOU Encyclopedia on Abgeordnetenhaus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q697775" start="4" end="20" title="Imperial Council (Austria)" label="Imperial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="29" end="40" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="48" end="63" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="95" end="104" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q680144" start="135" end="149" title="House of Lords (Austria)" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q320261" start="182" end="199" title="House of Deputies (Austria)" label="House of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="322" end="334" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q166877" start="342" end="349" title="Emperor of Austria" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q960541" start="440" end="445" title="Reich" label="Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065227" start="450" end="457" title="Government gazette" label="Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="520" end="547" title="Cisleithania#Crown lands" label="crown lands of Cisleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q320501" start="562" end="567" title="Landtag" label="diets"/>
<link wikidata="Q702121" start="638" end="657" title="Austrian Parliament Building" label="Parliament Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q46232" start="661" end="671" title="Vienna Ring Road" label="Ringstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="675" end="681" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498120" start="755" end="785" title="Estates House of Lower Austria" label="Estates House of Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q113014" start="860" end="877" title="Ferdinand Fellner" label="Ferdinand Fellner"/>
<link wikidata="Q690959" start="1059" end="1078" title="Revolutions of 1848 in the Habsburg areas" label="Revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473816" start="1107" end="1118" title="crown lands" label="crown lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="1126" end="1141" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="1162" end="1182" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93427" start="1264" end="1277" title="Archduke John of Austria" label="Archduke John"/>
<link wikidata="Q19021" start="1308" end="1323" title="Vienna Uprising" label="Vienna Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q158239" start="1344" end="1352" title="Kroměříž" label="Kroměříž"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="1411" end="1418" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1474" end="1486" title="Constitutional monarchy" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641089" start="1539" end="1558" title="multinational state" label="multinational state"/>
<link wikidata="Q183088" start="1586" end="1598" title="Austroslavism" label="Austroslavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="1619" end="1624" title="Czechs" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q159642" start="1636" end="1653" title="František Palacký" label="František Palacký"/>
<link wikidata="Q547074" start="1701" end="1723" title="Prince Felix of Schwarzenberg" label="Felix zu Schwarzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q685472" start="1760" end="1778" title="March Constitution of Austria" label="March Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q876529" start="1988" end="2007" title="Kremsier Parliament" label="Kremsier Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="2106" end="2118" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="2140" end="2148" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q540978" start="2406" end="2440" title="Second Italian War of Independence" label="Second Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q324916" start="2494" end="2513" title="Battle of Solferino" label="Battle of Solferino"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="2577" end="2588" title="Bourgeoisie" label="Bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q697734" start="2614" end="2629" title="October Diploma" label="October Diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="2890" end="2898" title="Liberalism" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="2907" end="2916" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q596470" start="3132" end="3152" title="Anton von Schmerling" label="Anton von Schmerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="3426" end="3440" title="House of Lords (United Kingdom)" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498120" start="3478" end="3501" title="Palais Niederösterreich" label="Palais Niederösterreich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="3620" end="3634" title="House of Lorraine" label="Imperial House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3666" end="3674" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="3730" end="3742" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="3768" end="3793" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholic Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4228" end="4244" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q871363" start="4346" end="4362" title="National Council (Austria)" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="4370" end="4389" title="Republic of Austria" label="Republic of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q697769" start="4465" end="4480" title="February Patent" label="February Patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q835567" start="4558" end="4564" title="curiae" label="curiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123526" start="4833" end="4853" title="chambers of commerce" label="chambers of commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q203607" start="5157" end="5169" title="Guilder" label="ten guilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="5350" end="5385" title="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867" label="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="5508" end="5520" title="Cisleithania" label="Cisleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="5525" end="5539" title="Transleithania" label="Transleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="5715" end="5733" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="5759" end="5786" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="6336" end="6354" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Kingdom of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q698248" start="6367" end="6386" title="Kingdom of Dalmatia" label="Kingdom of Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396442" start="6400" end="6432" title="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria" label="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154615" start="6447" end="6456" title="Archduchy" label="Archduchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="6460" end="6473" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154615" start="6487" end="6496" title="Archduchy" label="Archduchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41967" start="6500" end="6513" title="Upper Austria" label="Upper Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q661340" start="6526" end="6543" title="Duchy of Salzburg" label="Duchy of Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q580447" start="6557" end="6572" title="Duchy of Styria" label="Duchy of Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="6585" end="6603" title="Duchy of Carinthia" label="Duchy of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360973" start="6616" end="6633" title="Duchy of Carniola" label="Duchy of Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137588" start="6646" end="6663" title="Duchy of Bukovina" label="Duchy of Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670751" start="6677" end="6699" title="Margraviate of Moravia" label="Margraviate of Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298874" start="6712" end="6744" title="Duchy of Upper and Lower Silesia" label="Duchy of Upper and Lower Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543832" start="6758" end="6782" title="Princely County of Tyrol" label="Princely County of Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q38981" start="6791" end="6801" title="Vorarlberg" label="Vorarlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234139" start="6814" end="6835" title="Margraviate of Istria" label="Margraviate of Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q692946" start="6848" end="6887" title="Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca" label="Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006584" start="6896" end="6925" title="Imperial Free City of Trieste" label="Imperial Free City of Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q697077" start="7545" end="7563" title="Minister-President of Austria" label="minister-president"/>
<link wikidata="Q550748" start="7564" end="7599" title="Eduard Taaffe, 11th Viscount Taaffe" label="Eduard Taaffe, 11th Viscount Taaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q697799" start="7954" end="7980" title="Count Kasimir Felix Badeni" label="Count Kasimir Felix Badeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q241524" start="8177" end="8206" title="Paul Gautsch von Frankenthurn" label="Paul Gautsch von Frankenthurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q179111" start="8334" end="8357" title="Social Democratic Party of Austria" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q917435" start="9353" end="9364" title="July Crisis" label="July Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51068" start="9622" end="9629" title="Charles I of Austria" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q700757" start="9646" end="9661" title="Diet of Hungary" label="Diet of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q876529" start="9663" end="9686" title="Imperial Diet (Austria)" label="Imperial Diet (Austria)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12038678" start="9688" end="9701" title="Moravian Diet" label="Moravian Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="9703" end="9724" title="Parliament of Croatia" label="Parliament of Croatia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803658" wikidata="Q6220764" url="?curid=803658" title="John Barnes (computer scientist)">
<text>John Gilbert Presslie Barnes is a British computer scientist best known for his role in developing and publicising the programming language Ada. He is the primary inventor of and protagonist for the Ada Rendezvous mechanism.

Barnes studied mathematics at University of Cambridge and later worked at Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI). He was an industrial fellow at Wolfson College, Oxford in the very late 1970s or early 1980s, most likely at the suggestion of Professor Tony Hoare.

Before working on the Ada design team, while at ICI, he designed and implemented a dialect of the language ALGOL, named Real-Time Language 2 (RTL/2) for real-time computing.

Barnes was awarded an honorary PhD from the University of York in 2006.

==Publications==
*
*
*
*

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6220764" start="0" end="28" title="John Barnes (computer scientist)" label="John Gilbert Presslie Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="42" end="60" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="119" end="139" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="140" end="143" title="Ada (programming language)" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="241" end="252" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="256" end="279" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q899151" start="300" end="328" title="Imperial Chemical Industries" label="Imperial Chemical Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007225" start="367" end="390" title="Wolfson College, Oxford" label="Wolfson College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q92602" start="473" end="483" title="Tony Hoare" label="Tony Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="593" end="598" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277848" start="628" end="633" title="RTL/2" label="RTL/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="639" end="658" title="real-time computing" label="real-time computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="683" end="691" title="Honorary degree" label="honorary"/>
<link wikidata="Q967165" start="705" end="723" title="University of York" label="University of York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803660" wikidata="Q391911" url="?curid=803660" title="National Order of Quebec">
<text>The National Order of Quebec, termed officially in French as , and in English abbreviation as the Order of Quebec, is an order of merit in Quebec. Instituted in 1984 when Lieutenant Governor Jean-Pierre Côté granted royal assent to the (National Order of Quebec Act), the order is administered by the Governor-in-Council and is intended to honour current or former Quebec residents for conspicuous achievements in any field, being thus described as the highest honour in Quebec. In 1986, the order was expanded to include honorary membership for people outside Quebec.

==Structure and appointment==
Although the National Order of Quebec was established with the granting of royal assent by Quebec&#x27;s lieutenant governor and the Canadian sovereign is the fount of honour, the viceroy does not, as in other provinces, form an explicit part of the organization. Instead, the monarch&#x27;s representative is related to the order only by virtue of his or her place in council, collectively termed the government of Quebec, to which the constitution of the Order of Quebec makes specific reference.

The order contains three grades, each with accordant post-nominal letters and place in the Canadian order of precedence for honours, decorations, and medals. They are, in descending hierarchical order:

* Grand Officer (; GOQ)
* Officer (; OQ)
* Knight (&quot;;&quot; CQ)

Nominations to the National Order of Quebec are sought in Quebec&#x27;s daily and weekly media publications and are directed to the Council of the National Order of Quebec, elected by and amongst the members of the order for a period of three years and headed by a president elected by the council for two years. This body is mandated to short-list candidates and forward their suggestions to the Governor-in-Council. Any person born, living, or who has lived in Quebec, save for anyone serving as a Member of the National Assembly of Quebec, is eligible to be nominated and names may be submitted posthumously. The Cabinet may also, without the input of the Council of the National Order of Quebec, put forward the names of non-Quebecers for appointment as honorary members. Promotion through the grades is possible for both substantive and honorary members. Admission recognizes conspicuous meritorious actions that improve or support Quebec and/or its language and culture.

==Insignia==

Upon admission into the Order of Quebec, members are presented with various insignia of the organization—a medallion, miniature, and button. All are administered by the Regulations for the Insignia of the National Order of Quebec and were designed by Madeleine Dansereau, who was inspired by the heraldic elements of the provincial flag, notably the colours of blue and white used on the order&#x27;s ribbon and the &quot;fleur-de-lis&quot;. The badge of a Grand Officer consists of two 18kt gold plates, in the shape of a cross formed by two by arms, symmetrically superimposed atop one another 4 mm apart, the obverse face a high-polish, rusticated surface; at the lower left corner is a white enamel fleur-de-lis. On the reverse of the badge is inscribed the order&#x27;s motto— (homage to the people of Quebec)—and a serial number at the base of the vertical bar. The badge for Officers is of a nearly identical design, but made of arms long by wide, the obverse plate in 18k gold with an applied gold fleur-de-lis, and the rear in sterling silver. Knights have a medal with a diameter, brushed silver medallion with a symmetrically placed, etched cross with arms long by wide and filled with a highly polished, rusticated surface; a gold fleur-de-lis is mounted at the lower, left side of the cross. Each member will also receive miniature versions of their insignia, identical in appearance save for size: those for all grades being wide in each direction or in circumference. A lapel pin is also used for wear on casual civilian clothing. Male members wear their emblems suspended from a wide ribbon, at the collar for Grand Officers and Officers, and on a vertical ribbon on a medal bar on the left chest for Knights; women Grand Officers and Officers wear their insignia on a ribbon bow pinned at the left shoulder, and female Knights carry their medals in the same fashion as the men. The ribbon for miniatures is wide.

The regulations of the National Order of Quebec stipulate that the premier presents new inductees with their insignia, either on the National Holiday of Quebec or another day during the National Week. The ceremony takes place in the &quot;Salon Rouge&quot; of the parliament building in Quebec City, though exceptions are sometimes made when inductees cannot be present (notably for some non-Quebecer appointments). The insignia remain property of the Crown in Right of Quebec and must be returned upon a holder&#x27;s cessation of membership in the society, whether by death or dismissal.

==Inductees==
The following are some notable appointees into the National Order of Quebec:

===Quebec inductees===

====Grand Officer====

* Jean Victor Allard , Chief of the Defence Staff, appointed 1985
* Marcel Bélanger , economist, appointed 1974
* Jean Béliveau , hockey player, appointed 2010
* Lucien Bouchard , 27th Premier of Quebec, appointed 2008
* Robert Bourassa , 22nd Premier of Quebec, appointed posthumously 2008
* Jean Campeau , politician and businessman, appointed Grand Officer in 1990
* Leonard Norman Cohen , singer-songwriter, appointed 2008
* Maurice Couture , Archbishop of Quebec 1990–2002, appointed 2003
* Robert Després , businessman, appointed 2003
* Jean Drapeau , mayor of Montreal, appointed 1987
* Marcelle Ferron , painter and stained glass artist, appointed 1992
* Gérard Filion , newspaper director, appointed 1989
* Armand Frappier , researcher, appointed 1985
* Paul Gérin-Lajoie , appointed Officer in 1987 and Grand Officer in 1998
* Phil Gold , scientist, physician, appointed Officer in 1989 and Grand Officer in 2019
* Emmett Johns , Canadian priest and humanitarian, appointed 2003
* Daniel Johnson Jr. , 25th Premier of Quebec, appointed 2008
* Pierre-Marc Johnson , 24th Premier of Quebec, appointed 2008
* Phyllis Barbara Lambert , architect and philanthropist
* Bernard Landry , 28th Premier of Quebec, appointed 2008
* Charles Philippe Leblond , scientist, professor, appointed Grand Officer in 2001
* Félix Leclerc , singer-songwriter, appointed 1985
* Jean Paul Lemieux , painter, appointed posthumously 1997
* René Lévesque , 23rd Premier of Quebec, appointed posthumously 2008
* Martin Brian Mulroney , 18th Prime Minister of Canada, appointed 2002
* Alanis Obomsawin , filmmaker, First Nations activist, appointed 2016
* Jacques Parizeau , 26th Premier of Quebec, appointed 2008
* Jean-Paul Riopelle , painter, appointed Officer in 1988 and Grand Officer in 1994
* Ethel Stark , violinist and conductor, appointed 2003
* Charles Taylor , philosopher, appointed 2003
* Jean Vanier , philanthropist, theologian, founder of L&#x27;Arche, appointed 1992
* Gilles Vigneault , singer-songwriter, appointed Knight in 1985 and Grand Officer in 2000
====Officer====

* Yves Beauchemin , novelist, appointed 2003
* Laurent Beaudoin , businessman appointed 1990
* Francesco Bellini , research scientist and entrepreneur, appointed 2004
* Daniel Borsuk , plastic surgeon, appointed 2019
* Michel Brault , filmmaker, appointed 2003
* Boris Brott , conductor, appointed 2014
* Solange Chaput-Rolland , appointed 1985
* Jean Coutu , businessman, appointed 1993
* Richard Cruess , orthopaedic surgeon and academic, appointed 2003
* Bernard Derome , news anchor, appointed 2006
* Céline Dion , singer, appointed 1998
* Léon Dion , author, teacher, intellectual, appointed 1990
* Fernand Dumont , author, intellectual, appointed 1992
* Marie-Hélène Falcon , dance and theatre, appointed 2003
* Denise Filiatrault , playwright, actor, appointed 2000
* Anne Hébert , writer, appointed 1985
* Larkin Kerwin , physicist, appointed 1988
* Lucia Kowaluk , community activist, appointed 2014
* Louis Laberge , union leader, appointed 1988
* Normand Laprise , chef and author, appointed 2009
* Robert Lepage , playwright, filmmaker, appointed 1999
* Monique F. Leroux, businesswoman, appointed 2012
* Jean-Louis Lévesque , entrepreneur, philanthropist, appointed 1991
* Vincent Lemieux , professor and political scientist, appointed 2003
* André Melançon OQ, actor, screenwriter and film director, appointed 2013
* Gaston Miron , poet, appointed 1996
* Ted Moses , aboriginal chief, appointed 2002
* Louise Otis , judge, appointed 2003
* Denise Ouellet-Grenier , director of the L&#x27;Ordre national du Québec until 2001, appointed 2003
* Lise Payette , politician, writer, appointed 2001
* Pierre Péladeau businessman, appointed 1989
* Louise Penny , author, appointed 2017
* Hubert Reeves , astrophysicist, appointed 1994
* Maurice Richard , hockey player, appointed 1985
* Mary Simon , Governor General of Canada, appointed 1992
* Mary Two-Axe Earley , women&#x27;s rights activist, appointed 1985
* Jacques Villeneuve , racing driver, appointed 1998
====Knight====

* Jacques Amyot , long-distance swimmer, appointed 2001
* Denys Arcand , filmmaker, appointed 1990
* Frédéric Back , animator, appointed 1989
* Alice Benjamin, appointed 1993
* Sylvie Bernier , Olympic diver, appointed 1985
* Ferdinand Biondi , radio broadcaster, appointed 1985
* Neil Bissoondath , author, appointed 2010
* Denise Bombardier , journalist, appointed 2000
* Claire Bonenfant , president of the Quebec Status of Women Council, appointed 1991
* Émile Bouchard , hockey player, appointed 2008
* Gaétan Boucher , speed skater, appointed 1985
* Isabelle Boulay , singer, appointed 2012
* Pierre Bourque , mayor of Montreal, appointed 1993
* Françoise David , social and feminist activist, appointed 1999
* Yvon Deschamps , comedian, appointed 2001
* Jean Duceppe , actor, appointed 1985
* Diane Dufresne , singer and painter, appointed 2002
* Laurent Duvernay-Tardif , NFL player, appointed 2019
* Gad Elmaleh, comedian, appointed 2017
* Marc Favreau , actor, appointed 1995
* Jean-Pierre Ferland , singer-songwriter
* Madeleine Ferron , writer, appointed 1992
* Daniel Germain , philanthropist, appointed 1997
* Jacques Godbout , writer and filmmaker, appointed 1998
* Marc-André Hamelin , pianist
* Otto Joachim , composer, musician, painter, appointed 1993
* Roland-Benoît Jomphe , poet, appointed 1987
* Oliver Theophilus Jones , pianist, organist, composer and arranger, appointed 1994
* Pauline Julien , singer-songwriter, appointed 1997
* Madeleine Juneau , museologist, teacher, nun, appointed 2017
* Marie-Claire Kirkland-Casgrain , appointed 1985
* Françoise Labbé , artist, appointed 1997
* Jacques Lacombe , conductor, appointed 2012
* Jacques Lacoursière , historian, appointed 2002
* Guy Lafleur , hockey player, appointed 2005
* Guy Laliberté , appointed 1997
* Mario Lemieux , hockey player, appointed 2009
* Michel Lemieux , performance artist and theatre director, appointed 2014
* Édouard Lock , dancer, appointed 2001
* Louis Lortie , pianist, appointed 1998
* Norman McLaren , animator and filmmaker, appointed 1985
* Julie Payette , astronaut, appointed 2000
* Oscar Peterson , jazz musician, appointed 1991
* Chantal Petitclerc , wheelchair athlete, Canadian senator, appointed 2005
* Samuel Pierre, professor, appointed 2009
* Victor Pilon , director, theatre designer, visual designer and photographer, appointed 2014
* Luc Plamondon , songwriter, appointed 1990
* Jean-Louis Roux , actor and Lieutenant Governor of Quebec, appointed 1989
* Hubert Sacy , General manager of Éduc’alcool, appointed 2010
* Pierre Théberge , Museum director
* Michèle Thibodeau-DeGuire , engineer, appointed in 2005
* Michel Tremblay , playwright and author, appointed 1991
* Alain Trudel , conductor and trombonist, appointed 2019
* Jesús Carles de Vilallonga , painter, appointed 2011
* Denis Villeneuve , director and screenwriter, appointed in 2019
* Jean Wilkins , specialized physician (adolescent medicine), appointed 2016
* Paul Zumthor , medievalist and literary historian, appointed 1992
===Non-Quebec inductees===

====Honorary Grand Officer====

* Charles Dutoit , conductor, appointed 1995
* François Hollande , President of France, appointed 2014

====Honorary Officer====

* Raymond Barre , Prime Minister of France, appointed 1986
* Jacques Chirac , President of France, appointed 1987
* Jim Douglas , Governor of Vermont, appointed 2010
* Michel Drucker , television host, appointed Knight 2001, Officer 2010
* Laurent Fabius , Prime Minister of France, appointed 1986
* Lionel Jospin , Prime Minister of France, appointed 1998
* Alain Juppé , Prime Minister of France, appointed 1996
* Antonine Maillet , Acadian writer and playwright, appointed 1990
* Nana Mouskouri , Greek singer, appointed 2013
* Alain Peyrefitte , French politician, appointed 1998
* Jordi Pujol , President of the Generalitat of Catalonia, appointed 1996
* Jean-Pierre Raffarin , Prime Minister of France, appointed 2003
* Michel Rocard AC, , Prime Minister of France, appointed 2000
* Philippe Séguin , President of the French National Assembly, appointed 2000
* Edmund Stoiber , Minister-President of Bavaria, appointed 2003
* Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga GCB, , , President of Latvia, appointed 2006

====Honorary Knight====

* David Azrieli , architect, appointed 1999
* Gérard Depardieu , actor, appointed 2002, removed from order 2023
* Bernard Pivot , television host, appointed 2001

==See also==
* Symbols of Quebec
* State decoration
* Prix du Québec

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q391911" start="4" end="28" title="National Order of Quebec" label="National Order of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q979914" start="51" end="57" title="Quebec French" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q391911" start="61" end="61" title="National Order of Quebec" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="70" end="77" title="Canadian English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q391911" start="98" end="113" title="National Order of Quebec" label="Order of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677266" start="121" end="135" title="order of merit" label="order of merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="139" end="145" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238289" start="171" end="190" title="Lieutenant Governor of Quebec" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677284" start="191" end="207" title="Jean-Pierre Côté" label="Jean-Pierre Côté"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="216" end="228" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="301" end="320" title="Queen-in-Council" label="Governor-in-Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="675" end="687" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238289" start="691" end="724" title="Lieutenant Governor of Quebec" label="Quebec&amp;#x27;s lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="733" end="751" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="Canadian sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884636" start="759" end="774" title="fount of honour" label="fount of honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="780" end="787" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="960" end="976" title="Queen-in-Council" label="place in council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112634" start="1002" end="1022" title="government of Quebec" label="government of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330404" start="1153" end="1173" title="post-nominal letters" label="post-nominal letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030848" start="1191" end="1256" title="Canadian order of precedence (decorations and medals)" label="Canadian order of precedence for honours, decorations, and medals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="1770" end="1789" title="Queen-in-Council" label="Governor-in-Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="1887" end="1914" title="National Assembly of Quebec" label="National Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q29046068" start="2616" end="2635" title="Madeleine Dansereau" label="Madeleine Dansereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="2661" end="2669" title="Heraldry" label="heraldic"/>
<link wikidata="Q392167" start="2686" end="2701" title="Flag of Quebec" label="provincial flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="2787" end="2799" title="fleur-de-lis" label="fleur-de-lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401905" start="2854" end="2856" title="Carat (purity)" label="kt"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="2857" end="2861" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q40843" start="2888" end="2893" title="cross" label="cross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2992" end="3003" title="Jewellery#Metal finishes" label="high-polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q396851" start="3005" end="3015" title="Rustication (architecture)" label="rusticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="3068" end="3080" title="fleur-de-lis" label="fleur-de-lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q31576" start="3401" end="3416" title="sterling silver" label="sterling silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427163" start="4429" end="4455" title="National Holiday (Quebec)" label="National Holiday of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812858" start="4535" end="4546" title="Legislative Council of Quebec" label="Salon Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067302" start="4560" end="4579" title="Parliament Building (Quebec)" label="parliament building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="4583" end="4594" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898071" start="4748" end="4772" title="Monarchy in Quebec" label="Crown in Right of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170066" start="5028" end="5046" title="Jean Victor Allard" label="Jean Victor Allard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961996" start="5049" end="5075" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (Canada)" label="Chief of the Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756063" start="5094" end="5109" title="Marcel Bélanger" label="Marcel Bélanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q505479" start="5140" end="5153" title="Jean Béliveau" label="Jean Béliveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873388" start="5188" end="5203" title="Lucien Bouchard" label="Lucien Bouchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q650980" start="5247" end="5262" title="Robert Bourassa" label="Robert Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3171105" start="5319" end="5331" title="Jean Campeau" label="Jean Campeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276" start="5396" end="5416" title="Leonard Cohen" label="Leonard Norman Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q976997" start="5455" end="5470" title="Maurice Couture" label="Maurice Couture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434950" start="5522" end="5536" title="Robert Després" label="Robert Després"/>
<link wikidata="Q979154" start="5569" end="5581" title="Jean Drapeau" label="Jean Drapeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q975848" start="5620" end="5635" title="Marcelle Ferron" label="Marcelle Ferron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123956" start="5689" end="5702" title="Gérard Filion" label="Gérard Filion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861855" start="5742" end="5757" title="Armand Frappier" label="Armand Frappier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371417" start="5789" end="5806" title="Paul Gérin-Lajoie" label="Paul Gérin-Lajoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378775" start="5863" end="5872" title="Phil Gold" label="Phil Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053023" start="5951" end="5963" title="Emmett Johns" label="Emmett Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014237" start="6017" end="6035" title="Daniel Johnson Jr." label="Daniel Johnson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q964801" start="6079" end="6098" title="Pierre-Marc Johnson" label="Pierre-Marc Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381859" start="6142" end="6165" title="Phyllis Lambert" label="Phyllis Barbara Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q574359" start="6199" end="6213" title="Bernard Landry" label="Bernard Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959999" start="6257" end="6281" title="Charles Philippe Leblond" label="Charles Philippe Leblond"/>
<link wikidata="Q594644" start="6340" end="6353" title="Félix Leclerc" label="Félix Leclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173875" start="6392" end="6409" title="Jean Paul Lemieux" label="Jean Paul Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q381007" start="6451" end="6464" title="René Lévesque" label="René Lévesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="6521" end="6542" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Martin Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q637195" start="6593" end="6609" title="Alanis Obomsawin" label="Alanis Obomsawin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393455" start="6664" end="6680" title="Jacques Parizeau" label="Jacques Parizeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q708544" start="6724" end="6742" title="Jean-Paul Riopelle" label="Jean-Paul Riopelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q448933" start="6808" end="6819" title="Ethel Stark" label="Ethel Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q311757" start="6864" end="6878" title="Charles Taylor (philosopher)" label="Charles Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q545644" start="6911" end="6922" title="Jean Vanier" label="Jean Vanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q853420" start="6964" end="6976" title="L&amp;#x27;Arche" label="L&amp;#x27;Arche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522692" start="6995" end="7011" title="Gilles Vigneault" label="Gilles Vigneault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573473" start="7103" end="7118" title="Yves Beauchemin" label="Yves Beauchemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219031" start="7148" end="7164" title="Laurent Beaudoin" label="Laurent Beaudoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080907" start="7196" end="7213" title="Francesco Bellini (businessman)" label="Francesco Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q36988335" start="7270" end="7283" title="Daniel Borsuk" label="Daniel Borsuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030862" start="7320" end="7333" title="Michel Brault" label="Michel Brault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910920" start="7364" end="7375" title="Boris Brott" label="Boris Brott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489133" start="7406" end="7428" title="Solange Chaput-Rolland" label="Solange Chaput-Rolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3171476" start="7448" end="7458" title="Jean Coutu (pharmacist)" label="Jean Coutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430669" start="7491" end="7505" title="Richard Cruess" label="Richard Cruess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897777" start="7559" end="7573" title="Bernard Derome" label="Bernard Derome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="7606" end="7617" title="Celine Dion" label="Céline Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270913" start="7645" end="7654" title="Léon Dion" label="Léon Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q290093" start="7705" end="7719" title="Fernand Dumont" label="Fernand Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291875" start="7761" end="7780" title="Marie-Hélène Falcon" label="Marie-Hélène Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023033" start="7819" end="7837" title="Denise Filiatrault" label="Denise Filiatrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q737768" start="7876" end="7887" title="Anne Hébert" label="Anne Hébert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217951" start="7915" end="7928" title="Larkin Kerwin" label="Larkin Kerwin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7959" end="7972" title="Lucia Kowaluk" label="Lucia Kowaluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262412" start="8012" end="8025" title="Louis Laberge" label="Louis Laberge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194152" start="8059" end="8074" title="Normand Laprise" label="Normand Laprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341481" start="8111" end="8124" title="Robert Lepage" label="Robert Lepage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320840" start="8167" end="8184" title="Monique F. Leroux" label="Monique F. Leroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166874" start="8218" end="8237" title="Jean-Louis Lévesque" label="Jean-Louis Lévesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848339" start="8357" end="8371" title="André Melançon" label="André Melançon"/>
<link wikidata="Q955432" start="8432" end="8444" title="Gaston Miron" label="Gaston Miron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517041" start="8470" end="8479" title="Ted Moses" label="Ted Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242515" start="8657" end="8669" title="Lise Payette" label="Lise Payette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386717" start="8709" end="8724" title="Pierre Péladeau" label="Pierre Péladeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q460414" start="8755" end="8767" title="Louise Penny" label="Louise Penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356355" start="8795" end="8808" title="Hubert Reeves" label="Hubert Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q325138" start="8844" end="8859" title="Maurice Richard" label="Maurice Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780723" start="8894" end="8904" title="Mary Simon" label="Mary Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25513882" start="8952" end="8971" title="Mary Two-Axe Earley" label="Mary Two-Axe Earley"/>
<link wikidata="Q172843" start="9021" end="9039" title="Jacques Villeneuve" label="Jacques Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158122" start="9090" end="9103" title="Jacques Amyot (swimmer)" label="Jacques Amyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q363231" start="9146" end="9158" title="Denys Arcand" label="Denys Arcand"/>
<link wikidata="Q69218" start="9189" end="9202" title="Frédéric Back" label="Frédéric Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836534" start="9232" end="9246" title="Alice Benjamin" label="Alice Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q456620" start="9265" end="9279" title="Sylvie Bernier" label="Sylvie Bernier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443806" start="9314" end="9330" title="Ferdinand Biondi" label="Ferdinand Biondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337811" start="9369" end="9385" title="Neil Bissoondath" label="Neil Bissoondath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023014" start="9413" end="9430" title="Denise Bombardier" label="Denise Bombardier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975011" start="9462" end="9478" title="Claire Bonenfant" label="Claire Bonenfant"/>
<link wikidata="Q274947" start="9547" end="9561" title="Émile Bouchard" label="Émile Bouchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q494831" start="9596" end="9610" title="Gaétan Boucher" label="Gaétan Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q261019" start="9644" end="9659" title="Isabelle Boulay" label="Isabelle Boulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384158" start="9687" end="9701" title="Pierre Bourque (politician)" label="Pierre Bourque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086459" start="9740" end="9755" title="Françoise David" label="Françoise David"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574100" start="9805" end="9819" title="Yvon Deschamps" label="Yvon Deschamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3171833" start="9849" end="9861" title="Jean Duceppe" label="Jean Duceppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026211" start="9888" end="9902" title="Diane Dufresne" label="Diane Dufresne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842512" start="9942" end="9965" title="Laurent Duvernay-Tardif" label="Laurent Duvernay-Tardif"/>
<link wikidata="Q318991" start="9997" end="10008" title="Gad Elmaleh" label="Gad Elmaleh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288016" start="10037" end="10049" title="Marc Favreau" label="Marc Favreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169283" start="10076" end="10095" title="Jean-Pierre Ferland" label="Jean-Pierre Ferland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275641" start="10118" end="10134" title="Madeleine Ferron" label="Madeleine Ferron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383895" start="10162" end="10176" title="Daniel Germain" label="Daniel Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159008" start="10212" end="10227" title="Jacques Godbout" label="Jacques Godbout"/>
<link wikidata="Q45189" start="10269" end="10287" title="Marc-André Hamelin" label="Marc-André Hamelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319405" start="10300" end="10312" title="Otto Joachim (composer)" label="Otto Joachim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440117" start="10361" end="10381" title="Roland-Benoît Jomphe" label="Roland-Benoît Jomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116211" start="10407" end="10430" title="Oliver Jones (pianist)" label="Oliver Theophilus Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372725" start="10492" end="10506" title="Pauline Julien" label="Pauline Julien"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486030" start="10545" end="10561" title="Madeleine Juneau" label="Madeleine Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291691" start="10608" end="10638" title="Marie-Claire Kirkland" label="Marie-Claire Kirkland-Casgrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086529" start="10658" end="10673" title="Françoise Labbé" label="Françoise Labbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159233" start="10701" end="10716" title="Jacques Lacombe" label="Jacques Lacombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q674235" start="10747" end="10766" title="Jacques Lacoursière" label="Jacques Lacoursière"/>
<link wikidata="Q553249" start="10797" end="10808" title="Guy Lafleur" label="Guy Lafleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q357468" start="10843" end="10856" title="Guy Laliberté" label="Guy Laliberté"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="10876" end="10889" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310172" start="10924" end="10938" title="Michel Lemieux" label="Michel Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080168" start="10999" end="11011" title="Édouard Lock" label="Édouard Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055542" start="11039" end="11051" title="Louis Lortie" label="Louis Lortie"/>
<link wikidata="Q716552" start="11080" end="11094" title="Norman McLaren" label="Norman McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q240769" start="11138" end="11151" title="Julie Payette" label="Julie Payette"/>
<link wikidata="Q105349" start="11182" end="11196" title="Oscar Peterson" label="Oscar Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q457113" start="11231" end="11249" title="Chantal Petitclerc" label="Chantal Petitclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557508" start="11350" end="11362" title="Victor Pilon" label="Victor Pilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q591655" start="11444" end="11457" title="Luc Plamondon" label="Luc Plamondon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505474" start="11489" end="11504" title="Jean-Louis Roux" label="Jean-Louis Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q53775411" start="11565" end="11576" title="Hubert Sacy" label="Hubert Sacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387112" start="11628" end="11643" title="Pierre Théberge" label="Pierre Théberge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311704" start="11664" end="11689" title="Michèle Thibodeau-DeGuire" label="Michèle Thibodeau-DeGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q560434" start="11722" end="11737" title="Michel Tremblay" label="Michel Tremblay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830335" start="11780" end="11792" title="Alain Trudel" label="Alain Trudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188398" start="11838" end="11864" title="Jesús Carles de Vilallonga" label="Jesús Carles de Vilallonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q548823" start="11893" end="11909" title="Denis Villeneuve" label="Denis Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q55723052" start="11959" end="11971" title="Jean Wilkins" label="Jean Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q116039" start="12036" end="12048" title="Paul Zumthor" label="Paul Zumthor"/>
<link wikidata="Q116995" start="12164" end="12178" title="Charles Dutoit" label="Charles Dutoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q157" start="12209" end="12226" title="François Hollande" label="François Hollande"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="12229" end="12248" title="President of France" label="President of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12957" start="12294" end="12307" title="Raymond Barre" label="Raymond Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="12310" end="12334" title="Prime Minister of France" label="Prime Minister of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="12353" end="12367" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q726313" start="12408" end="12419" title="Jim Douglas" label="Jim Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773745" start="12422" end="12441" title="Governor of Vermont" label="Governor of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q933434" start="12460" end="12474" title="Michel Drucker" label="Michel Drucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q217070" start="12532" end="12546" title="Laurent Fabius" label="Laurent Fabius"/>
<link wikidata="Q187099" start="12592" end="12605" title="Lionel Jospin" label="Lionel Jospin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215569" start="12651" end="12662" title="Alain Juppé" label="Alain Juppé"/>
<link wikidata="Q946031" start="12708" end="12724" title="Antonine Maillet" label="Antonine Maillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="12727" end="12734" title="Acadian" label="Acadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q154662" start="12775" end="12789" title="Nana Mouskouri" label="Nana Mouskouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="12792" end="12797" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q929334" start="12823" end="12839" title="Alain Peyrefitte" label="Alain Peyrefitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q458702" start="12878" end="12889" title="Jordi Pujol" label="Jordi Pujol"/>
<link wikidata="Q722234" start="12892" end="12933" title="List of Presidents of the Generalitat de Catalunya" label="President of the Generalitat of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63263" start="12952" end="12972" title="Jean-Pierre Raffarin" label="Jean-Pierre Raffarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12946" start="13018" end="13031" title="Michel Rocard" label="Michel Rocard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="13032" end="13034" title="Order of Australia" label="AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q543332" start="13081" end="13096" title="Philippe Séguin" label="Philippe Séguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="13116" end="13140" title="French National Assembly" label="French National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q44507" start="13159" end="13173" title="Edmund Stoiber" label="Edmund Stoiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="13198" end="13205" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q151301" start="13224" end="13244" title="Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga" label="Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="13245" end="13248" title="Order of the Bath" label="GCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q218014" start="13254" end="13273" title="President of Latvia" label="President of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594947" start="13318" end="13331" title="David Azrieli" label="David Azrieli"/>
<link wikidata="Q106508" start="13362" end="13378" title="Gérard Depardieu" label="Gérard Depardieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101521" start="13430" end="13443" title="Bernard Pivot" label="Bernard Pivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419578" start="13494" end="13511" title="Symbols of Quebec" label="Symbols of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302125" start="13514" end="13530" title="State decoration" label="State decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405853" start="13533" end="13547" title="Prix du Québec" label="Prix du Québec"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803661" wikidata="Q465352" url="?curid=803661" title="History of technology">
<text>The history of technology is the history of the invention of tools and techniques by humans. Technology includes methods ranging from simple stone tools to the complex genetic engineering and information technology that has emerged since the 1980s. The term &quot;technology&quot; comes from the Greek word &quot;techne&quot;, meaning art and craft, and the word &quot;logos&quot;, meaning word and speech. It was first used to describe applied arts, but it is now used to describe advancements and changes that affect the environment around us.

New knowledge has enabled people to create new tools, and conversely, many scientific endeavors are made possible by new technologies, for example scientific instruments which allow us to study nature in more detail than our natural senses.

Since much of technology is applied science, technical history is connected to the history of science. Since technology uses resources, technical history is tightly connected to economic history. From those resources, technology produces other resources, including &quot;technological artifacts&quot; used in everyday life. Technological change affects, and is affected by, a society&#x27;s cultural traditions. It is a force for economic growth and a means to develop and project economic, political, military power and wealth.

== Measuring technological progress ==
Many sociologists and anthropologists have created social theories dealing with social and cultural evolution. Some, like Lewis H. Morgan, Leslie White, and Gerhard Lenski have declared technological progress to be the primary factor driving the development of human civilization. Morgan&#x27;s concept of three major stages of social evolution (savagery, barbarism, and civilization) can be divided by technological milestones, such as fire. White argued the measure by which to judge the evolution of culture is energy.

For White, &quot;the primary function of culture&quot; is to &quot;harness and control energy.&quot; White differentiates between five stages of human development: In the first, people use the energy of their own muscles. In the second, they use the energy of domesticated animals. In the third, they use the energy of plants (agricultural revolution). In the fourth, they learn to use the energy of natural resources: coal, oil, gas. In the fifth, they harness nuclear energy. White introduced the formula P=E/T, where P is the development index, E is a measure of energy consumed, and T is the measure of the efficiency of technical factors using the energy. In his own words, &quot;culture evolves as the amount of energy harnessed per capita per year is increased, or as the efficiency of the instrumental means of putting the energy to work is increased&quot;. Nikolai Kardashev extrapolated his theory, creating the Kardashev scale, which categorizes the energy use of advanced civilizations.

Lenski&#x27;s approach focuses on information. The more information and knowledge (especially allowing the shaping of natural environment) a given society has, the more advanced it is. He identifies four stages of human development, based on advances in the history of communication. In the first stage, information is passed by genes. In the second, when humans gain sentience, they can learn and pass information through experience. In the third, the humans start using signs and develop logic. In the fourth, they can create symbols, develop language and writing. Advancements in communications technology translate into advancements in the economic system and political system, distribution of wealth, social inequality and other spheres of social life. He also differentiates societies based on their level of technology, communication, and economy:

* hunter-gatherer,
* simple agricultural,
* advanced agricultural,
* industrial,
* special (such as fishing societies).

In economics, productivity is a measure of technological progress. Productivity increases when fewer inputs (classically labor and capital but some measures include energy and materials) are used in the production of a unit of output. Another indicator of technological progress is the development of new products and services, which is necessary to offset unemployment that would otherwise result as labor inputs are reduced. In developed countries productivity growth has been slowing since the late 1970s; however, productivity growth was higher in some economic sectors, such as manufacturing. For example, employment in manufacturing in the United States declined from over 30% in the 1940s to just over 10% 70 years later. Similar changes occurred in other developed countries. This stage is referred to as &quot;post-industrial&quot;.

In the late 1970s sociologists and anthropologists like Alvin Toffler (author of &quot;Future Shock&quot;), Daniel Bell and John Naisbitt have approached the theories of post-industrial societies, arguing that the current era of industrial society is coming to an end, and services and information are becoming more important than industry and goods. Some extreme visions of the post-industrial society, especially in fiction, are strikingly similar to the visions of near and post-singularity societies.

== By period and geography ==

The following is a summary of the history of technology by time period and geography:

* Olduvai stone technology (Oldowan) 2.5 million years ago (scrapers; to butcher dead animals)
* Huts, 2 million years ago.
* Acheulean stone technology 1.6 million years ago (hand axe)
* Fire creation and manipulation, used since the Paleolithic, possibly by Homo erectus as early as 1.5 Million years ago
* Cooking, 500,000 years ago.
* Javelins, 400,000 years ago.
* (Homo sapiens sapiens – modern human anatomy arises, around 100,000 years ago.)
* Glue, 200,000 years ago.
* Clothing possibly 170,000 years ago.
* Stone tools used by Homo floresiensis, possibly 100,000 years ago.
* Harpoons, 90,000 years ago.
* Bow and arrows, 70,000–60,000 years ago.
* Sewing needles, 60,000 – 50,000 BC
* Flutes, 43,000 years ago.
* Fishing nets, 43,000 years ago.
* Ropes, 40,000 years ago.
* Microliths c. 35,000 – 23,000 years ago
* Ceramics c. 25,000 BC
* Fishing hooks, C. 23,000 years ago.
* Domestication of animals, c. 15,000 BC
* Sling (weapon) c. 9th millennium BC
* Boats, 8,000 years ago.
* Brick used for construction in the Middle East c. 6000 BC
* Agriculture and plough c. 4000 BC
* Wheel c. 4000 BC
* Gnomon c. 4000 BC
* Writing systems c. 3500 BC
* Copper c. 3200 BC
* Bronze c. 2500 BC
* Salt c. 2500 BC
* Chariot c. 2000 BC
* Iron c. 1500 BC
* Sundial c. 800 BC
* Glass ca. 500 BC
* Catapult c. 400 BC
* Cast iron c. 400 BC
* Horseshoe c. 300 BC
* Stirrup first few centuries AD

=== Prehistory ===

==== Stone Age ====

During most of the Paleolithic – the bulk of the Stone Age – all humans had a lifestyle which involved limited tools and few permanent settlements. The first major technologies were tied to survival, hunting, and food preparation. Stone tools and weapons, fire, and clothing were technological developments of major importance during this period.

Human ancestors have been using stone and other tools since long before the emergence of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; approximately 300,000 years ago. The earliest direct evidence of tool usage was found in Ethiopia within the Great Rift Valley, dating back to 2.5 million years ago. The earliest methods of stone tool making, known as the Oldowan &quot;industry&quot;, date back to at least 2.3 million years ago. This era of stone tool use is called the &quot;Paleolithic&quot;, or &quot;Old stone age&quot;, and spans all of human history up to the development of agriculture approximately 12,000 years ago.

To make a stone tool, a &quot;core&quot; of hard stone with specific flaking properties (such as flint) was struck with a hammerstone. This flaking produced sharp edges which could be used as tools, primarily in the form of choppers or scrapers. These tools greatly aided the early humans in their hunter-gatherer lifestyle to perform a variety of tasks including butchering carcasses (and breaking bones to get at the marrow); chopping wood; cracking open nuts; skinning an animal for its hide, and even forming other tools out of softer materials such as bone and wood.

The earliest stone tools were irrelevant, being little more than a fractured rock. In the Acheulian era, beginning approximately 1.65 million years ago, methods of working these stones into specific shapes, such as hand axes emerged. This early Stone Age is described as the Lower Paleolithic.

The Middle Paleolithic, approximately 300,000 years ago, saw the introduction of the prepared-core technique, where multiple blades could be rapidly formed from a single core stone. The Upper Paleolithic, beginning approximately 40,000 years ago, saw the introduction of pressure flaking, where a wood, bone, or antler punch could be used to shape a stone very finely.

The end of the last Ice Age about 10,000 years ago is taken as the end point of the Upper Paleolithic and the beginning of the Epipaleolithic / Mesolithic. The Mesolithic technology included the use of microliths as composite stone tools, along with wood, bone, and antler tools.

The later Stone Age, during which the rudiments of agricultural technology were developed, is called the Neolithic period. During this period, polished stone tools were made from a variety of hard rocks such as flint, jade, jadeite, and greenstone, largely by working exposures as quarries, but later the valuable rocks were pursued by tunneling underground, the first steps in mining technology. The polished axes were used for forest clearance and the establishment of crop farming and were so effective as to remain in use when bronze and iron appeared. These stone axes were used alongside a continued use of stone tools such as a range of projectiles, knives, and scrapers, as well as tools, made from organic materials such as wood, bone, and antler.

Stone Age cultures developed music and engaged in organized warfare. Stone Age humans developed ocean-worthy outrigger canoe technology, leading to migration across the Malay Archipelago, across the Indian Ocean to Madagascar and also across the Pacific Ocean, which required knowledge of the ocean currents, weather patterns, sailing, and celestial navigation.

Although Paleolithic cultures left no written records, the shift from nomadic life to settlement and agriculture can be inferred from a range of archaeological evidence. Such evidence includes ancient tools, cave paintings, and other prehistoric art, such as the Venus of Willendorf. Human remains also provide direct evidence, both through the examination of bones, and the study of mummies. Scientists and historians have been able to form significant inferences about the lifestyle and culture of various prehistoric peoples, and especially their technology.

=== Ancient ===
==== Copper and Bronze Ages ====


Metallic copper occurs on the surface of weathered copper ore deposits and copper was used before copper smelting was known. Copper smelting is believed to have originated when the technology of pottery kilns allowed sufficiently high temperatures. The concentration of various elements such as arsenic increase with depth in copper ore deposits and smelting of these ores yields arsenical bronze, which can be sufficiently work hardened to be suitable for making tools.

Bronze is an alloy of copper with tin; the latter being found in relatively few deposits globally caused a long time to elapse before true tin bronze became widespread. (See: Tin sources and trade in ancient times) Bronze was a major advancement over stone as a material for making tools, both because of its mechanical properties like strength and ductility and because it could be cast in molds to make intricately shaped objects. Bronze significantly advanced shipbuilding technology with better tools and bronze nails. Bronze nails replaced the old method of attaching boards of the hull with cord woven through drilled holes. Better ships enabled long-distance trade and the advance of civilization. 
This technological trend apparently began in the Fertile Crescent and spread outward over time. These developments were not, and still are not, universal. The three-age system does not accurately describe the technology history of groups outside of Eurasia, and does not apply at all in the case of some isolated populations, such as the Spinifex People, the Sentinelese, and various Amazonian tribes, which still make use of Stone Age technology, and have not developed agricultural or metal technology. These villages preserve traditional customs in the face of global modernity, exhibiting a remarkable resistance to the rapid advancement of technology.

==== Iron Age ====
Before iron smelting was developed the only iron was obtained from meteorites and is usually identified by having nickel content. Meteoric iron was rare and valuable, but was sometimes used to make tools and other implements, such as fish hooks.

The Iron Age involved the adoption of iron smelting technology. It generally replaced bronze and made it possible to produce tools which were stronger, lighter and cheaper to make than bronze equivalents. The raw materials to make iron, such as ore and limestone, are far more abundant than copper and especially tin ores. Consequently, iron was produced in many areas.

It was not possible to mass manufacture steel or pure iron because of the high temperatures required. Furnaces could reach melting temperature but the crucibles and molds needed for melting and casting had not been developed. Steel could be produced by forging bloomery iron to reduce the carbon content in a somewhat controllable way, but steel produced by this method was not homogeneous.

In many Eurasian cultures, the Iron Age was the last major step before the development of written language, though again this was not universally the case.

In Europe, large hill forts were built either as a refuge in time of war or sometimes as permanent settlements. In some cases, existing forts from the Bronze Age were expanded and enlarged. The pace of land clearance using the more effective iron axes increased, providing more farmland to support the growing population.

==== Mesopotamia ====
Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) and its peoples (Sumerians, Akkadians, Assyrians and Babylonians) lived in cities from c. 4000 BC, and developed a sophisticated architecture in mud-brick and stone, including the use of the true arch. The walls of Babylon were so massive they were quoted as a Wonder of the World. They developed extensive water systems; canals for transport and irrigation in the alluvial south, and catchment systems stretching for tens of kilometers in the hilly north. Their palaces had sophisticated drainage systems.

Writing was invented in Mesopotamia, using the cuneiform script. Many records on clay tablets and stone inscriptions have survived. These civilizations were early adopters of bronze technologies which they used for tools, weapons and monumental statuary. By 1200 BC they could cast objects 5 m long in a single piece.

Several of the six classic simple machines were invented in Mesopotamia. Mesopotamians have been credited with the invention of the wheel. The wheel and axle mechanism first appeared with the potter&#x27;s wheel, invented in Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) during the 5th millennium BC. This led to the invention of the wheeled vehicle in Mesopotamia during the early 4th millennium BC. Depictions of wheeled wagons found on clay tablet pictographs at the Eanna district of Uruk are dated between 3700 and 3500 BC. The lever was used in the shadoof water-lifting device, the first crane machine, which appeared in Mesopotamia circa 3000 BC, and then in ancient Egyptian technology circa 2000 BC. The earliest evidence of pulleys date back to Mesopotamia in the early 2nd millennium BC.

The screw, the last of the simple machines to be invented, first appeared in Mesopotamia during the Neo-Assyrian period (911–609) BC. The Assyrian King Sennacherib (704–681 BC) claims to have invented automatic sluices and to have been the first to use water screw pumps, of up to 30 tons weight, which were cast using two-part clay molds rather than by the &#x27;lost wax&#x27; process. The Jerwan Aqueduct (c. 688 BC) is made with stone arches and lined with waterproof concrete.

The Babylonian astronomical diaries spanned 800 years. They enabled meticulous astronomers to plot the motions of the planets and to predict eclipses.

The earliest evidence of water wheels and watermills date back to the ancient Near East in the 4th century BC, specifically in the Persian Empire before 350 BC, in the regions of Mesopotamia (Iraq) and Persia (Iran). This pioneering use of water power constituted the first human-devised motive force not to rely on muscle power (besides the sail).

==== Egypt ====
The Egyptians, known for building pyramids centuries before the creation of modern tools, invented and used many simple machines, such as the ramp to aid construction processes. Historians and archaeologists have found evidence that the pyramids were built using three of what is called the Six Simple Machines, from which all machines are based. These machines are the inclined plane, the wedge, and the lever, which allowed the ancient Egyptians to move millions of limestone blocks which weighed approximately 3.5 tons (7,000 lbs.) each into place to create structures like the Great Pyramid of Giza, which is high.

They also made writing medium similar to paper from papyrus, which Joshua Mark states is the foundation for modern paper. Papyrus is a plant (cyperus papyrus) which grew in plentiful amounts in the Egyptian Delta and throughout the Nile River Valley during ancient times. The papyrus was harvested by field workers and brought to processing centers where it was cut into thin strips. The strips were then laid-out side by side and covered in plant resin. The second layer of strips was laid on perpendicularly, then both pressed together until the sheet was dry. The sheets were then joined to form a roll and later used for writing.

Egyptian society made several significant advances during dynastic periods in many areas of technology. According to Hossam Elanzeery, they were the first civilization to use timekeeping devices such as sundials, shadow clocks, and obelisks and successfully leveraged their knowledge of astronomy to create a calendar model that society still uses today. They developed shipbuilding technology that saw them progress from papyrus reed vessels to cedar wood ships while also pioneering the use of rope trusses and stem-mounted rudders. The Egyptians also used their knowledge of anatomy to lay the foundation for many modern medical techniques and practiced the earliest known version of neuroscience. Elanzeery also states that they used and furthered mathematical science, as evidenced in the building of the pyramids.

Ancient Egyptians also invented and pioneered many food technologies that have become the basis of modern food technology processes. Based on paintings and reliefs found in tombs, as well as archaeological artifacts, scholars like Paul T Nicholson believe that the Ancient Egyptians established systematic farming practices, engaged in cereal processing, brewed beer and baked bread, processed meat, practiced viticulture and created the basis for modern wine production, and created condiments to complement, preserve and mask the flavors of their food.

==== Indus Valley ====
The Indus Valley Civilization, situated in a resource-rich area (in modern Pakistan and northwestern India), is notable for its early application of city planning, sanitation technologies, and plumbing. Indus Valley construction and architecture, called &#x27;Vaastu Shastra&#x27;, suggests a thorough understanding of materials engineering, hydrology, and sanitation.

==== China ====
The Chinese made many first-known discoveries and developments. Major technological contributions from China include the earliest known form of the binary code and epigenetic sequencing, early seismological detectors, matches, paper, Helicopter rotor, Raised-relief map, the double-action piston pump, cast iron, water powered blast furnace bellows, the iron plough, the multi-tube seed drill, the wheelbarrow, the parachute, the compass, the rudder, the crossbow, the South Pointing Chariot and gunpowder. China also developed deep well drilling, which they used to extract brine for making salt. Some of these wells, which were as deep as 900 meters, produced natural gas which was used for evaporating brine.

Other Chinese discoveries and inventions from the medieval period include block printing, movable type printing, phosphorescent paint, endless power chain drive and the clock escapement mechanism. The solid-fuel rocket was invented in China about 1150, nearly 200 years after the invention of gunpowder (which acted as the rocket&#x27;s fuel). Decades before the West&#x27;s age of exploration, the Chinese emperors of the Ming Dynasty also sent large fleets on maritime voyages, some reaching Africa.

==== Hellenistic Mediterranean ====
The Hellenistic period of Mediterranean history began in the 4th century BC with Alexander&#x27;s conquests, which led to the emergence of a Hellenistic civilization representing a synthesis of Greek and Near-Eastern cultures in the Eastern Mediterranean region, including the Balkans, Levant and Egypt. With Ptolemaic Egypt as its intellectual center and Greek as the lingua franca, the Hellenistic civilization included Greek, Egyptian, Jewish, Persian and Phoenician scholars and engineers who wrote in Greek.

Hellenistic engineers of the Eastern Mediterranean were responsible for a number of inventions and improvements to existing technology. The Hellenistic period saw a sharp increase in technological advancement, fostered by a climate of openness to new ideas, the blossoming of a mechanistic philosophy, and the establishment of the Library of Alexandria in Ptolemaic Egypt and its close association with the adjacent museion. In contrast to the typically anonymous inventors of earlier ages, ingenious minds such as Archimedes, Philo of Byzantium, Heron, Ctesibius, and Archytas remain known by name to posterity.

Ancient agriculture, as in any period prior to the modern age the primary mode of production and subsistence, and its irrigation methods, were considerably advanced by the invention and widespread application of a number of previously unknown water-lifting devices, such as the vertical water-wheel, the compartmented wheel, the water turbine, Archimedes&#x27; screw, the bucket-chain and pot-garland, the force pump, the suction pump, the double-action piston pump and quite possibly the chain pump.

In music, the water organ, invented by Ctesibius and subsequently improved, constituted the earliest instance of a keyboard instrument. In time-keeping, the introduction of the inflow clepsydra and its mechanization by the dial and pointer, the application of a feedback system and the escapement mechanism far superseded the earlier outflow clepsydra.

Innovations in mechanical technology included the newly devised right-angled gear, which would become particularly important to the operation of mechanical devices. Hellenistic engineers also devised automata such as suspended ink pots, automatic washstands, and doors, primarily as toys, which however featured new useful mechanisms such as the cam and gimbals.

The Antikythera mechanism, a kind of analogous computer working with a differential gear, and the astrolabe both show great refinement in astronomical science.

In other fields, ancient Greek innovations include the catapult and the gastraphetes crossbow in warfare, hollow bronze-casting in metallurgy, the dioptra for surveying, in infrastructure the lighthouse, central heating, a tunnel excavated from both ends by scientific calculations, and the ship trackway. In transport, great progress resulted from the invention of the winch and the odometer.

Further newly created techniques and items were spiral staircases, the chain drive, sliding calipers and showers.

==== Roman Empire ====
The Roman Empire expanded from Italia across the entire Mediterranean region between the 1st century BC and 1st century AD. Its most advanced and economically productive provinces outside of Italia were the Eastern Roman provinces in the Balkans, Asia Minor, Egypt, and the Levant, with Roman Egypt in particular being the wealthiest Roman province outside of Italia.

The Roman Empire developed an intensive and sophisticated agriculture, expanded upon existing iron working technology, created laws providing for individual ownership, advanced stone masonry technology, advanced road-building (exceeded only in the 19th century), military engineering, civil engineering, spinning and weaving and several different machines like the Gallic reaper that helped to increase productivity in many sectors of the Roman economy. Roman engineers were the first to build monumental arches, amphitheatres, aqueducts, public baths, true arch bridges, harbours, reservoirs and dams, vaults and domes on a very large scale across their Empire. Notable Roman inventions include the book (Codex), glass blowing and concrete. Because Rome was located on a volcanic peninsula, with sand which contained suitable crystalline grains, the concrete which the Romans formulated was especially durable. Some of their buildings have lasted 2000 years, to the present day.

In Roman Egypt, the inventor Hero of Alexandria was the first to experiment with a wind-powered mechanical device (see Heron&#x27;s windwheel) and even created the earliest steam-powered device (the aeolipile), opening up new possibilities in harnessing natural forces. He also devised a vending machine. However, his inventions were primarily toys, rather than practical machines.

==== Inca, Maya, and Aztec ====
The engineering skills of the Inca and Maya were great, even by today&#x27;s standards. An example of this exceptional engineering is the use of pieces weighing upwards of one ton in their stonework placed together so that not even a blade can fit into the cracks. Inca villages used irrigation canals and drainage systems, making agriculture very efficient. While some claim that the Incas were the first inventors of hydroponics, their agricultural technology was still soil based, if advanced.

Though the Maya civilization did not incorporate metallurgy or wheel technology in their architectural constructions, they developed complex writing and astronomical systems, and created beautiful sculptural works in stone and flint. Like the Inca, the Maya also had command of fairly advanced agricultural and construction technology. The Maya are also responsible for creating the first pressurized water system in Mesoamerica, located in the Maya site of Palenque.

The main contribution of the Aztec rule was a system of communications between the conquered cities and the ubiquity of the ingenious agricultural technology of chinampas. In Mesoamerica, without draft animals for transport (nor, as a result, wheeled vehicles), the roads were designed for travel on foot, just as in the Inca and Mayan civilizations. The Aztec, subsequently to the Maya, inherited many of the technologies and intellectual advancements of their predecessors: the Olmec (see Native American inventions and innovations).

=== Medieval to early modern ===
One of the most significant developments of the medieval were economies in which water and wind power were more significant than animal and human muscle power. Most water and wind power was used for milling grain. Water power was also used for blowing air in blast furnace, pulping rags for paper making and for felting wool. The Domesday Book recorded 5,624 water mills in Great Britain in 1086, being about one per thirty families.

==== East Asia ====


==== Indian subcontinent ====


==== Islamic world ====


The Muslim caliphates united in trade large areas that had previously traded little, including the Middle East, North Africa, Central Asia, the Iberian Peninsula, and parts of the Indian subcontinent. The science and technology of previous empires in the region, including the Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Persian, Hellenistic and Roman empires, were inherited by the Muslim world, where Arabic replaced Syriac, Persian and Greek as the lingua franca of the region. Significant advances were made in the region during the Islamic Golden Age (8th–16th centuries).

The Arab Agricultural Revolution occurred during this period. It was a transformation in agriculture from the 8th to the 13th century in the Islamic region of the Old World. The economy established by Arab and other Muslim traders across the Old World enabled the diffusion of many crops and farming techniques throughout the Islamic world, as well as the adaptation of crops and techniques from and to regions outside it. Advances were made in animal husbandry, irrigation, and farming, with the help of new technology such as the windmill. These changes made agriculture much more productive, supporting population growth, urbanisation, and increased stratification of society.

Muslim engineers in the Islamic world made wide use of hydropower, along with early uses of tidal power, wind power, fossil fuels such as petroleum, and large factory complexes (&quot;tiraz&quot; in Arabic). A variety of industrial mills were employed in the Islamic world, including fulling mills, gristmills, hullers, sawmills, ship mills, stamp mills, steel mills, and tide mills. By the 11th century, every province throughout the Islamic world had these industrial mills in operation. Muslim engineers also employed water turbines and gears in mills and water-raising machines, and pioneered the use of dams as a source of water power, used to provide additional power to watermills and water-raising machines. Many of these technologies were transferred to medieval Europe.

Wind-powered machines used to grind grain and pump water, the windmill and wind pump, first appeared in what are now Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan by the 9th century. They were used to grind grains and draw up water, and used in the gristmilling and sugarcane industries. Sugar mills first appeared in the medieval Islamic world. They were first driven by watermills, and then windmills from the 9th and 10th centuries in what are today Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran. Crops such as almonds and citrus fruit were brought to Europe through Al-Andalus, and sugar cultivation was gradually adopted across Europe. Arab merchants dominated trade in the Indian Ocean until the arrival of the Portuguese in the 16th century.

The Muslim world adopted papermaking from China. The earliest paper mills appeared in Abbasid-era Baghdad during 794–795. The knowledge of gunpowder was also transmitted from China via predominantly Islamic countries, where formulas for pure potassium nitrate were developed.

The spinning wheel was invented in the Islamic world by the early 11th century. It was later widely adopted in Europe, where it was adapted into the spinning jenny, a key device during the Industrial Revolution. The crankshaft was invented by Al-Jazari in 1206, and is central to modern machinery such as the steam engine, internal combustion engine and automatic controls. The camshaft was also first described by Al-Jazari in 1206.

Early programmable machines were also invented in the Muslim world. The first music sequencer, a programmable musical instrument, was an automated flute player invented by the Banu Musa brothers, described in their &quot;Book of Ingenious Devices&quot;, in the 9th century. In 1206, Al-Jazari invented programmable automata/robots. He described four automaton musicians, including two drummers operated by a programmable drum machine, where the drummer could be made to play different rhythms and different drum patterns. The castle clock, a hydropowered mechanical astronomical clock invented by Al-Jazari, was an early programmable analog computer.

In the Ottoman Empire, a practical impulse steam turbine was invented in 1551 by Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma&#x27;ruf in Ottoman Egypt. He described a method for rotating a spit by means of a jet of steam playing on rotary vanes around the periphery of a wheel. Known as a steam jack, a similar device for rotating a spit was also later described by John Wilkins in 1648.

==== Medieval Europe ====
While medieval technology has been long depicted as a step backward in the evolution of Western technology, a generation of medievalists (like the American historian of science Lynn White) stressed from the 1940s onwards the innovative character of many medieval techniques. Genuine medieval contributions include for example mechanical clocks, spectacles and vertical windmills. Medieval ingenuity was also displayed in the invention of seemingly inconspicuous items like the watermark or the functional button. In navigation, the foundation to the subsequent Age of Discovery was laid by the introduction of pintle-and-gudgeon rudders, lateen sails, the dry compass, the horseshoe and the astrolabe.

Significant advances were also made in military technology with the development of plate armour, steel crossbows and cannon. The Middle Ages are perhaps best known for their architectural heritage: While the invention of the rib vault and pointed arch gave rise to the high rising Gothic style, the ubiquitous medieval fortifications gave the era the almost proverbial title of the &#x27;age of castles&#x27;.

Papermaking, a 2nd-century Chinese technology, was carried to the Middle East when a group of Chinese papermakers were captured in the 8th century. Papermaking technology was spread to Europe by the Umayyad conquest of Hispania. A paper mill was established in Sicily in the 12th century. In Europe the fiber to make pulp for making paper was obtained from linen and cotton rags. Lynn Townsend White Jr. credited the spinning wheel with increasing the supply of rags, which led to cheap paper, which was a factor in the development of printing.

==== Renaissance technology ====
Before the development of modern engineering, mathematics was used by artisans and craftsmen, such as millwrights, clock makers, instrument makers and surveyors. Aside from these professions, universities were not believed to have had much practical significance to technology.

A standard reference for the state of mechanical arts during the Renaissance is given in the mining engineering treatise &quot;De re metallica&quot; (1556), which also contains sections on geology, mining and chemistry. &quot;De re metallica&quot; was the standard chemistry reference for the next 180 years. Among the water powered mechanical devices in use were ore stamping mills, forge hammers, blast bellows, and suction pumps.

Due to the casting of cannon, the blast furnace came into widespread use in France in the mid 15th century. The blast furnace had been used in China since the 4th century BC.

The invention of the movable cast metal type printing press, whose pressing mechanism was adapted from an olive screw press, (c. 1441) lead to a tremendous increase in the number of books and the number of titles published. Movable ceramic type had been used in China for a few centuries and woodblock printing dated back even further.

The era is marked by such profound technical advancements like linear perceptivity, double shell domes or Bastion fortresses. Note books of the Renaissance artist-engineers such as Taccola and Leonardo da Vinci give a deep insight into the mechanical technology then known and applied. Architects and engineers were inspired by the structures of Ancient Rome, and men like Brunelleschi created the large dome of Florence Cathedral as a result. He was awarded one of the first patents ever issued to protect an ingenious crane he designed to raise the large masonry stones to the top of the structure. Military technology developed rapidly with the widespread use of the cross-bow and ever more powerful artillery, as the city-states of Italy were usually in conflict with one another. Powerful families like the Medici were strong patrons of the arts and sciences. Renaissance science spawned the Scientific Revolution; science and technology began a cycle of mutual advancement.

==== Age of Exploration ====
An improved sailing ship, the nau or carrack, enabled the Age of Exploration with the European colonization of the Americas, epitomized by Francis Bacon&#x27;s &quot;New Atlantis&quot;. Pioneers like Vasco da Gama, Cabral, Magellan and Christopher Columbus explored the world in search of new trade routes for their goods and contacts with Africa, India and China to shorten the journey compared with traditional routes overland. They produced new maps and charts which enabled following mariners to explore further with greater confidence. Navigation was generally difficult, however, owing to the problem of longitude and the absence of accurate chronometers. European powers rediscovered the idea of the civil code, lost since the time of the Ancient Greeks.

==== Pre–Industrial Revolution ====
The stocking frame, which was invented in 1598, increased a knitter&#x27;s number of knots per minute from 100 to 1000.

Mines were becoming increasingly deep and were expensive to drain with horse powered bucket and chain pumps and wooden piston pumps. Some mines used as many as 500 horses. Horse-powered pumps were replaced by the Savery steam pump (1698) and the Newcomen steam engine (1712).

===Industrial Revolution (1760–1830s)===
The revolution was driven by cheap energy in the form of coal, produced in ever-increasing amounts from the abundant resources of Britain. The British Industrial Revolution is characterized by developments in the areas of textile machinery, mining, metallurgy, transport and the invention of machine tools.
Before invention of machinery to spin yarn and weave cloth, spinning was done using the spinning wheel and weaving was done on a hand-and-foot-operated loom. It took from three to five spinners to supply one weaver. The invention of the flying shuttle in 1733 doubled the output of a weaver, creating a shortage of spinners. The spinning frame for wool was invented in 1738. The spinning jenny, invented in 1764, was a machine that used multiple spinning wheels; however, it produced low quality thread. The water frame patented by Richard Arkwright in 1767, produced a better quality thread than the spinning jenny. The spinning mule, patented in 1779 by Samuel Crompton, produced a high quality thread. The power loom was invented by Edmund Cartwright in 1787.
In the mid-1750s, the steam engine was applied to the water power-constrained iron, copper and lead industries for powering blast bellows. These industries were located near the mines, some of which were using steam engines for mine pumping. Steam engines were too powerful for leather bellows, so cast iron blowing cylinders were developed in 1768. Steam powered blast furnaces achieved higher temperatures, allowing the use of more lime in iron blast furnace feed. (Lime rich slag was not free-flowing at the previously used temperatures.) With a sufficient lime ratio, sulfur from coal or coke fuel reacts with the slag so that the sulfur does not contaminate the iron. Coal and coke were cheaper and more abundant fuel. As a result, iron production rose significantly during the last decades of the 18th century. Coal converted to coke fueled higher temperature blast furnaces and produced cast iron in much larger amounts than before, allowing the creation of a range of structures such as The Iron Bridge. Cheap coal meant that industry was no longer constrained by water resources driving the mills, although it continued as a valuable source of power.
The steam engine helped drain the mines, so more coal reserves could be accessed, and the output of coal increased. The development of the high-pressure steam engine made locomotives possible, and a transport revolution followed. The steam engine which had existed since the early 18th century, was practically applied to both steamboat and railway transportation. The Liverpool and Manchester Railway, the first purpose-built railway line, opened in 1830, the Rocket locomotive of Robert Stephenson being one of its first working locomotives used.

Manufacture of ships&#x27; pulley blocks by all-metal machines at the Portsmouth Block Mills in 1803 instigated the age of sustained mass production. Machine tools used by engineers to manufacture parts began in the first decade of the century, notably by Richard Roberts and Joseph Whitworth. The development of interchangeable parts through what is now called the American system of manufacturing began in the firearms industry at the U.S. Federal arsenals in the early 19th century, and became widely used by the end of the century.

Until the Enlightenment era, little progress was made in water supply and sanitation and the engineering skills of the Romans were largely neglected throughout Europe. The first documented use of sand filters to purify the water supply dates to 1804, when the owner of a bleachery in Paisley, Scotland, John Gibb, installed an experimental filter, selling his unwanted surplus to the public. The first treated public water supply in the world was installed by engineer James Simpson for the Chelsea Waterworks Company in London in 1829. The first screw-down water tap was patented in 1845 by Guest and Chrimes, a brass foundry in Rotherham. The practice of water treatment soon became mainstream, and the virtues of the system were made starkly apparent after the investigations of the physician John Snow during the 1854 Broad Street cholera outbreak demonstrated the role of the water supply in spreading the cholera epidemic.

=== Second Industrial Revolution (1860s–1914) ===

The 19th century saw astonishing developments in transportation, construction, manufacturing and communication technologies originating in Europe. After a recession at the end of the 1830s and a general slowdown in major inventions, the Second Industrial Revolution was a period of rapid innovation and industrialization that began in the 1860s or around 1870 and lasted until World War I. It included rapid development of chemical, electrical, petroleum, and steel technologies connected with highly structured technology research.

Telegraphy developed into a practical technology in the 19th century to help run the railways safely. Along with the development of telegraphy was the patenting of the first telephone. March 1876 marks the date that Alexander Graham Bell officially patented his version of an &quot;electric telegraph&quot;. Although Bell is noted with the creation of the telephone, it is still debated about who actually developed the first working model.

Building on improvements in vacuum pumps and materials research, incandescent light bulbs became practical for general use in the late 1870s. Edison Electric Illuminating Company, a company founded by Thomas Edison with financial backing from Spencer Trask, built and managed the first electricity network. Electrification was rated the most important technical development of the 20th century as the foundational infrastructure for modern civilization. This invention had a profound effect on the workplace because factories could now have second and third shift workers.

Shoe production was mechanized during the mid 19th century. Mass production of sewing machines and agricultural machinery such as reapers occurred in the mid to late 19th century. Bicycles were mass-produced beginning in the 1880s.

Steam-powered factories became widespread, although the conversion from water power to steam occurred in England earlier than in the U.S. Ironclad warships were found in battle starting in the 1860s, and played a role in the opening of Japan and China to trade with the West.

Between 1825 and 1840, the technology of photography was introduced. For much of the rest of the century, many engineers and inventors tried to combine it and the much older technique of projection to create a complete illusion or a complete documentation of reality. Colour photography was usually included in these ambitions and the introduction of the phonograph in 1877 seemed to promise the addition of synchronized sound recordings. Between 1887 and 1894, the first successful short cinematographic presentations were established.

=== 20th century ===
Mass production brought automobiles and other high-tech goods to masses of consumers. Military research and development sped advances including electronic computing and jet engines. Radio and telephony greatly improved and spread to larger populations of users, though near-universal access would not be possible until mobile phones became affordable to developing world residents in the late 2000s and early 2010s.

Energy and engine technology improvements included nuclear power, developed after the Manhattan project which heralded the new Atomic Age. Rocket development led to long range missiles and the first space age that lasted from the 1950s with the launch of Sputnik to the mid-1980s.

Electrification spread rapidly in the 20th century. At the beginning of the century electric power was for the most part only available to wealthy people in a few major cities. By 2019, an estimated 87 percent of the world&#x27;s population had access to electricity.

Birth control also became widespread during the 20th century. Electron microscopes were very powerful by the late 1970s and genetic theory and knowledge were expanding, leading to developments in genetic engineering.

The first &quot;test tube baby&quot; Louise Brown was born in 1978, which led to the first successful gestational surrogacy pregnancy in 1985 and the first pregnancy by ICSI in 1991, which is the implanting of a single sperm into an egg. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis was first performed in late 1989 and led to successful births in July 1990. These procedures have become relatively common.

Computers were connected by means of local area, telecom and fiber optic networks, powered by the optical amplifier that ushered in the Information Age. This optical networking technology exploded the capacity of the Internet beginning in 1996 with the launch of the first high-capacity wave division multiplexing (WDM) system by Ciena Corp. WDM, as the common basis for telecom backbone networks, increased transmission capacity by orders of magnitude, thus enabling the mass commercialization and popularization of the Internet and its widespread impact on culture, economics, business, and society.

The commercial availability of the first portable cell phone in 1981 and the first pocket-sized phone in 1985, both developed by Comvik in Sweden, coupled with the first transmission of data over a cellular network by Vodafone (formerly Racal-Millicom) in 1992 were the breakthroughs that led directly to the form and function of smartphones today. By 2014, there were more cell phones in use than people on Earth and The Supreme Court of the United States of America has ruled that a mobile phone was a private part of a person. Providing consumers wireless access to each other and to the Internet, the mobile phone stimulated one of the most important technology revolutions in human history.

The Human Genome Project sequenced and identified all three billion chemical units in human DNA with a goal of finding the genetic roots of disease and developing treatments. The project became feasible due to two technical advances made during the late 1970s: gene mapping by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) markers and DNA sequencing. Sequencing was invented by Frederick Sanger and, separately, by Dr. Walter Gilbert. Gilbert also conceived of the Human Genome Project on May 27, 1985, and first publicly advocated it in August 1985 at the first International Conference on Genes and Computers in August 1985. The U.S. Federal Government sponsored Human Genome Project began October 1, 1990, and was declared complete in 2003.

The massive data analysis resources necessary for running transatlantic research programs such as the Human Genome Project and the Large Electron–Positron Collider led to a necessity for distributed communications, causing Internet protocols to be more widely adopted by researchers and also creating a justification for Tim Berners-Lee to create the World Wide Web.

Vaccination spread rapidly to the developing world from the 1980s onward due to many successful humanitarian initiatives, greatly reducing childhood mortality in many poor countries with limited medical resources.

The US National Academy of Engineering, by expert vote, established the following ranking of the most important technological developments of the 20th century:

# Electrification
# Automobile
# Airplane
# Water supply and Distribution
# Electronics
# Radio and television
# Mechanized agriculture
# Computers
# Telephone
# Air Conditioning and Refrigeration
# Highways
# Spacecraft
# Internet
# Imaging technology
# Household appliances
# Health technology
# Petroleum and Petrochemical technologies
# Laser and Fiber Optics
# Nuclear technology
# Materials science

=== 21st century ===

In the early 21st century, research is ongoing into quantum computers, gene therapy (introduced 1990), 3D printing (introduced 1981), nanotechnology (introduced 1985), bioengineering/biotechnology, nuclear technology, advanced materials (e.g., graphene), the scramjet and drones (along with railguns and high-energy laser beams for military uses), superconductivity, the memristor, and green technologies such as alternative fuels (e.g., fuel cells, self-driving electric and plug-in hybrid cars), augmented reality devices and wearable electronics, artificial intelligence, and more efficient and powerful LEDs, solar cells, integrated circuits, wireless power devices, engines, and batteries.

Large Hadron Collider, the largest single machine ever built, was constructed between 1998 and 2008. The understanding of particle physics is expected to expand with better instruments including larger particle accelerators such as the LHC and better neutrino detectors. Dark matter is sought via underground detectors and observatories like LIGO have started to detect gravitational waves.

Genetic engineering technology continues to improve, and the importance of epigenetics on development and inheritance has also become increasingly recognized.

New spaceflight technology and spacecraft are also being developed, like the Boeing&#x27;s Orion and SpaceX&#x27;s Dragon 2. New, more capable space telescopes, such as the James Webb Space Telescope which was launched to orbit in December, 2021, and the Colossus Telescope, have been designed. The International Space Station was completed in the 2000s, and NASA and ESA plan a human mission to Mars in the 2030s. The Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) is an electro-magnetic thruster for spacecraft propulsion and is expected to be tested in 2015.

The Breakthrough Initiatives project plans to send the first ever spacecraft to visit another star, which will consist of numerous super-light chips driven by Electric propulsion in the 2030s, and receive images of the Proxima Centauri system, along with, possibly, the potentially habitable planet Proxima Centauri b, by midcentury.

2004 saw the first crewed commercial spaceflight when Mike Melvill crossed the boundary of space on June 21, 2004.

== By type ==

=== Biotechnology ===

* Timeline of agriculture and food technology
* Timeline of biotechnology

=== Civil engineering ===

* Civil engineering
* Architecture and building construction
* Bridges, harbors, tunnels, dams
* Surveying, instruments and maps, cartography, urban engineering, water supply and sewerage

=== Communication ===
* Communications
* Writing systems
* Telecommunications
* History of mobile phones
* History of animation
* History of broadcasting
* History of radar
* History of radio
* Printing
* Cinema
* Radio
* Television
* Internet
=== Computing ===
* Timeline of computing
* History of computing hardware before 1960
* History of computing hardware (1960s–present)
* History of computer hardware in Eastern Bloc countries
* History of computer science
* History of operating systems
* History of software engineering
* History of programming languages
* History of artificial intelligence
* History of the graphical user interface
* History of the Internet
* History of the World Wide Web
* Timeline of free and open-source software
* History of video games
* Timeline of quantum computing and communication

=== Consumer technology ===

* Timeline of lighting technology
* History of clothing and textiles
* History of materials science
* Family and consumer science
* History of knitting
* History of lensmaking
* History of the chair
* History of the umbrella
* Manufacturing

=== Electrical engineering ===

* Timeline of electrical and electronic engineering

=== Energy ===
* Energy (History, Use by humans, See also)
* History of coal mining
* History of perpetual motion machines
* Timeline of heat engine technology
* Timeline of steam power
* Timeline of solar cells
* Timeline of hydrogen technologies
* Timeline of alcohol fuel
* Timeline of nuclear fusion
=== Materials science ===

* Timeline of materials technology
* Metallurgy

=== Measurement ===

* History of time in the United States
* History of timekeeping devices

=== Medicine ===
=== Military ===

* Military history#Technological evolution
* :Category:Military history – articles on history of specific technologies

=== Nuclear ===

* Manhattan Project
* Atomic Age
* Nuclear testing
* Nuclear arms race

=== Science and technology ===
* List of years in science
* History of the telescope
* Timeline of telescopes, observatories, and observing technology
* Timeline of microscope technology
* Timeline of particle physics technology
* Timeline of low-temperature technology
* Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology
* Timeline of spaceflight
=== Transport ===
* History of the automobile
* History of the bicycle
* Timeline of aviation
* Timeline of jet power
* Maritime timeline
* Timeline of motor and engine technology
*Timeline of motorized bicycle history
* Timeline of photography technology
*Timeline of railway history
* Timeline of rocket and missile technology
*Timeline of spaceflight
* History of communication
== See also ==

===Related history===

* History of mathematics
* History of philosophy
* History of science
* Outline of prehistoric technology
* Science tourism
* Timeline of historic inventions
===Related disciplines===

* Criticism of technology
* Intellectual history (field of study)
* History of science and technology (field of study)
* List of multiple discoveries
* Philosophy of technology
* Technical school
* Technology
* Technology dynamics (field of study)
===Related subjects===

* High technology
* Deindustrialization
* Disruptive innovation
* List of technologies
* Simple machine
== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Archibugi, Daniele, and Mario Planta. &quot;Measuring technological change through patents and innovation surveys.&quot; &quot;Technovation&quot; 16.9 (1996): 451–519. online
* Brush, S.G. (1988). &quot;The History of Modern Science: A Guide to the Second Scientific Revolution 1800–1950&quot;. Ames: Iowa State University Press.
* Bunch, Bryan and Hellemans, Alexander, (1993) &quot;The Timetables of Technology&quot;, New York, Simon &amp; Schuster.
* Castro, J. Justin. &quot;History of technology in nineteenth and twentieth century Latin America,&quot; &quot;History Compass&quot; 18#3 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1111/hic3.12609
* Derry, Thomas Kingston and Williams, Trevor I., (1993) &quot;A Short History of Technology: From the Earliest Times to A.D. 1900&quot; New York: Dover Publications.
* Greenwood, Jeremy (1997) &quot;The Third Industrial Revolution: Technology, Productivity and Income Inequality&quot; AEI Press.
* Kranzberg, Melvin and Pursell, Carroll W. Jr., eds. (1967) &quot;Technology in Western Civilization: Technology in the Twentieth Century&quot; New York: Oxford University Press.
* Landa, Manuel de, &quot;War in the Age of Intelligent Machines&quot;, 2001.
* Olby, R.C. et al., eds. (1996). &quot;Companion to the History of Modern Science&quot;. New York, Routledge.
* Pacey, Arnold, (1974, 2ed 1994), &quot;The Maze of Ingenuity&quot;, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, 
* Popplow, Marcus, &quot;Technology&quot;, EGO – European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2017, retrieved: March 8, 2021 (pdf).
* Singer, C., Holmyard, E.J., Hall, A.R. and Williams, T.I. (eds.), (1954–59 and 1978) A History of Technology, 7 vols., Oxford, Clarendon Press. (Vols 6 and 7, 1978, ed. T. I. Williams)


== External links ==
* &quot;Electropaedia on the History of Technology&quot; 
* MIT 6.933J – The Structure of Engineering Revolutions. From MIT OpenCourseWare, course materials (graduate level) for a course on the history of technology through a Thomas Kuhn-ian lens.
* Concept of Civilization Events. From Jaroslaw Kessler, a chronology of &quot;civilizing events&quot;.
* Ancient and Medieval City Technology
* Society for the History of Technology
* Giants of Science (website of the Institute of National Remembrance)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q465352" start="4" end="25" title="History of technology" label="history of technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="141" end="152" title="stone tools" label="stone tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="168" end="187" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q207241" start="437" end="449" title="applied arts" label="applied arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="668" end="680" title="technologies" label="technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099911" start="694" end="715" title="scientific instrument" label="scientific instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797" start="817" end="832" title="applied science" label="applied science"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="872" end="890" title="history of science" label="history of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q47398" start="967" end="983" title="economic history" label="economic history"/>
<link wikidata="Q762702" start="1113" end="1133" title="Technological change" label="Technological change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552605" start="1363" end="1375" title="sociologists" label="sociologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="1380" end="1395" title="anthropologists" label="anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990987" start="1409" end="1424" title="social theories" label="social theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050187" start="1438" end="1444" title="Sociocultural evolution" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q12031891" start="1449" end="1467" title="cultural evolution" label="cultural evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q313458" start="1480" end="1495" title="Lewis H. Morgan" label="Lewis H. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q382021" start="1497" end="1509" title="Leslie White" label="Leslie White"/>
<link wikidata="Q325840" start="1515" end="1529" title="Gerhard Lenski" label="Gerhard Lenski"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409498" start="1714" end="1723" title="Primitive culture" label="barbarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="1729" end="1741" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883388" start="2026" end="2043" title="Human development (humanity)" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326504" start="2141" end="2161" title="domestication of animals" label="domesticated animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="2208" end="2231" title="Neolithic Revolution" label="agricultural revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="2281" end="2297" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="2343" end="2357" title="Nuclear power" label="nuclear energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q318814" start="2747" end="2764" title="Nikolai Kardashev" label="Nikolai Kardashev"/>
<link wikidata="Q647332" start="2803" end="2818" title="Kardashev scale" label="Kardashev scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="2999" end="3018" title="natural environment" label="natural environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633560" start="3139" end="3163" title="history of communication" label="history of communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="3210" end="3214" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488994" start="3249" end="3258" title="sentience" label="sentience"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="3371" end="3376" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="3464" end="3489" title="communications technology" label="communications technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="3525" end="3540" title="economic system" label="economic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q28108" start="3545" end="3561" title="political system" label="political system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415386" start="3563" end="3585" title="distribution of wealth" label="distribution of wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431887" start="3587" end="3604" title="social inequality" label="social inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="3739" end="3754" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q917614" start="3806" end="3816" title="Industrial society" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q297425" start="4757" end="4770" title="Alvin Toffler" label="Alvin Toffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916554" start="4788" end="4800" title="Future Shock" label="Future Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q316330" start="4809" end="4820" title="Daniel Bell" label="Daniel Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348632" start="4825" end="4838" title="John Naisbitt" label="John Naisbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q824362" start="4871" end="4896" title="post-industrial society" label="post-industrial societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q917614" start="4930" end="4948" title="industrial society" label="industrial society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="4974" end="4982" title="Service (economics)" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802622" start="5119" end="5126" title="Fictional technology" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q237525" start="5183" end="5194" title="Technological singularity" label="singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q217043" start="5327" end="5334" title="Olduvai Gorge" label="Olduvai"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="5335" end="5351" title="stone technology" label="stone technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q746287" start="5353" end="5360" title="Oldowan" label="Oldowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210774" start="5451" end="5460" title="Acheulean" label="Acheulean"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="5560" end="5571" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="5585" end="5597" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9747038" start="5610" end="5631" title="1 E13 s" label="1.5 Million years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757641" start="5664" end="5671" title="Javelin" label="Javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146890" start="5696" end="5716" title="Homo sapiens sapiens" label="Homo sapiens sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="5777" end="5781" title="adhesive" label="Glue"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="5843" end="5853" title="Stone tool" label="Stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q186266" start="5863" end="5880" title="Homo floresiensis" label="Homo floresiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9747038" start="5891" end="5908" title="1 E12 s" label="100,000 years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q207574" start="5912" end="5919" title="Harpoon" label="Harpoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="5942" end="5955" title="Bow and arrow" label="Bow and arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q142690" start="5985" end="5998" title="Sewing needle" label="Sewing needle"/>
<link wikidata="Q271598" start="6050" end="6061" title="Fishing net" label="Fishing net"/>
<link wikidata="Q164777" start="6111" end="6120" title="Microlith" label="Microlith"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="6153" end="6160" title="Ceramic" label="Ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205276" start="6177" end="6189" title="Fish hook" label="Fishing hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="6215" end="6228" title="Domestication" label="Domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q199771" start="6256" end="6270" title="Sling (weapon)" label="Sling (weapon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="6396" end="6402" title="plough" label="plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q236279" start="6435" end="6441" title="Gnomon" label="Gnomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="6455" end="6469" title="Writing system" label="Writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="6504" end="6510" title="Bronze" label="Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="6542" end="6549" title="Chariot" label="Chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q80793" start="6581" end="6588" title="Sundial" label="Sundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q184393" start="6620" end="6628" title="Catapult" label="Catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="6641" end="6650" title="Cast iron" label="Cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q192130" start="6663" end="6672" title="Horseshoe" label="Horseshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q191657" start="6685" end="6692" title="Stirrup" label="Stirrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="6777" end="6788" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q912205" start="7014" end="7018" title="control of fire by early humans" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501507" start="7024" end="7032" title="History of clothing and textiles" label="clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="7201" end="7213" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="7309" end="7317" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384313" start="7329" end="7346" title="Great Rift Valley, Kenya" label="Great Rift Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="7410" end="7420" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q746287" start="7442" end="7449" title="Oldowan" label="Oldowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="7564" end="7575" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669978" start="7744" end="7748" title="lithic core" label="core"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="7811" end="7816" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915181" start="7836" end="7847" title="hammerstone" label="hammerstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728731" start="7938" end="7946" title="chopper (archaeology)" label="choppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605626" start="7950" end="7958" title="scraper (archaeology)" label="scrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="8012" end="8027" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="8133" end="8139" title="Bone marrow" label="marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q210774" start="8377" end="8386" title="Acheulian" label="Acheulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q479448" start="8502" end="8510" title="hand axe" label="hand axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="8562" end="8579" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="8586" end="8604" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="Middle Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240638" start="8667" end="8690" title="prepared-core technique" label="prepared-core technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="8768" end="8785" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142470" start="8853" end="8869" title="pressure flaking" label="pressure flaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q916207" start="8901" end="8906" title="punch (engineering)" label="punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="9036" end="9053" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q829005" start="9079" end="9093" title="Epipaleolithic" label="Epipaleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="9096" end="9106" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164777" start="9154" end="9164" title="microliths" label="microliths"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="9338" end="9347" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="9444" end="9449" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="9451" end="9455" title="jade" label="jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q422173" start="9457" end="9464" title="jadeite" label="jadeite"/>
<link wikidata="Q917402" start="9470" end="9480" title="Greenschist" label="greenstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308299" start="9877" end="9888" title="Projectile point" label="projectiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605626" start="9902" end="9910" title="Scraper (archaeology)" label="scrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q761684" start="10020" end="10025" title="Prehistoric music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454605" start="10051" end="10058" title="Prehistoric warfare" label="warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q639140" start="10100" end="10115" title="outrigger canoe" label="outrigger canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427867" start="10139" end="10148" title="History of Papua New Guinea" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="10160" end="10177" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="10206" end="10216" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="10331" end="10351" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="10562" end="10575" title="cave painting" label="cave painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842924" start="10588" end="10603" title="prehistoric art" label="prehistoric art"/>
<link wikidata="Q131397" start="10617" end="10636" title="Venus of Willendorf" label="Venus of Willendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="10738" end="10745" title="mummy" label="mummies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="11073" end="11081" title="smelting" label="smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="11171" end="11175" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645335" start="11348" end="11364" title="arsenical bronze" label="arsenical bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501203" start="11392" end="11405" title="work hardening" label="work hardened"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="11440" end="11446" title="Bronze" label="Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807847" start="11615" end="11653" title="Tin sources and trade in ancient times" label="Tin sources and trade in ancient times"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="12195" end="12211" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q475234" start="12305" end="12321" title="three-age system" label="three-age system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="12395" end="12402" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q639411" start="12484" end="12499" title="Spinifex People" label="Spinifex People"/>
<link wikidata="Q917695" start="12505" end="12516" title="Sentinelese people" label="Sentinelese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823449" start="12953" end="12966" title="Meteoric iron" label="Meteoric iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="13074" end="13082" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q964257" start="13108" end="13121" title="bloomery" label="iron smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q193057" start="13694" end="13701" title="forging" label="forging"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="14007" end="14016" title="hill fort" label="hill fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="14335" end="14346" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="14378" end="14383" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q150996" start="14389" end="14398" title="Akkad (city)" label="Akkadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="14400" end="14407" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="14414" end="14423" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="14552" end="14561" title="true arch" label="true arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q209287" start="14622" end="14641" title="Wonder of the World" label="Wonder of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="14916" end="14925" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q186713" start="15215" end="15230" title="simple machines" label="simple machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q592289" start="15331" end="15345" title="wheel and axle" label="wheel and axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128390" start="15380" end="15399" title="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="15413" end="15424" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q446" start="15502" end="15517" title="wheeled vehicle" label="wheeled vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="15591" end="15596" title="wagon" label="wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570005" start="15607" end="15618" title="clay tablet" label="clay tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="15619" end="15630" title="pictographs" label="pictographs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15638" end="15652" title="Uruk#Eanna District" label="Eanna district"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="15656" end="15660" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q40164" start="15701" end="15706" title="lever" label="lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q837176" start="15723" end="15730" title="shadoof" label="shadoof"/>
<link wikidata="Q178692" start="15763" end="15768" title="Crane (machine)" label="crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823319" start="15835" end="15862" title="ancient Egyptian technology" label="ancient Egyptian technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48378" start="15903" end="15909" title="pulley" label="pulley"/>
<link wikidata="Q764323" start="15973" end="15978" title="Screw (simple machine)" label="screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="16069" end="16081" title="Neo-Assyrian" label="Neo-Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207140" start="16121" end="16132" title="Sennacherib" label="Sennacherib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047037" start="16228" end="16238" title="screw pump" label="screw pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q765814" start="16333" end="16341" title="Lost-wax casting" label="lost wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q751861" start="16456" end="16487" title="Babylonian astronomical diaries" label="Babylonian astronomical diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="16629" end="16640" title="water wheel" label="water wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="16646" end="16655" title="watermill" label="watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="16674" end="16691" title="ancient Near East" label="ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="16735" end="16749" title="Persian Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="16806" end="16812" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="16844" end="16855" title="water power" label="water power"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999" start="16946" end="16950" title="sail" label="sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="16974" end="16983" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q161462" start="17112" end="17116" title="inclined plane" label="ramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12516" start="17207" end="17214" title="pyramid" label="pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q186713" start="17261" end="17280" title="Simple machine" label="Six Simple Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q161462" start="17340" end="17354" title="inclined plane" label="inclined plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q131408" start="17360" end="17365" title="wedge" label="wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q40164" start="17375" end="17380" title="lever" label="lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q37200" start="17551" end="17572" title="Great Pyramid of Giza" label="Great Pyramid of Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="17642" end="17649" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="19629" end="19654" title="Indus Valley Civilization" label="Indus Valley Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="19700" end="19708" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418323" start="19789" end="19812" title="Sanitation of the Indus Valley Civilisation" label="sanitation technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120985" start="19885" end="19899" title="Vaastu Shastra" label="Vaastu Shastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q747986" start="20081" end="20119" title="History of science and technology in China" label="technological contributions from China"/>
<link wikidata="Q864135" start="20159" end="20170" title="binary code" label="binary code"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="20204" end="20227" title="Seismometer" label="seismological detectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q37507" start="20229" end="20234" title="match" label="match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343028" start="20245" end="20261" title="Helicopter rotor" label="Helicopter rotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q350514" start="20263" end="20280" title="Raised-relief map" label="Raised-relief map"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="20313" end="20322" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q208103" start="20352" end="20359" title="bellows" label="bellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="20370" end="20376" title="plough" label="plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q604716" start="20393" end="20403" title="seed drill" label="seed drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="20441" end="20448" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="20454" end="20460" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="20466" end="20474" title="crossbow" label="crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780829" start="20480" end="20502" title="South Pointing Chariot" label="South Pointing Chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261053" start="20798" end="20812" title="block printing" label="block printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="20814" end="20835" title="movable type" label="movable type printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q950318" start="20873" end="20884" title="chain drive" label="chain drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="20936" end="20942" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="21017" end="21026" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="21147" end="21159" title="Ming Dynasty" label="Ming Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="21170" end="21182" title="Treasure voyages" label="large fleets"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="21267" end="21285" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q446185" start="21289" end="21310" title="History of the Mediterranean region" label="Mediterranean history"/>
<link wikidata="Q551888" start="21344" end="21370" title="Alexander&amp;#x27;s conquests" label="Alexander&amp;#x27;s conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="21404" end="21428" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenistic civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="21457" end="21462" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="21467" end="21476" title="Near-East" label="Near-East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301962" start="21496" end="21517" title="Eastern Mediterranean" label="Eastern Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="21540" end="21547" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="21549" end="21555" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="21560" end="21565" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="21572" end="21587" title="Ptolemaic Egypt" label="Ptolemaic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338367" start="21685" end="21690" title="Greeks in Egypt" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="21692" end="21700" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="21710" end="21717" title="Persian people" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="21722" end="21731" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704909" start="21861" end="21888" title="Ancient Greek technology" label="inventions and improvements"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="21917" end="21935" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="22108" end="22129" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="22133" end="22148" title="Ptolemaic Egypt" label="Ptolemaic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q684645" start="22193" end="22200" title="museion" label="museion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="22292" end="22302" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q334570" start="22304" end="22322" title="Philo of Byzantium" label="Philo of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q161853" start="22324" end="22329" title="Hero of Alexandria" label="Heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q41766" start="22331" end="22340" title="Ctesibius" label="Ctesibius"/>
<link wikidata="Q202001" start="22346" end="22354" title="Archytas" label="Archytas"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="22678" end="22689" title="water-wheel" label="water-wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130760" start="22726" end="22733" title="turbine" label="turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189155" start="22735" end="22757" title="Archimedes&amp;#x27; screw" label="Archimedes&amp;#x27; screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038362" start="22797" end="22807" title="force pump" label="force pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q745837" start="22813" end="22825" title="suction pump" label="suction pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038362" start="22845" end="22856" title="piston pump" label="piston pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739959" start="22880" end="22890" title="chain pump" label="chain pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q918236" start="22907" end="22918" title="water organ" label="water organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q194173" start="23077" end="23086" title="Water clock" label="clepsydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="23155" end="23170" title="feedback" label="feedback system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137941" start="23179" end="23189" title="escapement" label="escapement"/>
<link wikidata="Q143873" start="23324" end="23328" title="gear" label="gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q787116" start="23447" end="23455" title="automata" label="automata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775122" start="23494" end="23503" title="washstand" label="washstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q495933" start="23593" end="23596" title="Cam (mechanism)" label="cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146104" start="23601" end="23607" title="gimbal" label="gimbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182324" start="23615" end="23636" title="Antikythera mechanism" label="Antikythera mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="23648" end="23666" title="analog computer" label="analogous computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193137" start="23682" end="23699" title="differential gear" label="differential gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="23709" end="23718" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q184393" start="23827" end="23835" title="catapult" label="catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350168" start="23844" end="23856" title="gastraphetes" label="gastraphetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227060" start="23919" end="23926" title="dioptra" label="dioptra"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="23964" end="23974" title="lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q843596" start="23976" end="23991" title="central heating" label="central heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q955894" start="23995" end="24053" title="Tunnel of Eupalinos" label="tunnel excavated from both ends by scientific calculations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226902" start="24063" end="24076" title="Diolkos" label="ship trackway"/>
<link wikidata="Q258534" start="24142" end="24147" title="winch" label="winch"/>
<link wikidata="Q745105" start="24156" end="24164" title="odometer" label="odometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828546" start="24215" end="24232" title="List of ancient spiral stairs" label="spiral staircases"/>
<link wikidata="Q950318" start="24238" end="24249" title="chain drive" label="chain drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12408" start="24251" end="24267" title="caliper" label="sliding calipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="24309" end="24321" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="24336" end="24342" title="Roman Italy" label="Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="24361" end="24381" title="Mediterranean region" label="Mediterranean region"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="24512" end="24525" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="24543" end="24550" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="24552" end="24562" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="24564" end="24569" title="Roman Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="24579" end="24585" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="24592" end="24603" title="Roman Egypt" label="Roman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="24801" end="24805" title="Roman law" label="laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="24886" end="24899" title="Roman road" label="road-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367947" start="25039" end="25052" title="reaper" label="Gallic reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413460" start="25128" end="25143" title="Ancient Roman engineering" label="Roman engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005031" start="25187" end="25200" title="List of Roman amphitheatres" label="amphitheatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="25202" end="25211" title="Roman aqueduct" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="25213" end="25225" title="Thermae" label="public baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223230" start="25227" end="25244" title="Roman bridge" label="true arch bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="25246" end="25253" title="harbour" label="harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q213924" start="25374" end="25386" title="Codex" label="book (Codex)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185286" start="25388" end="25401" title="glass blowing" label="glass blowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q161853" start="25684" end="25702" title="Hero of Alexandria" label="Hero of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="25738" end="25748" title="wind-power" label="wind-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q161853" start="25774" end="25779" title="Hero of Alexandria" label="Heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="25828" end="25839" title="steam-power" label="steam-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q338613" start="25854" end="25863" title="aeolipile" label="aeolipile"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="25943" end="25958" title="vending machine" label="vending machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="26100" end="26104" title="Inca" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="26109" end="26113" title="Maya peoples" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="26376" end="26384" title="drainage" label="drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q191667" start="26489" end="26500" title="hydroponics" label="hydroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="26579" end="26596" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q181427" start="27026" end="27034" title="Palenque" label="Palenque"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="27066" end="27071" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q750176" start="27198" end="27207" title="chinampas" label="chinampas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="27212" end="27223" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="27517" end="27522" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979954" start="27528" end="27570" title="Native American inventions and innovations" label="Native American inventions and innovations"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="27866" end="27879" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="27937" end="27950" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="28133" end="28142" title="caliphate" label="caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="28266" end="28283" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="28302" end="28321" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="28485" end="28497" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="28639" end="28657" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477405" start="28685" end="28713" title="Arab Agricultural Revolution" label="Arab Agricultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="28791" end="28836" title="Golden Age of Islam" label="8th to the 13th century in the Islamic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="28844" end="28853" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="28882" end="28886" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q10513540" start="28897" end="28911" title="Islamic economics in the world" label="Muslim traders"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="29126" end="29142" title="animal husbandry" label="animal husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="29144" end="29154" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="29213" end="29221" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="29417" end="29427" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q184037" start="29454" end="29465" title="tidal power" label="tidal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="29467" end="29477" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="29479" end="29490" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585730" start="29646" end="29653" title="fulling" label="fulling"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="29661" end="29670" title="gristmill" label="gristmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q371996" start="29673" end="29680" title="Rice huller" label="hullers"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="29682" end="29689" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281709" start="29692" end="29701" title="ship mill" label="ship mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q364000" start="29704" end="29714" title="stamp mill" label="stamp mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069494" start="29717" end="29727" title="steel mill" label="steel mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q493694" start="29734" end="29743" title="tide mill" label="tide mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q644997" start="29883" end="29896" title="water turbine" label="water turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q143873" start="29902" end="29906" title="gear" label="gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="29970" end="29974" title="dams" label="dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="30039" end="30048" title="watermill" label="watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="30143" end="30153" title="Wind-power" label="Wind-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730505" start="30218" end="30227" title="wind pump" label="wind pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="30260" end="30264" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="30266" end="30277" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820305" start="30416" end="30427" title="Sugarcane mill" label="Sugar mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="30450" end="30472" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="medieval Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="30581" end="30592" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="30607" end="30611" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="30627" end="30633" title="almond" label="almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="30639" end="30645" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="30683" end="30693" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q335415" start="30888" end="30899" title="papermaking" label="papermaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="30925" end="30935" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437641" start="30949" end="30956" title="Abbasid Dynasty" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="30961" end="30968" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="31002" end="31011" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q177836" start="31105" end="31122" title="potassium nitrate" label="potassium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58966" start="31144" end="31158" title="spinning wheel" label="spinning wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="31179" end="31192" title="Islamic world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q49015" start="31289" end="31303" title="spinning jenny" label="spinning jenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="31329" end="31350" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49718" start="31356" end="31366" title="crankshaft" label="crankshaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q81627" start="31383" end="31392" title="Al-Jazari" label="Al-Jazari"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="31449" end="31461" title="steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="31463" end="31489" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="31494" end="31511" title="automatic control" label="automatic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q13707" start="31518" end="31526" title="camshaft" label="camshaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4303335" start="31581" end="31602" title="Program (machine)" label="programmable machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q646683" start="31653" end="31668" title="music sequencer" label="music sequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="31685" end="31703" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q423210" start="31751" end="31760" title="Banu Musa" label="Banu Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116191" start="31796" end="31821" title="Book of Ingenious Devices" label="Book of Ingenious Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q787116" start="31890" end="31898" title="automata" label="automata"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="31899" end="31904" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q787116" start="31925" end="31934" title="automaton" label="automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q831698" start="31996" end="32008" title="drum machine" label="drum machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q853854" start="32101" end="32113" title="castle clock" label="castle clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="32117" end="32127" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275" start="32141" end="32159" title="astronomical clock" label="astronomical clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="32196" end="32208" title="Computer programming" label="programmable"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="32209" end="32224" title="analog computer" label="analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="32234" end="32248" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189859" start="32270" end="32283" title="steam turbine" label="steam turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379164" start="32308" end="32344" title="Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma&amp;#x27;ruf" label="Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma&amp;#x27;ruf"/>
<link wikidata="Q491507" start="32348" end="32361" title="Ottoman Egypt" label="Ottoman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q22847" start="32400" end="32404" title="Rotisserie" label="spit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339914" start="32500" end="32510" title="steam jack" label="steam jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q381039" start="32577" end="32589" title="John Wilkins" label="John Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q983820" start="32803" end="32813" title="Lynn White" label="Lynn White"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="32952" end="32968" title="mechanical clock" label="mechanical clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q37501" start="32971" end="32981" title="spectacles" label="spectacles"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="32995" end="33003" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q43065" start="33103" end="33112" title="watermark" label="watermark"/>
<link wikidata="Q870870" start="33120" end="33137" title="push button" label="functional button"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="33187" end="33203" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="33255" end="33261" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164174" start="33264" end="33275" title="lateen sail" label="lateen sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230946" start="33282" end="33293" title="dry compass" label="dry compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="33317" end="33326" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391846" start="33412" end="33424" title="plate armour" label="plate armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="33432" end="33440" title="crossbow" label="crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="33446" end="33452" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q935723" start="33554" end="33563" title="rib vault" label="rib vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="33568" end="33580" title="arch" label="pointed arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="33610" end="33622" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic style"/>
<link wikidata="Q335415" start="33740" end="33751" title="Papermaking" label="Papermaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="33939" end="33967" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="Umayyad conquest of Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q983820" start="34120" end="34143" title="Lynn Townsend White Jr." label="Lynn Townsend White Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1958442" start="34421" end="34431" title="millwright" label="millwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193676" start="34725" end="34740" title="De re metallica" label="De re metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q364000" start="34962" end="34980" title="Stamp mill" label="ore stamping mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="35066" end="35079" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="35253" end="35267" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="35608" end="35627" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="linear perceptivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="35629" end="35647" title="Santa Maria del Fiore" label="double shell domes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12797" start="35651" end="35667" title="Bastion fortress" label="Bastion fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398560" start="35726" end="35733" title="Taccola" label="Taccola"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="35738" end="35755" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="35891" end="35903" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="35918" end="35930" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="35957" end="35975" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q178692" start="36065" end="36070" title="crane (machine)" label="crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="36215" end="36224" title="cross-bow" label="cross-bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="36248" end="36257" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="36357" end="36363" title="Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288583" start="36410" end="36429" title="History of science in the Renaissance" label="Renaissance science"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="36442" end="36463" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q220635" start="36592" end="36599" title="carrack" label="carrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="36613" end="36631" title="Age of Exploration" label="Age of Exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="36641" end="36678" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="36694" end="36707" title="Francis Bacon (philosopher)" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233830" start="36721" end="36733" title="New Atlantis" label="New Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="36755" end="36768" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q174432" start="36770" end="36776" title="Pedro Álvares Cabral" label="Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="36778" end="36786" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="36791" end="36811" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8507766" start="37154" end="37174" title="History of longitude" label="problem of longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307829" start="37203" end="37215" title="Marine chronometer" label="chronometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923776" start="37262" end="37272" title="civil code" label="civil code"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933138" start="37358" end="37372" title="stocking frame" label="stocking frame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37688" end="37705" title="Thomas Savery#First steam engine mechanism" label="Savery steam pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224989" start="37721" end="37742" title="Newcomen atmospheric engine" label="Newcomen steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="37923" end="37930" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="37944" end="37965" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="38042" end="38052" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19768" start="38085" end="38097" title="machine tool" label="machine tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202252" start="38337" end="38351" title="flying shuttle" label="flying shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274449" start="38429" end="38443" title="spinning frame" label="spinning frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q49015" start="38479" end="38493" title="spinning jenny" label="spinning jenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751504" start="38608" end="38619" title="water frame" label="water frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413723" start="38721" end="38734" title="spinning mule" label="spinning mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q140692" start="38756" end="38771" title="Samuel Crompton" label="Samuel Crompton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353185" start="38809" end="38819" title="power loom" label="power loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="38885" end="38897" title="steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="39698" end="39702" title="Coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="39729" end="39742" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q99200" start="39858" end="39873" title="The Iron Bridge" label="The Iron Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="40350" end="40359" title="steamboat" label="steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398696" start="40392" end="40424" title="Liverpool and Manchester Railway" label="Liverpool and Manchester Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q777026" start="40484" end="40501" title="Rocket locomotive" label="Rocket locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q328728" start="40505" end="40522" title="Robert Stephenson" label="Robert Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="40554" end="40565" title="steam locomotive" label="locomotives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397030" start="40607" end="40613" title="Block and tackle" label="blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399543" start="40643" end="40665" title="Portsmouth Block Mills" label="Portsmouth Block Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="40706" end="40721" title="mass production" label="mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q19768" start="40723" end="40736" title="Machine tools" label="Machine tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q329017" start="40829" end="40844" title="Richard Roberts (engineer)" label="Richard Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q712307" start="40849" end="40865" title="Joseph Whitworth" label="Joseph Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q871913" start="40886" end="40907" title="interchangeable parts" label="interchangeable parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745548" start="40939" end="40971" title="American system of manufacturing" label="American system of manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="41120" end="41137" title="Enlightenment era" label="Enlightenment era"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078604" start="41167" end="41194" title="History of water supply and sanitation" label="water supply and sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527878" start="41306" end="41317" title="sand filter" label="sand filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q211870" start="41394" end="41411" title="Paisley, Scotland" label="Paisley, Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143209" start="41579" end="41592" title="James Simpson (engineer)" label="James Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962238" start="41601" end="41627" title="Chelsea Waterworks Company" label="Chelsea Waterworks Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q656656" start="41668" end="41677" title="Tap (valve)" label="water tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q217039" start="41740" end="41749" title="Rotherham" label="Rotherham"/>
<link wikidata="Q356407" start="41906" end="41915" title="John Snow (physician)" label="John Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035019" start="41927" end="41961" title="1854 Broad Street cholera outbreak" label="1854 Broad Street cholera outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q217200" start="42328" end="42356" title="Second Industrial Revolution" label="Second Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="42468" end="42479" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="42625" end="42635" title="Telegraphy" label="Telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="43132" end="43155" title="incandescent light bulb" label="incandescent light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576212" start="43310" end="43323" title="Spencer Trask" label="Spencer Trask"/>
<link wikidata="Q49013" start="43720" end="43734" title="sewing machine" label="sewing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="43740" end="43762" title="agricultural machinery" label="agricultural machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="44012" end="44028" title="Ironclad warship" label="Ironclad warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="44192" end="44203" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q311666" start="44338" end="44348" title="projector" label="projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="44506" end="44516" title="phonograph" label="phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="44559" end="44588" title="sound film" label="synchronized sound recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="44640" end="44655" title="cinematography" label="cinematographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="44710" end="44725" title="Mass production" label="Mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="44734" end="44744" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q192386" start="44796" end="44813" title="Military research" label="Military research"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="44865" end="44874" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="44879" end="44889" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q944584" start="44902" end="44911" title="telephony" label="telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="45029" end="45042" title="mobile phones" label="mobile phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="45064" end="45080" title="developing world" label="developing world"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="45178" end="45191" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="45213" end="45230" title="Manhattan project" label="Manhattan project"/>
<link wikidata="Q757669" start="45254" end="45264" title="Atomic Age" label="Atomic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="45266" end="45272" title="Rocket" label="Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q938328" start="45326" end="45335" title="space age" label="space age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076056" start="45409" end="45424" title="Electrification" label="Electrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="45678" end="45691" title="Birth control" label="Birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="45740" end="45760" title="Electron microscopes" label="Electron microscopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="45874" end="45893" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="45912" end="45926" title="test tube baby" label="test tube baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q234027" start="45933" end="45945" title="Louise Brown" label="Louise Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q334645" start="45998" end="46019" title="gestational surrogacy" label="gestational surrogacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28700" start="46065" end="46069" title="Intracytoplasmic sperm injection" label="ICSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501356" start="46134" end="46167" title="Preimplantation genetic diagnosis" label="Preimplantation genetic diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061219" start="46342" end="46349" title="Telecommunications engineering" label="telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="46354" end="46374" title="Fiber-optic network" label="fiber optic networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359305" start="46391" end="46408" title="optical amplifier" label="optical amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="46429" end="46444" title="Information Age" label="Information Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098878" start="46451" end="46469" title="optical networking" label="optical networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="46580" end="46606" title="Wavelength-division multiplexing" label="wave division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091783" start="46623" end="46633" title="Ciena" label="Ciena Corp"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="47114" end="47122" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="47133" end="47147" title="Racal-Millicom" label="Racal-Millicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q192446" start="48442" end="48462" title="Human Genome Project" label="Human Genome Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q659029" start="48471" end="48503" title="Large Electron–Positron Collider" label="Large Electron–Positron Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="48661" end="48676" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="48691" end="48705" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="48708" end="48719" title="Vaccination" label="Vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="48930" end="48961" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076056" start="49086" end="49101" title="Electrification" label="Electrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="49104" end="49114" title="Automobile" label="Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="49128" end="49140" title="Water supply" label="Water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="49160" end="49171" title="Electronics" label="Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520981" start="49197" end="49219" title="Mechanized agriculture" label="Mechanized agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="49246" end="49262" title="Air Conditioning" label="Air Conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="49267" end="49280" title="Refrigeration" label="Refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="49283" end="49291" title="Highways" label="Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="49294" end="49304" title="Spacecraft" label="Spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q115180053" start="49318" end="49336" title="Imaging technology" label="Imaging technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q212920" start="49339" end="49359" title="Household appliances" label="Household appliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519843" start="49362" end="49379" title="Health technology" label="Health technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="49396" end="49409" title="Petrochemical" label="Petrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="49425" end="49430" title="Laser" label="Laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="49435" end="49447" title="Fiber Optics" label="Fiber Optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q348091" start="49450" end="49468" title="Nuclear technology" label="Nuclear technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="49471" end="49488" title="Materials science" label="Materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="49564" end="49581" title="quantum computers" label="quantum computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213901" start="49583" end="49595" title="gene therapy" label="gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q229367" start="49615" end="49626" title="3D printing" label="3D printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="49646" end="49660" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q580689" start="49680" end="49694" title="bioengineering" label="bioengineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="49695" end="49708" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q348091" start="49710" end="49728" title="nuclear technology" label="nuclear technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="49730" end="49748" title="Materials science" label="advanced materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q60591" start="49771" end="49779" title="scramjet" label="scramjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195578" start="49784" end="49790" title="Unmanned combat air vehicle" label="drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q875724" start="49803" end="49810" title="railgun" label="railgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="49860" end="49877" title="superconductivity" label="superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q212923" start="49883" end="49892" title="memristor" label="memristor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077952" start="49925" end="49941" title="alternative fuel" label="alternative fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="49950" end="49960" title="fuel cells" label="fuel cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483388" start="49988" end="50002" title="plug-in hybrid" label="plug-in hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="50010" end="50027" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334829" start="50040" end="50060" title="wearable electronics" label="wearable electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="50062" end="50085" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="50119" end="50123" title="LEDs" label="LEDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="50125" end="50136" title="solar cells" label="solar cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="50138" end="50157" title="integrated circuits" label="integrated circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6856398" start="50159" end="50173" title="wireless power" label="wireless power"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="50196" end="50205" title="Battery (electricity)" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="50208" end="50229" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="50330" end="50346" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="50410" end="50430" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q583152" start="50459" end="50476" title="neutrino detector" label="neutrino detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="50479" end="50490" title="Dark matter" label="Dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q255371" start="50550" end="50554" title="LIGO" label="LIGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="50578" end="50596" title="gravitational wave" label="gravitational wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q26939" start="50675" end="50686" title="epigenetics" label="epigenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="50764" end="50775" title="spaceflight" label="spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="50791" end="50801" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q211727" start="50851" end="50856" title="Orion (spacecraft)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17122887" start="50875" end="50883" title="SpaceX Dragon 2" label="Dragon 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q148578" start="50903" end="50919" title="Space observatory" label="space telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="50933" end="50959" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51015" end="51033" title="Extremely large telescope#Colossus Telescope" label="Colossus Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="51059" end="51086" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="51119" end="51123" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="51128" end="51131" title="ESA" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q51075" start="51139" end="51160" title="human mission to Mars" label="human mission to Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q235195" start="51179" end="51225" title="Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket" label="Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706451" start="51336" end="51360" title="Breakthrough Initiatives" label="Breakthrough Initiatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808109" start="51383" end="51430" title="Breakthrough Starshot" label="the first ever spacecraft to visit another star"/>
<link wikidata="Q648588" start="51491" end="51510" title="Electric propulsion" label="Electric propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14266" start="51551" end="51567" title="Proxima Centauri" label="Proxima Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436084" start="51602" end="51630" title="List of potentially habitable exoplanets" label="potentially habitable planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26692445" start="51631" end="51649" title="Proxima Centauri b" label="Proxima Centauri b"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572206" start="51680" end="51715" title="SpaceShipOne flight 15P" label="first crewed commercial spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q918798" start="51721" end="51733" title="Mike Melvill" label="Mike Melvill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="51746" end="51763" title="boundary of space" label="boundary of space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935605" start="51823" end="51866" title="Timeline of agriculture and food technology" label="Timeline of agriculture and food technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062530" start="51869" end="51894" title="Timeline of biotechnology" label="Timeline of biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="51995" end="52001" title="harbor" label="harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="52020" end="52029" title="Surveying" label="Surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="52053" end="52064" title="cartography" label="cartography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805497" start="52102" end="52110" title="sanitary sewer" label="sewerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="52153" end="52167" title="Writing system" label="Writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630862" start="52192" end="52216" title="History of mobile phones" label="History of mobile phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q15272421" start="52219" end="52239" title="History of animation" label="History of animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086441" start="52242" end="52265" title="History of broadcasting" label="History of broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517472" start="52268" end="52284" title="History of radar" label="History of radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517374" start="52287" end="52303" title="History of radio" label="History of radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586120" start="52376" end="52397" title="Timeline of computing" label="Timeline of computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q186148" start="52400" end="52441" title="History of computing hardware" label="History of computing hardware before 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920631" start="52444" end="52489" title="History of computing hardware (1960s–present)" label="History of computing hardware (1960s–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682545" start="52492" end="52546" title="History of computer hardware in Eastern Bloc countries" label="History of computer hardware in Eastern Bloc countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189238" start="52549" end="52576" title="History of computer science" label="History of computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143393" start="52579" end="52607" title="History of operating systems" label="History of operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348143" start="52610" end="52641" title="History of software engineering" label="History of software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068652" start="52644" end="52676" title="History of programming languages" label="History of programming languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592244" start="52679" end="52713" title="History of artificial intelligence" label="History of artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9004240" start="52716" end="52755" title="History of the graphical user interface" label="History of the graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q193315" start="52758" end="52781" title="History of the Internet" label="History of the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393866" start="52784" end="52813" title="History of the World Wide Web" label="History of the World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133027" start="52816" end="52857" title="Timeline of free and open-source software" label="Timeline of free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q918316" start="52860" end="52882" title="History of video games" label="History of video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302108" start="52885" end="52932" title="Timeline of quantum computing and communication" label="Timeline of quantum computing and communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967183" start="52965" end="52996" title="Timeline of lighting technology" label="Timeline of lighting technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501507" start="52999" end="53031" title="History of clothing and textiles" label="History of clothing and textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868178" start="53034" end="53062" title="History of materials science" label="History of materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="53065" end="53092" title="Family and consumer science" label="Family and consumer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973962" start="53095" end="53114" title="History of knitting" label="History of knitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137024" start="53117" end="53138" title="History of lensmaking" label="History of lensmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870768" start="53141" end="53161" title="History of the chair" label="History of the chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q41607" start="53164" end="53187" title="History of the umbrella" label="History of the umbrella"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806050" start="53239" end="53288" title="Timeline of electrical and electronic engineering" label="Timeline of electrical and electronic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136978" start="53351" end="53373" title="History of coal mining" label="History of coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252268" start="53376" end="53412" title="History of perpetual motion machines" label="History of perpetual motion machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806082" start="53415" end="53449" title="Timeline of heat engine technology" label="Timeline of heat engine technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q576409" start="53452" end="53475" title="Timeline of steam power" label="Timeline of steam power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516913" start="53478" end="53501" title="Timeline of solar cells" label="Timeline of solar cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072671" start="53504" end="53537" title="Timeline of hydrogen technologies" label="Timeline of hydrogen technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806004" start="53540" end="53564" title="Timeline of alcohol fuel" label="Timeline of alcohol fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806129" start="53567" end="53593" title="Timeline of nuclear fusion" label="Timeline of nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016746" start="53623" end="53655" title="Timeline of materials technology" label="Timeline of materials technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="53658" end="53668" title="Metallurgy" label="Metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870966" start="53693" end="53729" title="History of time in the United States" label="History of time in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321131" start="53732" end="53762" title="History of timekeeping devices" label="History of timekeeping devices"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53801" end="53841" title="Military history#Technological evolution" label="Military history#Technological evolution"/>
<link wikidata="" start="53844" end="53870" title=":Category:Military history" label=":Category:Military history"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="53938" end="53955" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q757669" start="53958" end="53968" title="Atomic Age" label="Atomic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="53971" end="53986" title="Nuclear testing" label="Nuclear testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q550452" start="53989" end="54006" title="Nuclear arms race" label="Nuclear arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q472338" start="54041" end="54065" title="List of years in science" label="List of years in science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530956" start="54068" end="54092" title="History of the telescope" label="History of the telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806210" start="54095" end="54158" title="Timeline of telescopes, observatories, and observing technology" label="Timeline of telescopes, observatories, and observing technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q611618" start="54161" end="54194" title="Timeline of microscope technology" label="Timeline of microscope technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806141" start="54197" end="54236" title="Timeline of particle physics technology" label="Timeline of particle physics technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806098" start="54239" end="54277" title="Timeline of low-temperature technology" label="Timeline of low-temperature technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000508" start="54280" end="54339" title="Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology" label="Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446867" start="54342" end="54365" title="Timeline of spaceflight" label="Timeline of spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129377" start="54386" end="54411" title="History of the automobile" label="History of the automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059831" start="54414" end="54436" title="History of the bicycle" label="History of the bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088229" start="54439" end="54459" title="Timeline of aviation" label="Timeline of aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806087" start="54462" end="54483" title="Timeline of jet power" label="Timeline of jet power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765896" start="54486" end="54503" title="Maritime timeline" label="Maritime timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348825" start="54506" end="54545" title="Timeline of motor and engine technology" label="Timeline of motor and engine technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806115" start="54547" end="54584" title="Timeline of motorized bicycle history" label="Timeline of motorized bicycle history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088185" start="54587" end="54621" title="Timeline of photography technology" label="Timeline of photography technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137487" start="54623" end="54650" title="Timeline of railway history" label="Timeline of railway history"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389826" start="54653" end="54694" title="Timeline of rocket and missile technology" label="Timeline of rocket and missile technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446867" start="54696" end="54719" title="Timeline of spaceflight" label="Timeline of spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633560" start="54722" end="54746" title="History of communication" label="History of communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q185264" start="54788" end="54810" title="History of mathematics" label="History of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27654" start="54813" end="54834" title="History of philosophy" label="History of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="54837" end="54855" title="History of science" label="History of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q15855916" start="54858" end="54891" title="Outline of prehistoric technology" label="Outline of prehistoric technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10385531" start="54894" end="54909" title="Science tourism" label="Science tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088283" start="54912" end="54943" title="Timeline of historic inventions" label="Timeline of historic inventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260036" start="54973" end="54996" title="Criticism of technology" label="Criticism of technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195695" start="54999" end="55019" title="Intellectual history" label="Intellectual history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183341" start="55039" end="55072" title="History of science and technology" label="History of science and technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629550" start="55092" end="55120" title="List of multiple discoveries" label="List of multiple discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q279438" start="55123" end="55147" title="Philosophy of technology" label="Philosophy of technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692599" start="55182" end="55201" title="Technology dynamics" label="Technology dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192297" start="55285" end="55306" title="Disruptive innovation" label="Disruptive innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088283" start="55309" end="55329" title="List of technologies" label="List of technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q186713" start="55332" end="55346" title="Simple machine" label="Simple machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q556699" start="56501" end="56517" title="Manuel de Landa" label="Landa, Manuel de"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968622" start="56525" end="56563" title="War in the Age of Intelligent Machines" label="War in the Age of Intelligent Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637597" start="57271" end="57289" title="MIT OpenCourseWare" label="MIT OpenCourseWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q184980" start="57377" end="57392" title="Thomas Kuhn" label="Thomas Kuhn-ian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803664" wikidata="Q3180896" url="?curid=803664" title="John Brashear">
<text>John Alfred Brashear (November 24, 1840 – April 8, 1920) was an American astronomer and instrument builder.

== Life and work ==

Brashear was born in Brownsville, Pennsylvania, a town located 35 miles (56 km) south of Pittsburgh along the Monongahela River. His father, Basil Brown Brashear, worked as a saddler, while his mother, Julia Smith Brashear, was a school teacher. He was the oldest of seven children. As a young boy, John Brashear was profoundly influenced by his maternal grandfather, Nathanial Smith, who was a clock repairer. At the age of nine, his grandfather took him to peer through the telescope of &#x27;Squire&#x27; Joseph P. Wampler, who often set up his traveling telescope in Brownsville. This formative experience of viewing the moon and the planet Saturn stayed with Brashear throughout his life. After receiving a common school education until the age of 15, he began an apprenticeship with a machinist and had mastered his trade by the age of 20.

Beginning in 1861, Brashear worked as a millwright in a rolling steel mill in Pittsburgh. He pursued his passion for astronomy during the night, with the assistance of his wife Phoebe Stewart, a Sunday school teacher whom Brashear met in 1861 and married in 1862. With limited financial resources to purchase a telescope, Brashear constructed his own workshop using a three-meter-square coal shed behind his house. He then proceeded to build his own refractor.


Starting in 1880, Brashear dedicated his time to manufacturing astronomical as well as scientific instruments and conducting various experiments. He notably developed an improved silvering method, which would later become the standard for coating first surface mirrors, known as the &quot;Brashear Process,&quot; until vacuum metalizing began replacing it in 1932.

Brashear patented few instruments and never patented his techniques. He founded &quot;John A. Brashear Co.&quot; with his son-in-law and partner, James Brown McDowell (now a division of L-3 Communications, and still based in Pittsburgh). His instruments gained worldwide respect. Optical elements and instruments of precision produced by John Brashear were purchased for their quality by almost every important observatory in the world. Some are still in use today. A crew demolishing his factory found a time capsule that became an object of dispute.

In 1892 Brashear made his second of three trips to Europe, this time providing a lecture tour. In 1898 he became director of the Allegheny Observatory in Pittsburgh, continuing in this post until 1900.

From 1901 to 1904, he was acting chancellor of the Western University of Pennsylvania, now known as the University of Pittsburgh, after serving as a member of the board of trustees since 1896. Brashear also was a trustee of the Carnegie Institute of Technology and served as President of the Academy of Science and Art.

John and Phoebe Brashear were active in their church as well. He served as the choir director of Bingham Street Methodist Episcopal Church, and organized the Cantata Society, composed of church choirs from Pittsburgh&#x27;s South Side. During the Panama-Pacific Exposition (1915), in which a 20&quot; Warner-Swasey telescope with Brashear optics was displayed, Brashear was named &quot;the State&#x27;s most distinguished man&quot; by Pennsylvania&#x27;s Governor Martin Grove Brumbaugh. The telescope is still in use today at Chabot Space and Science Center at Oakland, California.

John Brashear was admired and beloved by fellow western Pennsylvanians and international astronomers, who familiarly called him &quot;Uncle John&quot;.

In 1919, he suffered ptomaine poisoning (an outdated term for food poisoning), which induced a debilitating illness lasting six months. He died at age 79 at his home on Perrysville Avenue. His body was held in state in the Great Hall of the Soldiers and Sailors Monument.

His ashes are interred in a crypt below the Keeler Telescope at Allegheny Observatory, along with those of his wife. A plaque on the crypt reads: &quot;We have loved the stars too fondly to be fearful of the night.&quot;, a paraphrase of the last line of the poem &quot;The Old Astronomer to His Pupil&quot; by Sarah Williams. He was survived by a daughter and several siblings.

==Honors==
* In 1902, he was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society.
*He was awarded the Elliott Cresson Medal of The Franklin Institute in 1910.
* The Brashear Association was founded in 1916 in his memory.
* In 2012, the John A. Brashear House and Factory at 1954 Perrysville Avenue in the Perry South neighborhood of Pittsburgh was listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

Named for him:
* The crater Brashear on the Moon
* The crater Brashear on Mars
* Asteroid 5502 Brashear
* Brashear High School in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (1976)
* Brashear Street in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
* One of the telescopes at the Goodsell Observatory
* The Brashear 11-Inch Refractor at the Nicholas E. Wagman Observatory near Pittsburgh.

==See also==

* List of astronomical instrument makers
* Chabot Space &amp; Science Center, Oakland, California

== References ==
== Further reading ==

* - See also later reprints.
* Obituary notices:
**

==External links==
* &quot;The Unexpected Hero of Light,&quot; Initial Condition podcast, Episode 9
* &quot;John A. Brashear&quot; History Cover Page
* &quot;Uncle John&quot; Brashear

Video
* Undaunted: The Forgotten Giants of the Allegheny Observatory
* WQED OnQ: John Brashear&#x27;s Legacy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3180896" start="0" end="20" title="John Brashear" label="John Alfred Brashear"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="73" end="83" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132976" start="151" end="176" title="Brownsville, Pennsylvania" label="Brownsville, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="219" end="229" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q643780" start="240" end="257" title="Monongahela River" label="Monongahela River"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="775" end="781" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958442" start="1017" end="1027" title="millwright" label="millwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="1094" end="1103" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="1288" end="1297" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657271" start="1619" end="1628" title="silvering" label="silvering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781428" start="1992" end="2010" title="L-3 Communications" label="L-3 Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q348" start="2311" end="2323" title="time capsule" label="time capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2410" end="2416" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q549937" start="2488" end="2509" title="Allegheny Observatory" label="Allegheny Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061" start="2595" end="2605" title="chancellor (education)" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="2613" end="2647" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="Western University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="2666" end="2690" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="2790" end="2822" title="Carnegie Institute of Technology" label="Carnegie Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q250578" start="3130" end="3155" title="Panama-Pacific Exposition" label="Panama-Pacific Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q658426" start="3347" end="3369" title="Martin Grove Brumbaugh" label="Martin Grove Brumbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557406" start="3861" end="3890" title="Soldiers and Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum" label="Soldiers and Sailors Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q549937" start="3957" end="3978" title="Allegheny Observatory" label="Allegheny Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422906" start="4204" end="4218" title="Sarah Williams (poet)" label="Sarah Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="4329" end="4359" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q817496" start="4381" end="4402" title="The Franklin Institute Awards" label="Elliott Cresson Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q339484" start="4406" end="4428" title="The Franklin Institute" label="The Franklin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229643" start="4515" end="4549" title="John A. Brashear House and Factory" label="John A. Brashear House and Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169892" start="4584" end="4595" title="Perry South (Pittsburgh)" label="Perry South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="4612" end="4622" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4641" end="4677" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923925" start="4708" end="4716" title="Brashear (lunar crater)" label="Brashear"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="4724" end="4728" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="4754" end="4758" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="4761" end="4769" title="Asteroid" label="Asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458116" start="4770" end="4783" title="5502 Brashear" label="5502 Brashear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957776" start="4786" end="4806" title="Brashear High School" label="Brashear High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583607" start="4919" end="4939" title="Goodsell Observatory" label="Goodsell Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606308" start="5045" end="5083" title="List of astronomical instrument makers" label="List of astronomical instrument makers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066015" start="5086" end="5119" title="Chabot Space &amp;amp; Science Center" label="Chabot Space &amp;amp; Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="5121" end="5140" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803665" wikidata="Q7710934" url="?curid=803665" title="That's Incredible!">
<text>That&#x27;s Incredible! is an American reality television show that aired on the ABC television network from 1980 to 1984. In the tradition of &quot;You Asked for It&quot;, &quot;Ripley&#x27;s Believe It or Not!&quot; and &quot;Real People&quot;, the show featured people performing stunts and reenactments of allegedly paranormal events. The show also often featured people with unusual talents, such as speed-talker John Moschitta Jr., who made his first national television appearance on the show, as well as scientific, medical, and technological breakthroughs such as the Taser and cryogenic corneal reshaping by lathe keratomileusis. The show&#x27;s catchphrase said by one of its hosts at the conclusion of a particularly amazing segment was the same as its title: &quot;That&#x27;s incredible!&quot;

Despite accusations of being &quot;sadistic&quot;, the series was a huge success and influenced many entertainers.

==Synopsis==
The show was co-hosted by Fran Tarkenton, John Davidson and Cathy Lee Crosby, and was produced by Alan Landsburg Productions. Originally aired as an hour-long program, episodes were later re-edited into 30-minute segments for syndication. It debuted on March 3, 1980.

A number of the stunts performed were dangerous, including juggling knives, staying inside a small box for hours, and one involving a man supposedly catching a bullet between his teeth. The dangerous nature of these stunts eventually prompted producers to augment the footage with the caption &quot;Do Not Try This Yourself&quot;. Steve Baker, also known as &quot;Mr. Escape&quot;, was frequently featured on the show.

In 1980, Tiger Woods appeared on the show at the age of 5, displaying his ability to putt a golf ball into a hole from different areas.

==Nielsen ratings==
The show ranked in the top 30 for its first four seasons, and ranked at #3 during its first season, but fell out of the top 50 during its final season.

# 1979–80: #3 (25.8 rating)
# 1980–81: #22 (20.5 rating)
# 1981–82: #28 (18.4 rating)
# 1982–83: #22 (18.3 rating)
# 1983–84: #58 (14.6 rating)

==Spin-off==
&quot;Those Amazing Animals&quot; is a reality television series about animals and their extraordinary lives. It was hosted by Burgess Meredith, Jim Stafford and Priscilla Presley. Also appearing were explorer Jacques-Yves Cousteau, undersea photographers Ron and Valerie Taylor, and Joan Embery of the San Diego Zoo. The series aired on ABC on Sunday nights from August 24, 1980, to August 23, 1981.

==Revival==
&quot;That&#x27;s Incredible!&quot; was revived for the 1988–89 season, hosted by Davidson, Cristina Ferrare and Tracey Gold, as &quot;Incredible Sunday&quot;.

==Syndication==
The show was seen weekends on Retro Television Network. It was also broadcast overseas in Australia and New Zealand.

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="39" end="57" title="reality television" label="reality television"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="81" end="84" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056924" start="149" end="165" title="You Asked for It" label="You Asked for It"/>
<link wikidata="Q18347981" start="179" end="211" title="List of Ripley&amp;#x27;s Believe It or Not! TV series" label="Ripley&amp;#x27;s Believe It or Not!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301013" start="228" end="239" title="Real People (TV program)" label="Real People"/>
<link wikidata="Q332102" start="320" end="330" title="paranormal" label="paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12745112" start="418" end="436" title="John Moschitta Jr." label="John Moschitta Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q9137247" start="577" end="582" title="Taser" label="Taser"/>
<link wikidata="Q564829" start="624" end="638" title="keratomileusis" label="keratomileusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285539" start="964" end="978" title="Fran Tarkenton" label="Fran Tarkenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228714" start="980" end="993" title="John Davidson (entertainer)" label="John Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q194647" start="998" end="1014" title="Cathy Lee Crosby" label="Cathy Lee Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707117" start="1036" end="1062" title="Alan Landsburg Productions" label="Alan Landsburg Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="1164" end="1175" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996821" start="1356" end="1373" title="Bullet catch" label="catching a bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611852" start="1538" end="1549" title="Steve Baker (illusionist)" label="Steve Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="1636" end="1647" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="2134" end="2159" title="reality television series" label="reality television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q343633" start="2222" end="2238" title="Burgess Meredith" label="Burgess Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689224" start="2240" end="2252" title="Jim Stafford" label="Jim Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q234773" start="2257" end="2274" title="Priscilla Presley" label="Priscilla Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q83233" start="2305" end="2326" title="Jacques-Yves Cousteau" label="Jacques-Yves Cousteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15613448" start="2351" end="2354" title="Ron Taylor (diver)" label="Ron"/>
<link wikidata="Q15613451" start="2359" end="2373" title="Valerie Taylor (diver)" label="Valerie Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205034" start="2379" end="2390" title="Joan Embery" label="Joan Embery"/>
<link wikidata="Q818395" start="2398" end="2411" title="San Diego Zoo" label="San Diego Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="2433" end="2436" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584995" start="2565" end="2579" title="1988–89 United States network television schedule" label="1988–89 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186344" start="2601" end="2617" title="Cristina Ferrare" label="Cristina Ferrare"/>
<link wikidata="Q262498" start="2622" end="2633" title="Tracey Gold" label="Tracey Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077724" start="2716" end="2740" title="Retro Television Network" label="Retro Television Network"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803667" wikidata="Q5357450" url="?curid=803667" title="Taro Hakase">
<text>is a Japanese musician who specialises as a violinist and composer.

==Biography==

===Career===
Hakase was involved in a Japanese band called Kryzler &amp; Kompany which formed while he was in college. He played the violin, while Tsuneyoshi Saito played keyboards, and Yoshinobu Takeshita played bass. Their first eponymous album was released in September 1990 and sold 74,000 copies. Their second, &quot;Kryzler And Company #&quot;, sold over 81,000 copies. Steve McClure of &quot;Billboard&quot; wrote that they have become &quot;Japan&#x27;s unlikeliest pop idols, attracting hordes of screaming fans, a far cry from the decorum and reserve usually shown by Japan&#x27;s classical music audiences.&quot; The band provided the music for Celine Dion&#x27;s single &quot;To Love You More&quot; which was recorded as the theme song for the Japanese drama &quot;Koibito Yo&quot; (My Dear Lover). The song reached number one on Billboard Japan. He then joined Dion on her nationwide promotional tour making television appearances and performed the song during her 1996–1997 Falling into You Tour and her 1998–1999 Let&#x27;s Talk About Love Tour as guest violinist. When Dion went on hiatus to have her son, Hakase pursued a solo career, and Kryzler &amp; Kompany disbanded after having produced 11 albums.

In 2006, to celebrate 10 years of his success, Hakase reunited with Dion in Las Vegas, Nevada during a performance of her show A New Day... to perform &quot;To Love You More&quot;.

He performed &quot;Addio monti (I promessi sposi)&quot; on the 2007 Ennio Morricone tribute album &quot;We All Love Ennio Morricone&quot;, and also co-composed the album &quot;Symphonic Poem &quot;Hope&quot;&quot; with Yuji Toriyama, a collection of themes used in promotional videos for &quot;Final Fantasy XII&quot;.

In his native Japan, his song &quot;Another Sky&quot; is All Nippon Airways&#x27; theme song, while &quot;Color Your Life&quot; is Shinsei Bank&#x27;s theme song.

On July 10, 2013, it was announced that he featured on D-Lite (Daesung) from BigBang&#x27;s song &quot;I Love You&quot;.

On May 20, 2014, he was featured on Namie Amuro&#x27;s song &quot;Can You Celebrate?&quot;, the song was rerecorded with a new vocals and new music video

On July 4, 2014, he was featured on a remix of American singer Ariana Grande&#x27;s song &quot;Baby I&quot;. It was included on the Japanese version of Grande&#x27;s second album &quot;My Everything&quot;.

Kryzler &amp; Kompany would later reunite. They released the album &quot;New World&quot; in February 2015 to commemorate their 25th anniversary.

===Personal life===
His wife is Japanese actress Mayuko Takata and they live together in Tokyo, Japan.

==Discography==
===Albums===
* &quot;Watashi&quot; (May 21, 1997)
* &quot;Canary&quot; (April 22, 1998, with Toshi)
* &quot;髪結い伊三次 Original Sound Track&quot; (May 21, 1999)
* &quot;Duets&quot; (October 21, 1999)
* &quot;Tango Nostalgia&quot; (タンゴ・ノスタルジア) (August 30, 2000)
* &quot;Violinism (Acoustic Best)&quot; (September 1, 2000)
* &quot;Endless Violin&quot; (September 5, 2001)
* &quot;The Best Track&quot; (August 21, 2002)
* &quot;Violinism II&quot; (October 2, 2002)
* &quot;Traveling Notes&quot; (October 8, 2003)
* &quot;Migration&quot; (November 27, 2003)
* &quot;What a Day...&quot; (November 15, 2004)
* &quot;Der Wunder: 葉加瀬太郎 meets 松本零士&quot; (November 25, 2004)
* &quot;Violinism with Love&quot; (October 5, 2005)
* &quot;The Best of Mozart Selected by Taro Hakase&quot; (May 3, 2006)
* &quot;Sweet Melodies: Taro Plays Hakase&quot; (September 6, 2006)
* &quot;Songs&quot; (July 4, 2007)
* &quot;Classical Tuning&quot; (September 10, 2008)
* &quot;The Best Track&quot; (September 2, 2009)
* &quot;My Favorite Songs&quot; (September 9, 2009)
* &quot;Emotionism&quot; (September 29, 2010)
* &quot;The Best of Taro Hakase&quot; (August 10, 2011)
* &quot;With One Wish&quot; (November 7, 2012)
* &quot;Japonism&quot; (August 21, 2013)
* &quot;Etupirka (Best Acoustic)&quot; (2014)

===Singles===
* &quot;Ben&quot; (May 21, 1997)
* &quot;Natural High&quot; (November 21, 1997, with Toshi)
* &quot;Brazil&quot; (November 21, 1997)
* &quot;So Nice (Summer Samba)&quot; (August 21, 1999)
* &quot;交響詩「希望」Symphonic Poem &#x27;Hope&#x27;&quot; (March 1, 2006)

===Collaborations===
* &quot;Baby I&quot; in collaboration with Ariana Grande, from &quot;My Everything&quot; Japanese edition (August 25, 2014)

== References ==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11500280" start="231" end="247" title="Tsuneyoshi Saito" label="Tsuneyoshi Saito"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="483" end="492" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="740" end="751" title="Celine Dion" label="Celine Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273327" start="772" end="788" title="To Love You More" label="To Love You More"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738705" start="1072" end="1093" title="Falling into You Tour" label="Falling into You Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3830998" start="1112" end="1143" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Talk About Love Tour" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Talk About Love Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="1382" end="1399" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q460086" start="1433" end="1445" title="A New Day..." label="A New Day..."/>
<link wikidata="Q23848" start="1556" end="1571" title="Ennio Morricone" label="Ennio Morricone"/>
<link wikidata="Q327594" start="1782" end="1799" title="Final Fantasy XII" label="Final Fantasy XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q204284" start="1865" end="1883" title="All Nippon Airways" label="All Nippon Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q571997" start="1939" end="1951" title="Shinsei Bank" label="Shinsei Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q194798" start="2027" end="2033" title="D-Lite" label="D-Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q282104" start="2049" end="2056" title="BigBang (South Korean band)" label="BigBang"/>
<link wikidata="Q266676" start="2130" end="2141" title="Namie Amuro" label="Namie Amuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935746" start="2160" end="2178" title="Can You Celebrate?" label="Can You Celebrate?"/>
<link wikidata="Q151892" start="2312" end="2325" title="Ariana Grande" label="Ariana Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q14127679" start="2344" end="2350" title="Baby I" label="Baby I"/>
<link wikidata="Q17297888" start="2434" end="2447" title="My Everything (Ariana Grande album)" label="My Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545193" start="2651" end="2664" title="Mayuko Takata" label="Mayuko Takata"/>
<link wikidata="Q360634" start="2815" end="2820" title="Toshi (musician)" label="Toshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14127679" start="4300" end="4306" title="Baby I" label="Baby I"/>
<link wikidata="Q151892" start="4335" end="4348" title="Ariana Grande" label="Ariana Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q17297888" start="4361" end="4374" title="My Everything (Ariana Grande album)" label="My Everything"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803668" wikidata="Q356875" url="?curid=803668" title="Cecrops">
<text>In Greek mythology, Cecrops (; Ancient Greek: Κέκροψ, &quot;Kékrops&quot;; &quot;gen&quot;.: Κέκροπος) may refer to two legendary kings of Athens: 

* Cecrops I, the first king of Athens.
* Cecrops II, son of Pandion I, king of Athens.
*Cecrops, son of Hephaestus.

== Notes ==

== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
*Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q356875" start="20" end="27" title="Cecrops" label="Cecrops"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="31" end="44" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="120" end="129" title="Greek mythology" label="legendary"/>
<link wikidata="Q780194" start="130" end="135" title="King of Athens" label="kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="136" end="145" title="Athens" label="of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q500739" start="151" end="160" title="Cecrops I" label="Cecrops I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="180" end="186" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q974346" start="190" end="200" title="Cecrops II" label="Cecrops II"/>
<link wikidata="Q865111" start="209" end="218" title="Pandion I" label="Pandion I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44384" start="253" end="263" title="Hephaestus" label="Hephaestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="299" end="310" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="611" end="631" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="817" end="826" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803669" wikidata="Q974346" url="?curid=803669" title="Cecrops II">
<text>In Greek mythology, Cecrops II (; Ancient Greek: Κέκροψ, &quot;Kékrops&quot;; &quot;gen&quot;.: Κέκροπος) was the legendary or semi-legendary seventh king of Athens and in whose reign the deeds of Dionysus and Perseus occurred.

== Family ==
Cecrops was the son of Pandion I, king of Athens and possibly the naiad Zeuxippe, and thus brother to Erechtheus, Butes, Procne, Philomela and Teuthras. In some accounts, his parents were identified to be King Erechtheus and the naiad Praxithea and thus he was brother to Pandorus, Metion, Protogeneia, Pandora, Procris, Creusa, Orithyia and Chthonia. His other possible siblings were Orneus, Thespius, Eupalamus, Sicyon and Merope.

Cecrops married Metiadusa, daughter of Eupalamus (his brother or a son of Metion), by whom he became the father of his heir, Pandion II.

== Mythology ==
After Poseidon having destroyed Erechtheus and his house during the war between Athens and Eleusis, Cecrops being the eldest of the dead king&#x27;s children, succeeded to the throne. He was chosen by the appointed judge Xuthus, his brother-in-law, who was accordingly banished from the land by the rest of the sons of Erechtheus.

After ruling for 40 years, he was ousted by Metion and Pandorus, and fled to Aegilia or Aegialea where he would die.

Cecrops was succeeded in Athens by his son Pandion II (though Pandion II has also been said to be his nephew, the son of Erechtheus).


==Notes==
== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Diodorus Siculus, &quot;The Library of History&quot; translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer&#x27;s Web Site
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2&quot;. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888–1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Lucius Mestrius Plutarchus, &quot;Lives&quot; with an English Translation by Bernadotte Perrin. Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press. London. William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. 1. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
*Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Stephanus of Byzantium, &quot;Stephani Byzantii Ethnicorum quae supersunt,&quot; edited by August Meineike (1790-1870), published 1849. A few entries from this important ancient handbook of place names have been translated by Brady Kiesling. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Suida, &quot;Suda Encyclopedia&quot; translated by Ross Scaife, David Whitehead, William Hutton, Catharine Roth, Jennifer Benedict, Gregory Hays, Malcolm Heath Sean M. Redmond, Nicholas Fincher, Patrick Rourke, Elizabeth Vandiver, Raphael Finkel, Frederick Williams, Carl Widstrand, Robert Dyer, Joseph L. Rife, Oliver Phillips and many others. Online version at the Topos Text Project.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q974346" start="20" end="27" title="Cecrops II" label="Cecrops"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="34" end="47" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="158" end="164" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="197" end="205" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="210" end="217" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q865111" start="265" end="274" title="Pandion I" label="Pandion I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="284" end="290" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q182037" start="308" end="313" title="naiad" label="naiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28071422" start="314" end="322" title="Zeuxippe" label="Zeuxippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q301219" start="344" end="354" title="Erechtheus" label="Erechtheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56234353" start="356" end="361" title="Butes" label="Butes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231743" start="363" end="369" title="Procne" label="Procne"/>
<link wikidata="Q115449" start="371" end="380" title="Philomela" label="Philomela"/>
<link wikidata="Q108365426" start="385" end="393" title="Teuthras (mythology)" label="Teuthras"/>
<link wikidata="Q20871147" start="477" end="486" title="Praxithea" label="Praxithea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428721" start="514" end="522" title="Pandorus" label="Pandorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q591842" start="524" end="530" title="Metion" label="Metion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43886253" start="532" end="543" title="Protogeneia" label="Protogeneia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60794256" start="545" end="552" title="Pandora (Greek myth)" label="Pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139470" start="554" end="561" title="Procris" label="Procris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196048" start="563" end="569" title="Creusa (daughter of Erechtheus)" label="Creusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129489" start="571" end="579" title="Orithyia (Athenian)" label="Orithyia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699013" start="584" end="592" title="Chthonia" label="Chthonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985130" start="627" end="633" title="Orneus" label="Orneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q952188" start="635" end="643" title="Thespius" label="Thespius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562019" start="645" end="654" title="Eupalamus" label="Eupalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q472774" start="656" end="662" title="Sicyon (mythology)" label="Sicyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10772066" start="667" end="673" title="Merope (Greek myth)" label="Merope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855596" start="692" end="701" title="Metiadusa" label="Metiadusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076578" start="801" end="811" title="Pandion II" label="Pandion II"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="836" end="844" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204905" start="921" end="928" title="Eleusis" label="Eleusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q591842" start="1206" end="1212" title="Metion" label="Metion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428721" start="1217" end="1225" title="Pandorus" label="Pandorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56884984" start="1239" end="1246" title="Aegilia (disambiguation)" label="Aegilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076578" start="1323" end="1333" title="Pandion II" label="Pandion II"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1446" end="1457" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="1758" end="1774" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064817" start="1825" end="1848" title="Charles Henry Oldfather" label="Charles Henry Oldfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="1866" end="1888" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="2262" end="2288" title="Plutarch" label="Lucius Mestrius Plutarchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2531" end="2540" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="2937" end="2959" title="Stephanus of Byzantium" label="Stephanus of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="3222" end="3227" title="Suda" label="Suida"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803672" wikidata="Q1439311" url="?curid=803672" title="Sandpainting">
<text>Sandpainting is the art of pouring coloured sands, and powdered pigments from minerals or crystals, or pigments from other natural or synthetic sources onto a surface to make a fixed or unfixed sand painting. Unfixed sand paintings have a long established cultural history in numerous social groupings around the globe, and are often temporary, ritual paintings prepared for religious or healing ceremonies. This form of art is also referred to as drypainting.

Drypainting is practised by Native Americans in the Southwestern United States, by Tibetan and Buddhist monks, as well as Indigenous Australians, and also by Latin Americans on certain Christian holy days.
==History==

=== Native American sandpainting ===
In the sandpainting of southwestern Native Americans (the most famous of which are the Navajo [known as the Diné]), the Medicine Man (or &quot;Hatałii&quot;) paints loosely upon the ground of a hogan, where the ceremony takes place, or on a buckskin or cloth tarpaulin, by letting the coloured sands flow through his fingers with control and skill. There are 600 to 1,000 different traditional designs for sandpaintings known to the Navajo. They do not view the paintings as static objects, but as spiritual, living beings to be treated with great respect. More than 30 different sandpaintings may be associated with one ceremony.

The colours for the painting are usually accomplished with naturally coloured sand, crushed gypsum (white), yellow ochre, red sandstone, charcoal and a mixture of charcoal and gypsum (blue). Brown can be made by mixing red and black; red and white make pink. Other colouring agents include corn meal, flower pollen, or powdered roots and bark.

The paintings are for healing purposes only. Many of them contain images of &quot;Yeibicheii&quot; (the Holy People). While creating the painting, the medicine man will chant, asking the &quot;yeibicheii&quot; to come into the painting and help heal the patient.

When the medicine man finishes painting, he checks its accuracy. The order and symmetry of the painting symbolise the harmony which a patient wishes to reestablish in his or her life. The accuracy of a sandpainting is believed to determine its efficacy as a sacred tool. The patient will be asked to sit on the sandpainting as the medicine man proceeds with the healing chant. It is claimed the sandpainting acts as a portal to attract the spirits and allow them to come and go. Practitioners believe sitting on the sandpainting helps the patient to absorb spiritual power, while in turn the Holy People will absorb the illness and take it away. Afterward, when the sandpainting has served its purpose, it is considered to be toxic, since it has absorbed the illness. For this reason, the painting is destroyed. Because of the sacred nature of the ceremonies, the sandpaintings are begun, finished, used and destroyed within 12 hours.

The ceremonies involving sandpaintings are usually done in sequences, termed &quot;chants&quot;, lasting a certain number of days depending on the ceremony. At least one fresh, new sandpainting is made for each day.

Some Navajo laws and taboos relate to the sandpaintings, and protect their holiness:
* Women of child-bearing age are not supposed to sing the chants associated with the &quot;yeibicheii&quot;. This is both because the ceremony has a possibility of injuring an unborn child, and because of a taboo preventing menstruating women from attending. (Some cultures considered menstruation and presence of blood to be powerful spiritual events that had to be restrained, as they represented life forces.) Post-menopausal women are more likely to be chanters or diagnosticians.
* Authentic sandpaintings are rarely photographed, so as to not disrupt the flow of the ceremony. For many reasons, medicine men will seldom allow outsiders inside a sacred ceremony. Because so many outsiders are curious about sandpainting, some medicine men may create pieces for exhibition purposes only, using reversed colours and variations. To create an authentic sandpainting solely for viewing would be a profane act. The sandpaintings for sale in shops and on the Internet are commercially produced and contain deliberate errors, as the real sandpaintings are considered sacred.
* The earliest credited instance of traditional Navajo sandpaintings (being rendered in coloured sands as opposed to tapestry or other media) being created in a permanent form for sale, have been traced to between 1945 and 1955. The main credit is generally given to a Navajo Hatałii named Fred Stevens, Jr. (Grey Squirrel), who developed the primary method of &quot;permatizing&quot; for commercial sandpaintings that is still used.

===Indigenous Australian sandpainting===

Indigenous Australian art has a history which covers more than 30,000 years, and a wide range of native traditions and styles. These have been studied in recent decades and their complexity has gained increased international recognition. Aboriginal Art covers a wide variety of media, including sandpainting, painting on leaves, wood carving, rock carving, sculpture, and ceremonial clothing, as well as artistic embellishments found on weaponry and also tools. Art is one of the key rituals of Aboriginal culture. It was and still is, used to mark territory, record history, and tell stories about &quot;The Dreaming&quot;.

Aboriginal people have taken to transforming their tradition sand paintings into more permanent forms using modern techniques and materials.

Geoffrey Bardon was an Australian art teacher who was instrumental in creating the Aboriginal art of the Western Desert movement, and in bringing Australian indigenous art to the attention of the world.&quot;... [directed by Bardon, the elders] began to interact with certain issues in 1960s and 70s international painting, especially the extreme schematisation of New York minimalism.&quot; In the History of Painting&quot;Lyrical Abstraction in the late 1960s is characterised by the paintings of Dan Christensen, Ronnie Landfield, Peter Young and others, and along with the fluxus movement and postminimalism (a term first coined by Robert Pincus-Witten in the pages of Artforum in 1969) sought to expand the boundaries of abstract painting and minimalism by focusing on process, new materials and new ways of expression.&quot;

This connection is seen most obviously in the connection between the paintings from the late sixties of Peter Young (artist) and the paintings that follow in the early seventies produced in the Papunya Tula.

Papunya Tula, or Papunya Tula Artists Pty Ltd, is an artist cooperative formed in 1972 that is owned and operated by Aboriginal people from the Western Desert of Australia. Kaapa Tjampitjinpa is one of the early Papunya Tula artists and is known for &quot;Gulgardi&quot;. It is notable for being the first work by an Indigenous Australian artist to win a contemporary art award, and the first public recognition of a Papunya painting.

=== Tibetan sandpainting ===
Tibetan Buddhist sand paintings usually composed &quot;mandalas&quot;. In Tibetan, it is called &quot;dul-tson-kyil-khor&quot; (mandala of coloured powders).
The sand is carefully placed on a large, flat table. The construction process takes several days, and the mandala is destroyed shortly after its completion. This is done as a teaching tool and metaphor for the &quot;impermanence&quot; (Pali: &quot;anicca&quot;) of all contingent and compounded phenomena (Sanskrit: &quot;Pratītya-samutpāda&quot;).

The mandala sand-painting process begins with an opening ceremony, during which the &quot;lamas&quot;, or Tibetan priests, consecrate the site and call forth the forces of goodness. They chant, declare intention, &quot;mudra&quot;, &quot;asana&quot;, &quot;pranayama&quot;, do visualisations, play music, recite &quot;mantras&quot;, etc.
On the first day, the lamas begin by drawing an outline of the mandala to be painted on a wooden platform. The following days see the laying of the coloured sands, which is effected by pouring the sand from traditional metal funnels called chak-pur. Each monk holds a &quot;chak-pur&quot; in one hand, while running a metal rod on its serrated surface; the vibration causes the sands to flow like liquid.
Formed of traditional prescribed iconography that includes geometric shapes and a multitude of ancient spiritual symbols (e.g.: Ashtamangala and divine attributes of &quot;yidam&quot;), seed syllables, mantra, the sand-painted mandala is used as a tool or instrument for innumerable purposes. A primary purpose is to reconsecrate the earth and its inhabitants.
When the meditation is complete, the sand painting is ceremoniously destroyed using a Vajra and the sand is then gathered and taken to a body of water for offering.

===Japanese tray pictures===

Emperor Tenmu (631–686), the 40th emperor of Japan, used Bonseki techniques to describe landscapes and natural objects. Several gardens in Kyoto are also believed to have been designed using bonseki. The 1300 essay by the Japanese Zen monk Kokan Shiren, &quot;Rhymeprose on a Miniature Landscape Garden&quot;, talks about the principles of bonseki and garden architecture. Bonseki became a popular art form of the Japanese aristocracy during the reign of Ashikaga Yoshimasa (1443–1490). The historical figure with the most profound influence on the Japanese &quot;Way of Tea&quot;, Sen no Rikyū (1522–1591), practiced bonseki. From the 15th century in Japan, Buddhist artists in the times of the &quot;shōguns&quot; practised the craft of &quot;bonseki&quot; by sprinkling dry coloured sand and pebbles onto the surface of plain black lacquered trays. They used bird feathers as brushes to form the sandy surface into seascapes and landscapes. These tray pictures were used in religious ceremonies. Although the practice of bonseki nearly died out after WWII, there are still actively practicing schools.

===Table decking===
During the 17th and 18th centuries, the royal courts of Europe employed &quot;table deckers&quot;, who decorated the side tables at royal banquets having adapted the craft of &#x27;bonseki&#x27; from the Japanese. The table deckers sprinkled coloured sands, marble dust, sugars, etc. upon the surface of plain white tablecloths to create unfixed pictures of fruit, flowers, birds and rustic scenery. In between each design spaces were left for fruit bowls and sweetmeat dishes so that the diners could refresh themselves in between the main courses of the feast. These ornate pictures were discarded along with the debris of the feast.

As a fine example of the table deckers&#x27; craft, Woburn Abbey in Bedfordshire, England possesses an ornate folding screen with three panels, decorated with sand pictures protected by glass. The centre one has five spaces for sweetmeat pyramid dishes while the two side leaves of the screen have three spaces for fruit trays. There are four sand pictures in each corner of the side panels of the screen, featuring 18th-century pastoral scenes, while the remaining areas of the screen are decorated with butterflies, doves, fruit, flowers, etc. The screen would be laid upon the surface of a side table. It doubled as a serving base for elaborate porcelain dishes and glass trays containing fruits, bonbons and sweetmeats, from which the hosts and their guests could help themselves while socialising or stretching their legs between the multiple courses being served on the main table in the dining hall. This screen may have been the work of the German artisan F. Schweikhardt, who specialised in still-life studies in the style of the Dutch painter Jan van Huysum.

===Georgian sandpainting===

Sandpainting as a craft was inspired by King George III, who was a skilled watchmaker and craftsman in his own right, and took an interest in the skills demonstrated by royal functionaries, known as Table Deckers, who decorated the white table-cloths at royal banquets with ornate centre-pieces decorated by using unfixed coloured sands and sugars as &#x27;paint&#x27;, and a bird&#x27;s feather as a &#x27;brush&#x27; a craft introduced by a European traveller who had observed the craftsmen at work in Japan.

It was while watching the table deckers at work the King suggested that if the sand pictures being temporarily laid out upon the surface of the tablecloths could be fixed permanently in place rather than being discarded with the remains of the feast, this would save much time and energy employing a multitude of skilled embroiderers toiling over such skilled work. So on one occasion the King bellowed to the craftsmen, &quot;Why don&#x27;t you fix it!&quot; This set a number of craftsmen including Haas, Schweikhardt and Benjamin Zobel (Memmingen, Germany, 21 September 1762 – London, England, 24 October 1830), all of German origin, to, independently of each other, successfully develop suitable methods to achieve this goal, and these pictures were commissioned by the royal worthies of the day and became highly prized by the aristocracy. The King&#x27;s brother, the Duke of York, commissioned a number of works by Zobel and the others, although the sand artists jealously guarded their method from their competitors.
Zobel depicted &quot;pigs in the manner of Morland&quot;; &quot;Nelson&quot;, the favourite dog of the Duke of York; &quot;Tiger after George Stubbs&quot;, and an impressive &quot;Vulture and snake.&quot;
Although many of Zobel&#x27;s works have survived, few of those by Haas have survived the passage of time, although observers considered his work superior to that of Zobel. This may reflect the differing techniques used by each artist. A diarist observed Zobel&#x27;s coating the surface of the baseboard with a mixture of gum arabic and white lead and sprinkling sand upon the sticky surface using a folded paper funnel as a brush. He had to work quickly since the adhesive would dry in a few hours. Several of his surviving pictures have unfinished work on the reverse. Haas followed more closely the techniques developed in Japan, but mixing dry powdered gum arabic with the sand, sprinkling the mixture through a sieve and using feathers as brushes to create the pictures upon the baseboard, then fixing them by some method which he kept a secret. Due to the damp conditions in many of the stately homes of the day, his pictures failed to last more than a few years. On one occasion Haas was called away while working on an unfixed sand picture. When he returned he found one of Windsor Castle&#x27;s cats curled up on the picture, thus damaging it.

Eventually Zobel returned to Memmingen in Bavaria where he continued to successfully pursue his craft. Some of his work is displayed in Memmingen Town Hall. Haas was forced to give up sand painting, probably due to the ongoing disasters with his pictures. He opened a bakery in Windsor instead, and the icing on his cakes may well have been decorated with pictures in coloured sugar instead of sand.

With the passing of these Georgian craftsmen and the disposal of the Duke of York&#x27;s collection the interest and skills evolved in sand picture work declined. The only Royal personage to take further interest in the craft was the late Queen Mary, consort to King George V, who bequeathed her Georgian sand paintings to the Victoria and Albert Museum, and her collection of Isle of Wight sand pictures to Carisbrooke Castle Museum on the Isle of Wight.

In the first half of the 20th century Lt. Colonel Rybot was a keen collector of sand paintings, which were the source material of the articles written on the subject in the arts and crafts magazines of the day. Eventually 37 of his collection of sand paintings were the main feature at an auction held at Sotheby&#x27;s New Bond Street gallery on 15 June 1956.

===Victorian sand picture souvenirs===

Thousands of sites exist where it is possible to collect natural coloured sands for craftwork, with an enormous range of colours being available around the globe varying with the contents of the mineral charged waters leaching through the sands. For the tourist the vertical sand cliffs at Alum Bay on the Isle of Wight form the central portion of a visual geological phenomenon (best viewed after a shower of rain) which encapsulates the chalk spires of The Needles and Tennyson Downs. Although tourists are no longer encouraged to obtain their own sand from the cliffs, numerous companies on the Island sell sand for the purpose of sandpainting.

After her marriage to Prince Albert and having chosen Osborne House near Cowes to be her new family retreat, Queen Victoria was the prime mover in the gentrification of this former backwater, local artisans benefitted from the influx of wealthy visitors, and a number of craftsmen sold their fixed sand pictures and unfixed sand jars featuring views of the Island as unique keepsakes of the Isle of Wight.

Some of these sand pictures were small and crude and left unsigned, but Edwin and John Dore of Arreton produced some fine work in the 1840s. The pictures were of postcard size and the subject matter local views such as Carisbrooke Castle, and other touristy subjects. Edwin always signed his quaint pictures in a fine hand with a mapping pen and Indian ink, one of his most successful mass-produced subjects being &quot;Collecting birds eggs on Needles Cliffs&quot;. John Dore used a card embellished with a printed border of lace design on which to execute his sand pictures although the quality of his work was inferior to that of his brother.

Few of the Island sand artists filled in the sky, giving that detail a light colourwash as a finishing touch, sometimes leaving doors and windows free of sand which would be blocked in with Indian ink. In the 1860s and 1870s J. Symons of Cowes produced local views much larger than postcard size, mounted in glazed oak or maple frames and signed with the artist&#x27;s signature on the reverse.
The father and son team the Neates of Newport sold their works from a stall outside Carisbrooke Castle gates where visitors were offered sand pictures and sand jars priced from 1/- to 2/6 each and the son grew his fingernails abnormally long in order to distribute the sand on his pictures.
During the 1930s and 1940s R.J.Snow of Lake came nearest to producing sand pictures in the manner of the Georgian craftsmen, but postcard size, although he did produce some fine commissioned work, particularly a view of Oddicombe in Devon, in which the sea and sky were also &quot;painted&quot; in sand, but after the war years the quality of the postcard sand pictures deteriorated with the mass-produced article with little taste or skill being offered for sale for a few shillings.

===Senegal===

In Senegal, designs are glued to board and are typically of figures in the landscape.

===Sand bottles===

In the 1860s to 1890s, Andrew Clemens, a deaf-mute man born in Dubuque, Iowa, USA became famous for his craft of creating unfixed pictures using multicoloured sands compressed inside glass bottles or ornate chemist jars. The sand was collected from the bluffs overlooking the Mississippi River. The subjects of his sand bottles included ornately decorated sentimental verses, sailing ships, plants, animals and portraits.

He exhibited his work at the St. Louis trade fair and, having spent hours creating a picture in a bottle, would demonstrate to an incredulous audience that the picture inside was unfixed by destroying the bottle with a hammer. Clemens&#x27; sand bottles have become museum pieces and highly prized antiques which have since sold at auction for thousands of US dollars.

===Sand carpets===
In the province of Drenthe in the Netherlands in the late 19th, early 20th centuries it was custom to use a stiff broom to sweep patterns in white sand to form simple decorations on the tiled floors of the houses, mostly for special occasions or celebrations. The next day it was swept up.
This custom was also practised in Northern Belgium by the Dutch speaking communities while in
Hekelgem, 1973 was the centenary year of the craft of &quot;Old Zandtapijt&quot;. The hotels and cafes would employ artisans to strew ornate sand pictures in unfixed coloured sands on the tiled floors of their premises to encourage passing tourists to halt and enjoy local hospitality on their way towards Brussels. Roger de Boeck, born in 1930, was a well-respected exponent of this craft, who used glue to fix his sand pictures to a suitable base selling them to visitors to his atelier. In addition to biblical scenes, his finest works included a portrait of Queen Elizabeth 1953, and US president John Kennedy, in the early 60s. This craft continues, and a booklet to celebrate the centenary was published on 1 February 1973.

==Modern culture==

In modern days, sandpainting is most often practised during Dia de los Muertos (Day of the Dead) in Mexico and the United States. Streets are decorated with sand paintings that are later swept away, symbolising the fleeting nature of life. Of note are the sandpaintings done during the Seattle Dia De Muertos Festival, but the most exciting development has been the Performance Art of Sand Animation which has created a new wave of younger artists and also revived interest in all types of sand painting.

A number of contemporary artists use sand in ways that depart from specific cultural traditions exploring techniques by raking sand, pouring it, carving it, creating unique designs. The works are ephemeral and are primarily shared through documentation or part of a live performance.

Many of these artists were included in an exhibit at the Museum of Arts and Design in New York City titled &quot;Swept Away: Dust, Ashes, and Dirt in Contemporary Art and Design&quot; which was featured in the galleries in 2012. Curator David Revere McFadden described his reasoning for curating the exhibit as wanting to spotlight the work of contemporary artists who specialise in what he described as &quot;unorthodox, unusual, or unexpected materials.&quot;

Artist included in the exhibit that use sand and techniques related to sand painting were: Elvira Wersche, who collects sands from all over the world to create geometric patterned paintings, only to be destroyed as part of a performance. Andy Goldsworthy is known for his ephemeral works using nature, and began sand painting and drawing in 1986, documented the deterioration of a giant ball of sand on the beach packed with bones for the exhibit. Jim Denevan known for his massive raked sand paintings also shared documentation of his process on California beaches. Igor Eskinja used dust to paint an architectural floor plan in the galleries. Cui Fei produces calligraphic works in sand using tradition chak-pur and brushes. Vik Muniz uses dust, chocolate syrup, grains of sand, sugar, caviar, magazines and industrial garbage in a way that reflects sand painting. The rotating exhibit &quot;Swept Away Projects&quot; featured Linda Florence and Joe Mangrum whose works were added to the galleries after removal of previous works. Linda Florence used chalk to stencil patterns onto the floor and often uses various materials like sugar to create installations. Joe Mangrum poured coloured sand from his hand for two consecutive days on 8–9 May 2012 he titled &quot;Asynchronous Syntropy&quot; and an outdoor project that acted as a circumambulation of the museum itself. Mangrum worked a total of 24 hours over the span of two days, spontaneously improvising his sand painting design, only to have it quickly disappear under the bustle of Columbus Circle foot traffic.

Other contemporary artists who work with sand include Andrew van der Merwe, based in Cape Town, who carves calligraphic imagery into the sand on beaches; Andres Amador, an American artist who rakes designs into beaches; Ahmad Nadalian, an Iranian artist who uses natural ground pigments to paint with sand; and Motoi Yamamoto, who makes paintings reflecting typhoons and natural phenomena using salt.

===Present-day sand painting techniques===
Most artists use naturally occurring oxidised and mineral-charged coloured sands, adding powdered charcoal to widen the palette and in some instances idiosyncratic materials such as iron filings or discarded stonemasons&#x27; dust from ecclesiastical sites. Other artists use industrial tinted quartz sands with a capacity to resist weathering, and a new generation of strong adhesives. The work is protected with a coat of spray varnish. No protective glass frame is needed with the sands and the adhesives since the paintings have proved to resist the effect of direct sunlight without any yellowing of the varnish.

==See also==

*Other sandpaintings
**Kolam
**Sand mandala
**Marmotinto
**Rangoli (Indian sandpainting)
**Yantra
*Bonkei (Japanese dry tray landscapes)
*Process art
*Sand animation
*Sand drawing

== References ==
==Sources==
* Eugene Baatsoslanii Joe, Mark Bahti, Oscar T. Branson, &quot;Navajo Sandpainting Art,&quot; (Treasure Chest Publications, Inc, 1978.) 
* Rochester, Vermont: Inner Traditions International.
* Villasenor, David. &quot;Tapestries in Sand: The Spirit of Indian Sandpainting&quot;. California, Naturegraph Company, Inc. 1966.
* Wilson, Joseph A.P. &quot;Relatives Halfway Round The World: Southern Athabascans and Southern Tarim Fugitives&quot;, &quot;Limina&quot;, 11. 2005. pp. 67–78. URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20060821192325/http://limina.arts.uwa.edu.au/__data/page/90432/wilson.pdf
* Arthur Morrison. &quot;Japanese Sand-Pictures pp. 609–612&quot;. Strand Magazine, 1909.
* G. B. Hughes. &quot;Decorating the Georgian Dessert Table&quot;. Country Life, 21.5.1959.
* F.C.H. &quot;Marmortinto or Sandpainting&quot;. Notes and Queries, pp217/8 11.3.1854 
* J. Mummery. &quot;Marmortinto or Sandpainting&quot;.Notes and Queries, pp327/8 8.4.1854 
* Fred Lee Carter. &quot;The &quot;Lost Art&quot; of sandpainting pp. 215–221&quot;. The Connoisseur Illustrated, 1927.
* Fred Lee Carter. &quot;Sand Pictures&quot;. Notes and Queries, 8.12.1928.
* E. McCoy. &quot;Pictures Painted with Sand&quot;. Antiques, March 1936.
* Bea Howe. &quot;Sand Pictures&quot;. Homes and Gardens, April 1940.
* D. A. Ponsonby. &quot;A Sand Painter and Morland pp. 111–113&quot;. The Connoisseur-American Edition, April 1955.
* Lt.-Colonel Rybot. &quot;Auction of Sand Paintings&quot;. Sotherby and Co, 15.6.1956
* S. Groves. &quot;They Painted in Sand&quot;. The Lady, 22.1.1959.
* J. Toller. &quot;The Regency and Victorian Crafts&quot;. Ward Lock, 1969.
* C. P. Woodhouse. &quot;The Victoriana Collectors Handbook&quot;. Bell, 1970.
* Bea Howe. &quot;Antiques from the Victorian Home&quot;. Batsford, 1973.
* J. Field. &quot;Victorian Crafts&quot;. Heinemann, 1973.
* Brian Pike sand painter. &quot;Painting with Sand-Golden Hands Crafts-vol.70&quot;. Marshall Cavendish, 1976.
* Joyce Eley. &quot;Sand Pictures&quot;. Wight Life, Oct-Nov. 1974.
* A. H. Trelawny. &quot;Keepsake Castles in the Sand&quot;. Country Life, 2.2.1995.
* Etienne le compte. &quot;1873 - 1973 Oud Zandtapijt&quot; published Hekelgem 1 February 1973.
* Villasenor, David &amp; Jean. &quot;How to do Permanent Sand Paintings&quot;. Villasenor, David &amp; Jean, 1972.
* K. Beese. &quot;Sand Painting Techniques&quot;. Design 60, 1959.
* P. Nelson. &quot;Sandpainting&quot;. Creative Crafts, April 1974.
* Brian Pike. &quot;Sand Art&quot;.Family Circle Book of Crafts, 1980.
* Brian Pike. &quot;The Craft of Sand-painting&quot;.The Craftsman Magazine, 1989.

==External links==
* Real sandpainting by &quot;Sand-Show&quot; theater/studio
* Bonseki Furusato

*Sandpainting in Hong Kong</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1439311" start="0" end="12" title="Sandpainting" label="Sandpainting"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="490" end="506" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="514" end="540" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="545" end="550" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="584" end="606" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="805" end="811" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q266750" start="838" end="850" title="Medicine Man" label="Medicine Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623348" start="912" end="917" title="hogan" label="hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623698" start="959" end="967" title="buckskin (leather)" label="buckskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="1012" end="1016" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="1442" end="1448" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q194191" start="1465" end="1470" title="ochre" label="ochre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="1476" end="1485" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="1487" end="1495" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="1658" end="1664" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581290" start="1717" end="1724" title="healing" label="healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051328" start="1777" end="1787" title="Yeii" label="Yeibicheii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553339" start="1864" end="1869" title="chant" label="chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="2038" end="2046" title="symmetry" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180362" start="4094" end="4101" title="Sacrilege" label="profane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4559" end="4592" title="Fred Stevens, Jr. (Grey Squirrel)" label="Fred Stevens, Jr. (Grey Squirrel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q420716" start="4746" end="4771" title="Indigenous Australian art" label="Indigenous Australian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q155881" start="5351" end="5363" title="Dreaming (spirituality)" label="The Dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500708" start="5514" end="5529" title="Geoffrey Bardon" label="Geoffrey Bardon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5597" end="5633" title="Aboriginal art of the Western Desert" label="Aboriginal art of the Western Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772393" start="5913" end="5932" title="History of Painting" label="History of Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213254" start="6013" end="6028" title="Dan Christensen" label="Dan Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365903" start="6030" end="6046" title="Ronnie Landfield" label="Ronnie Landfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755473" start="6048" end="6059" title="Peter Young (artist)" label="Peter Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755473" start="6450" end="6470" title="Peter Young (artist)" label="Peter Young (artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18005" start="6540" end="6552" title="Papunya Tula" label="Papunya Tula"/>
<link wikidata="Q18005" start="6555" end="6567" title="Papunya Tula" label="Papunya Tula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719499" start="6728" end="6746" title="Kaapa Tjampitjinpa" label="Kaapa Tjampitjinpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005934" start="6811" end="6819" title="Gulgardi" label="Gulgardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="7020" end="7036" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191431" start="7075" end="7082" title="mandala" label="mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q129261421" start="7426" end="7432" title="anicca" label="anicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q522046" start="7500" end="7518" title="Pratītya-samutpāda" label="Pratītya-samutpāda"/>
<link wikidata="Q191421" start="7618" end="7622" title="lama" label="lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q208030" start="7747" end="7752" title="mudra" label="mudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q466797" start="7766" end="7771" title="asana" label="asana"/>
<link wikidata="Q839496" start="7785" end="7794" title="pranayama" label="pranayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="7846" end="7852" title="mantra" label="mantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16915873" start="8106" end="8114" title="chak-pur" label="chak-pur"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="8304" end="8315" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243136" start="8330" end="8346" title="List of geometric shapes" label="geometric shapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911739" start="8399" end="8411" title="Ashtamangala" label="Ashtamangala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072049" start="8443" end="8448" title="yidam" label="yidam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416043" start="8457" end="8471" title="seed syllables" label="seed syllables"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="8473" end="8479" title="mantra" label="mantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q695709" start="8718" end="8723" title="Vajra" label="Vajra"/>
<link wikidata="Q335181" start="8828" end="8841" title="Emperor Tenmu" label="Emperor Tenmu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091289" start="9068" end="9080" title="Kokan Shiren" label="Kokan Shiren"/>
<link wikidata="Q447034" start="9283" end="9301" title="Ashikaga Yoshimasa" label="Ashikaga Yoshimasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="9487" end="9495" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="9530" end="9536" title="shōgun" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294710" start="9573" end="9580" title="bonseki" label="bonseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629626" start="10643" end="10655" title="Woburn Abbey" label="Woburn Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="10659" end="10671" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144689" start="10701" end="10715" title="folding screen" label="folding screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="10819" end="10828" title="sweetmeat" label="sweetmeat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11555" end="11570" title="F. Schweikhardt" label="F. Schweikhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="11630" end="11635" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="11636" end="11643" title="Painting" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q527869" start="11644" end="11658" title="Jan van Huysum" label="Jan van Huysum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335151" start="12726" end="12740" title="Benjamin Zobel" label="Benjamin Zobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q224215" start="13047" end="13070" title="Prince Edward, Duke of York and Albany" label="The King&amp;#x27;s brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q535814" start="13755" end="13765" title="gum arabic" label="gum arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q656004" start="13770" end="13780" title="white lead" label="white lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q29957" start="13846" end="13852" title="funnel" label="funnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14825" start="14616" end="14625" title="Memmingen" label="Memmingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="15315" end="15341" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="15365" end="15378" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q328595" start="15396" end="15421" title="Carisbrooke Castle" label="Carisbrooke Castle Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q654762" start="15750" end="15764" title="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s" label="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q447363" start="16137" end="16145" title="Alum Bay" label="Alum Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281259" start="16302" end="16313" title="The Needles" label="The Needles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16318" end="16332" title="Tennyson Downs" label="Tennyson Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q565155" start="16550" end="16563" title="Osborne House" label="Osborne House"/>
<link wikidata="Q587996" start="16569" end="16574" title="Cowes" label="Cowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="16605" end="16619" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756622" start="18867" end="18881" title="Andrew Clemens" label="Andrew Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118643" start="18885" end="18894" title="deaf mute" label="deaf-mute"/>
<link wikidata="Q772" start="19675" end="19682" title="Drenthe" label="Drenthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="20602" end="20617" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="20628" end="20653" title="John F. Kennedy" label="US president John Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309256" start="20851" end="20869" title="Day of the Dead" label="Dia de los Muertos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="21077" end="21084" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21085" end="21108" title="Festál#Mexico: Día de Muertos" label="Dia De Muertos Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="21309" end="21325" title="contemporary art" label="contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916901" start="21493" end="21502" title="ephemeral" label="ephemeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940773" start="21639" end="21664" title="Museum of Arts and Design" label="Museum of Arts and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="21668" end="21681" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239003" start="21819" end="21840" title="David Revere McFadden" label="David Revere McFadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q357126" start="22283" end="22299" title="Andy Goldsworthy" label="Andy Goldsworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194601" start="22493" end="22504" title="Jim Denevan" label="Jim Denevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16915873" start="22750" end="22758" title="chak-pur" label="chak-pur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288454" start="22772" end="22781" title="Vik Muniz" label="Vik Muniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211108" start="22993" end="23004" title="Joe Mangrum" label="Joe Mangrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q504073" start="23107" end="23114" title="stencil" label="stencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211108" start="23208" end="23219" title="Joe Mangrum" label="Joe Mangrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734140" start="23379" end="23395" title="circumambulation" label="circumambulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q109968" start="23586" end="23601" title="Columbus Circle" label="Columbus Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="23702" end="23711" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="24356" end="24362" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779023" start="24718" end="24723" title="Kolam" label="Kolam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247677" start="24726" end="24738" title="Sand mandala" label="Sand mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772187" start="24741" end="24751" title="Marmotinto" label="Marmotinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284472" start="24754" end="24761" title="Rangoli" label="Rangoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q395012" start="24786" end="24792" title="Yantra" label="Yantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942127" start="24794" end="24800" title="Bonkei" label="Bonkei"/>
<link wikidata="Q545851" start="24833" end="24844" title="Process art" label="Process art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348106" start="24846" end="24860" title="Sand animation" label="Sand animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545808" start="24862" end="24874" title="Sand drawing" label="Sand drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035603" start="25064" end="25080" title="Inner Traditions" label="Inner Traditions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25098" end="25115" title="Villasenor, David" label="Villasenor, David"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25196" end="25215" title="Naturegraph Company" label="Naturegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25230" end="25248" title="Wilson, Joseph A.P" label="Wilson, Joseph A.P"/>
<link wikidata="Q4303218" start="25498" end="25513" title="Arthur Morrison" label="Arthur Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126800" start="25563" end="25578" title="Strand Magazine" label="Strand Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25588" end="25600" title="G. B. Hughes" label="G. B. Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177346" start="25653" end="25665" title="Country Life (magazine)" label="Country Life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25680" end="25686" title="F.C.H." label="F.C.H."/>
<link wikidata="Q1129889" start="25728" end="25745" title="Notes and Queries" label="Notes and Queries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25768" end="25778" title="J. Mummery" label="J. Mummery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129889" start="25820" end="25837" title="Notes and Queries" label="Notes and Queries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25859" end="25874" title="Fred Lee Carter" label="Fred Lee Carter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25942" end="25969" title="The Connoisseur Illustrated" label="The Connoisseur Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25979" end="25994" title="Fred Lee Carter" label="Fred Lee Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129889" start="26023" end="26040" title="Notes and Queries" label="Notes and Queries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26055" end="26063" title="E. McCoy" label="E. McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659546" start="26105" end="26113" title="Antiques (magazine)" label="Antiques"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26129" end="26137" title="Bea Howe" label="Bea Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984757" start="26166" end="26183" title="Homes and Gardens" label="Homes and Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26199" end="26213" title="D. A. Ponsonby" label="D. A. Ponsonby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26267" end="26299" title="The Connoisseur-American Edition" label="The Connoisseur-American Edition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26315" end="26332" title="Lt.-Colonel Rybot" label="Lt.-Colonel Rybot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26373" end="26388" title="Sotherby and Co" label="Sotherby and Co"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26402" end="26411" title="S. Groves" label="S. Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q15848335" start="26447" end="26455" title="The Lady (magazine)" label="The Lady"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26470" end="26479" title="J. Toller" label="J. Toller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100540" start="26527" end="26536" title="Ward Lock" label="Ward Lock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26546" end="26561" title="C. P. Woodhouse" label="C. P. Woodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26611" end="26615" title="Bell (publisher)" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26625" end="26633" title="Bea Howe" label="Bea Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869636" start="26681" end="26689" title="Batsford" label="Batsford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26699" end="26707" title="J. Field" label="J. Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273015" start="26739" end="26748" title="Heinemann (book publisher)" label="Heinemann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26758" end="26781" title="Brian Pike sand painter" label="Brian Pike sand painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043752" start="26842" end="26860" title="Marshall Cavendish" label="Marshall Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26870" end="26880" title="Joyce Eley" label="Joyce Eley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26909" end="26919" title="Wight Life" label="Wight Life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26938" end="26952" title="A. H. Trelawny" label="A. H. Trelawny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177346" start="26996" end="27008" title="Country Life (magazine)" label="Country Life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27022" end="27039" title="Etienne le compte" label="Etienne le compte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27118" end="27146" title="Villasenor, David &amp;amp; Jean" label="Villasenor, David &amp;amp; Jean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27196" end="27224" title="Villasenor, David &amp;amp; Jean" label="Villasenor, David &amp;amp; Jean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27234" end="27242" title="K. Beese" label="K. Beese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27282" end="27291" title="Design 60" label="Design 60"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27301" end="27310" title="P. Nelson" label="P. Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27338" end="27353" title="Creative Crafts" label="Creative Crafts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27369" end="27379" title="Brian Pike" label="Brian Pike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27402" end="27430" title="Family Circle Book of Crafts" label="Family Circle Book of Crafts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27440" end="27450" title="Brian Pike" label="Brian Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180519" start="27491" end="27513" title="The Craftsman Magazine" label="The Craftsman Magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803673" wikidata="Q60531" url="?curid=803673" title="Wolfgang Schmieder">
<text>Wolfgang Schmieder (May 29, 1901 – November 8, 1990) was a German music librarian and musicologist.

Schmieder was born in Bromberg (now Bydgoszcz, Poland). In 1950, he published the BWV, or Bach-Werke-Verzeichnis (&quot;Bach Works Catalogue&quot;), a catalog of musical works by Johann Sebastian Bach. The numbering system used in the BWV has since become a nearly universal standard, used by scholars and musicians around the world. (BWV numbers are sometimes referred to as &quot;Schmieder&quot; numbers; the designations S 971 and BWV 971 therefore refer to the same thing, the &quot;Italian Concerto&quot;.) Schmieder served as the Special Advisor for Music for the City and University Library at Goethe University Frankfurt from April 1942 until his retirement in 1963. He lived in Freiburg im Breisgau until his death in November 1990 at the age of 89.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q60531" start="0" end="18" title="Wolfgang Schmieder" label="Wolfgang Schmieder"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="86" end="98" title="musicology" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41252" start="123" end="131" title="Bromberg" label="Bromberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41252" start="137" end="146" title="Bydgoszcz" label="Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214203" start="183" end="186" title="BWV" label="BWV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="280" end="301" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293299" start="582" end="610" title="Italian Concerto (Bach)" label="&amp;quot;Italian Concerto&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q50662" start="702" end="729" title="Goethe University Frankfurt" label="Goethe University Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="788" end="808" title="Freiburg im Breisgau" label="Freiburg im Breisgau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803674" wikidata="Q1575913" url="?curid=803674" title="Viva Forever">
<text>&quot;Viva Forever&quot; is a song by English girl group the Spice Girls from their second studio album, &quot;Spiceworld&quot; (1997). The song was co-written by the group with Matt Rowe and Richard Stannard, while production was handled by the latter two. It is a pop ballad with Spanish-style elements. The song&#x27;s theme is about a summer romance during a holiday vacation, as the lyrics discuss recent experiences and memories. It was released as the album&#x27;s fourth and final single on 20 July 1998 by Virgin Records.

The single&#x27;s commercial release was delayed several times and was poorly promoted, being affected by Halliwell&#x27;s departure and the subsequent continuation of the Spiceworld Tour by the remaining members. The song was well received by most music critics, with some considering it their best work artistically in 1998. It was a commercial success, debuting atop the UK Singles Chart, becoming the group&#x27;s seventh number-one single in the United Kingdom and staying at the position for two weeks. It has since been certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI). The song was also successful on the music charts in the rest of Europe, as well as Canada and Oceania.

An accompanying music video, directed by Steve Box, features stop motion animation of the group as fairies, and it took five months to be completed. The video was commissioned months before Halliwell&#x27;s departure and as such, she is featured in it and on the accompanying artwork.

==Background==
In May 1997, the Spice Girls went on a promotional visit to the Cannes Film Festival in the south of France, where they announced their then-upcoming movie &quot;Spice World&quot; (1997). The group began shooting scenes for the movie in June. Meanwhile, Virgin Records started the first marketing meetings for the promotional campaign for their second album &quot;Spiceworld&quot;, which was set to be released in November 1997. No song had been written for the album at this point, so the Spice Girls had to do all the songwriting and recording at the same time as they were shooting the movie. Between takes and at the end of each filming day, the group usually went straight into a mobile recording studio set up in a Winnebago, which followed them between film sets. Their schedule was physically arduous with logistical difficulties, as Melanie Brown commented in her autobiography: &quot;doing the two full-time jobs at the same time took its toll and within a couple on weeks, exhaustion set in&quot;.

For the album, the Spice Girls worked with the same songwriting teams and producers from their debut studio album, &quot;Spice&quot; (1996). But during the recording of the &quot;Spiceworld&quot; tracks, the group was so busy with the filming schedule that the quality of their musical contributions became more erratic and piecemeal. Andy Watkins, of the production duo Absolute, co-writers of &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; (from the band&#x27;s previous album) remembered: &quot;We&#x27;d sit there literally all day long and quite often we wouldn&#x27;t even get them at all.&quot; Eliot Kennedy, who co-wrote &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; with the group, worked on a couple of backing tracks for &quot;Spiceworld&quot;, but decided not to get involved in the album after hearing from the other teams about the complications of the recording schedule.

==Writing and inspiration==
&quot;Viva Forever&quot; was one of the last songs the group wrote for &quot;Spiceworld&quot;. It was written at the end of the summer of 1997, after the filming for the &quot;Spice World&quot; movie had finished. Originally entitled &quot;Obrigado&quot;, which means &quot;thank you&quot; in Portuguese, it was later renamed. The song was written by the Spice Girls with the songwriting team Richard &quot;Biff&quot; Stannard and Matt Rowe. They later confirmed that the lyrics were mainly penned by Geri Halliwell. The inspiration for the song&#x27;s theme came from the idea of a summer romance during a holiday vacation on the Costa Brava or Costa del Sol in the Spanish Mediterranean, and the people the group met during those holidays. Emma Bunton commented about the songwriting process:
When we sat down to write it, we were talking about holiday romances, so that&#x27;s what came out in the studio. I don&#x27;t think I&#x27;ve ever had a real holiday romance, but I&#x27;ve met people I&#x27;ll never forget. You meet so many different people and have nice or weird or romantic experiences with them, and you never forget them, do you?
==Composition and lyrics==
Musically, &quot;Viva Forever&quot; is a pop ballad with R&amp;B influences, and Spanish-style elements. It is written in the key of E minor, with a time signature set in common time, and moves at a slow tempo of 84 beats per minute. The song starts with an instrumental introduction that includes keyboards, an acoustic guitar played by John Themis, and a string section arranged by English composer Anne Dudley. The song is constructed in a verse-chorus form, with an instrumental interlude before the bridge and the third chorus. It uses the sequence of Em–Bm–C–G as a chord progression during the verses and the chorus. The song employs Spanish production, including the sounds of castanets and guitars, a flamenco rhythm, and Spanish lyrics–&quot;hasta mañana&quot;, translated as &quot;until tomorrow&quot;, and &quot;viva&quot; itself, meaning &quot;long live&quot; (i.e.: Viva forever means &quot;live forever&quot;, also written in the chorus&#x27;s lyrics), as the lyrics were mostly written by Geri Halliwell who has maternal Spanish blood and speaks broken Spanish. Tom Ewing from the e-zine &quot;Freaky Trigger&quot; described it as &quot;wistful music&quot;, while Alexis Petridis of &quot;The Guardian&quot; said that the song has a &quot;note of melancholy&quot; around it.

The lyrics of the song are about past experiences or memories. Talking about them, Bunton explained that in the song&#x27;s concept, every experience is &quot;like a little dream&quot;. She mentioned that the Spice Girls purposely left it &quot;a bit open ended&quot;, as in the outcome is not clear if the narrator went back &quot;to reality&quot; or &quot;back to normal&quot;; and added that &quot;it really makes you think–and we try to provoke thought with all our songs&quot;. Ewing believed the song encapsulates a very specific moment that he described as &quot;memories of summer love fading at the edges&quot;, although he said lyrically, it &quot;does nothing unexpected, and it never makes a move when there&#x27;s a cheesier one available&quot;. El Hunt of &quot;NME&quot; also remarked on the lyrical content, commenting that it seemed &quot;cribbed from motivational fridge magnets&quot;.

==Release and promotion==
In February 1998, the Spice Girls embarked on the Spiceworld Tour covering Europe and North America, in support of their second studio album. On 22 April 1998, &quot;Smash Hits&quot; magazine reported the release of the album&#x27;s fourth single for 25 May, a double A-side consisting of &quot;Viva Forever&quot; with &quot;Never Give Up on the Good Times&quot;, a disco influenced track from &quot;Spiceworld&quot; that was written by the group with Stannard and Rowe. The release date was later postponed.

On 26 May, the group traveled back to the United Kingdom after their tour performance in Helsinki, Finland. The next day, their lawyer, Andrew Thompson, told the rest of the members that Halliwell decided to leave the group. That day, the group were scheduled to appear on &quot;The National Lottery Live&quot;, where they performed &quot;Viva Forever&quot; and &quot;Spice Up Your Life&quot; without Halliwell, the excuse being that she was ill. Speculation in the press grew, with reports of a midweek row on the plane back from Helsinki, and rumours of a power struggle with Brown as the reason for Halliwell&#x27;s departure. The Spice Girls then flew to Oslo, Norway, to complete the last two shows of the European segment of the tour performance as a quartet. On 31 May 1998, Halliwell officially announced her departure from the Spice Girls through her solicitor, claiming that she was suffering from exhaustion, and because of differences between the group. She would later admit of having problems with an eating disorder and depression. The remaining group members announced that they would continue through the summer of 1998 with the North American part of the tour as originally planned.

On 15 June, the group traveled to the US to continue with the Spiceworld Tour in West Palm Beach. During the following weeks, the release date of &quot;Viva Forever&quot;–only as a standalone single–was pushed to three different dates in July 1998. &quot;Music Week&quot; reported that the single was to be released on 4 July, while &quot;Smash Hits&quot; announced it for 13 July. In late June 1998, the song started to receive airplay across the UK, appearing on the playlists of 46 ILR stations and Capital FM&#x27;s the &quot;Pepsi Chart&quot;. It entered the UK Airplay Chart Top 50 on 11 July, and two weeks later, the song reached the top five despite the lukewarm support from Radio One, initially appearing on the B-list, before being promoted to the A-list.

After several delays, &quot;Viva Forever&quot; was commercially released in the UK on 20 July 1998, in three single versions. The first one, an enhanced CD, included the radio edit of the song, an instrumental take, and a remix version by American singer-songwriter and producer Tony Rich. In addition, the CD contained a multimedia programme, which features animated figures of the Spice Girls, scrolling synchronised lyrics, photographs and cartoons of each group member, an animated magic wand cursor that triggers an audio sample, and the music video. This was the first time that interactive multimedia components were available on a Spice Girls CD. The second version, released on a standard CD single, included the radio edit, live versions of &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; and &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; recorded at the NEC Arena in Birmingham, and a double-side poster. The same track listing was used for the third version of the single, released in cassette format.

==Critical reception==
&quot;Viva Forever&quot; was met with generally positive reviews from music critics. Amanda Murray of &quot;Sputnikmusic&quot; described the song as &quot;a genuinely great song&quot; adding that it is &quot;sincerely moving&quot; and that &quot;never would I have imagined the Spice Girls could pull off a song like this&quot;. &quot;Yahoo! Music&quot; complimented the song, saying &quot;a tear-jerking flamenco guitar and lush strings weave into this break-your-heart, &#x27;I Will Always Love You&#x27; ballad with a touch of Madonna about it [...] inspired&quot;. Ilana Kaplan of &quot;Billboard magazine, &quot;in a retrospective review of the Spiceworld album also gave the song a positive review, saying &quot;Viva Forever was like the Spice Girls trying their hand at Sade with a fusion of Latin percussion and the vision of a cheesy romance novel. But it worked, and the Spice Girls made a five-minute epic song about living in the moment, but also moving on&quot;. &quot;Can&#x27;t Stop the Pop&quot; also lauded the song, saying &quot;Viva Forever is a brilliant song and very deserving of the success it enjoyed. Lying amidst the caricatured frivolously fun Spiceworld, this track emits a level of musicianship that the Spice Girls had rarely shown to such extent before. In a more mixed review, Gina Arnold of Salon.com felt that the ballads on &quot;Spiceworld&quot; are bland &quot;but still appealing&quot;. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine&#x27;s David Wild cited the song as an example of the album&#x27;s production of a &quot;rehash of hip-hop and pop clichés&quot;, with him adding it is &quot;as convincing as the Spices&#x27; Spanish accents&quot;. &quot;Music Week&quot; described the song as a &quot;haunting, flamenco-style ballad&quot;, and called it the &quot;ideal summer hit&quot;. Writing for the &quot;Orange County Register&quot;, Cary Darling named the song one of &quot;Spiceworld&quot;″s standout tracks for its &quot;appealing, &#x27;Fernando&#x27;-era ABBA internationalism&quot;. The staff of the &quot;Daily Record&quot; considered it the best track in the album, while &quot;Smash Hits&quot;″ critic Alex Needham lauded it as &quot;the best thing they&#x27;ve ever done&quot;.&quot;

Some critics noted similarities between &quot;Viva Forever&quot; and Madonna&#x27;s early work, in particular her 1987 song &quot;La Isla Bonita&quot;. Nick Krewen of &quot;The Hamilton Spectator&quot; said that the song does &quot;manage to steal a lick or two from Madonna&quot;. Sarah Davis of &quot;Dotmusic&quot; characterized it as an &quot;&#x27;I Will Always Love You&#x27; ballad with a touch of Madonna&quot; and a combination of Spanish instrumentation. &quot;Chicago Sun-Times″&quot; critic Jim DeRogatis called it the Spice Girls&#x27; version of &quot;La Isla Bonita&quot;, while Greg Kot of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; viewed it more as a tribute to the song. The &quot;Hartford Courant&#x27;s&quot; music writer Roger Catlin, noted the similarities between the two songs and commented that Madonna was &quot;the obvious role model&quot;. Ann Powers of &quot;The New York Times&quot; described the song as &quot;an earnest ballad&quot; and felt that it resembles the sound of Madonna&#x27;s early albums. When comparing &quot;Spiceworld&quot; to their debut studio album &quot;Spice&quot; (1996), Jim Farber of the &quot;New York Daily News&quot; was unimpressed, but thought that the production had more variety. He labelled the song&#x27;s sound as &quot;ersatz Spanish&quot; in a manner that is similar to &quot;La Isla Bonita&quot;.

==Commercial performance==
Upon its release as a single, &quot;Viva Forever&quot; debuted atop the UK Singles Chart, becoming the Spice Girls&#x27; seventh chart-topper and their first number one as a foursome. The single sold 100,000 copies in the first three days of release and 277,000 in the first week, outselling its closest competitors by about four to one. The song spent two weeks at number one, nine weeks in the top 40, 13 weeks in the top 75, and was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for selling 600,000 copies in the UK in August 1998. As of July 2021, it has sold 798,000 combined sales in the country.

&quot;Viva Forever&quot; was commercially successful in the rest of Europe. It reached number two on the Eurochart Hot 100, while peaking inside the top 10 in Austria, Belgium (French chart), Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Switzerland, and inside the top 20 in Belgium (Flemish chart), France, and Norway. The song was also a radio hit across the continent, reaching the top position of the European Radio Top 50 for four weeks, topping the airplay charts in the German-speaking countries, and the UK; and peaking inside the top five in Hungary, Italy, Poland, and Scandinavia.

&quot;Viva Forever&quot; peaked at number nine in Taiwan during the last week of July 1998. On 10 August 1998, the song debuted on the Canadian &quot;RPM&quot; singles chart at number 81, later reaching a peak position of number four in its eighth week. It ended at the 57th position on the year-end chart. The song debuted on the Official New Zealand Music Chart at number one on 23 August 1998, becoming the group&#x27;s second number one and eighth top ten single in the country. It stayed at the top for two weeks, while remained on the chart for 11 weeks, and was certified platinum by the Recorded Music NZ (RMNZ) for sales of 30,000 units in October 1998. &quot;Viva &quot;Forever&quot; debuted on the ARIA Singles Chart at number 59 on 30 August 1998. It peaked at number two for two weeks, giving the Spice Girls their sixth top ten single in Australia. It remained on the chart for 21 weeks, and was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) for selling 70,000 units in 1998.

After British singer Anne-Marie and contestant Mark Howard performed a version of &quot;Viva Forever&quot; on the final of &quot;The Voice&quot; series 11 in October 2022, the Spice Girls&#x27; original charted at number 73 on the UK Singles Downloads Chart Top 100 on 4 November 2022.

==Music video==

===Background===

The music video for &quot;Viva Forever&quot;, which features stop motion animation of the Spice Girls as fairies, was directed by Academy Award winner Steve Box of Aardman Animations, the British animation studio behind the claymation franchise &quot;Wallace and Gromit&quot; and the 2000 comedy film &quot;Chicken Run&quot;. The video was screened for the first time in the UK on 22 June 1998, after five months of shooting, considerably longer than it took to make the &quot;Spice World&quot; movie. For the fairies, Box created five 12-inch-high tin puppets with wings modelled after each group member, including one for Halliwell, as it was commissioned months before her departure. He commented that the concepts for the video came from children&#x27;s annuals, such as the comic strip character &quot;Rupert Bear&quot;, and from Victorian legends of fairies at the bottom of the garden. The music video&#x27;s main theme is the loss of youth and innocence, which according to Box, matches the song&#x27;s sentiment of sorrow. He further elaborated:

I came up with this idea for the girls to be tin toy fairies that were like lost toys, which was a little bit of a comment on that modern pop: you buy it, you put your money in, you get your music and then shortly afterwards it will disappear.
According to Box, the atypical concept came from a trend in the music industry. At the time, music videos in the UK were aimed to appear on the television programme &quot;The Chart Show&quot;, which only showed small clips of the entire video, usually the first verse and chorus of the song. For this reason, he was able to experiment with the animation, and decided to place the most elaborated segment in the beginning of the video. Box commented that this allowed him to &quot;do something really unusual, that was unexpected&quot;.

===Synopsis===
The music video, set in the 1970s, starts off with a storybook about two boys, who are running around the woods when they encounter a case (similar to the cases inside a Kinder Surprise, but life-sized) that opens by itself, which reveals a toy chicken. The two friends chase after the chicken until they see another case, which the toy chicken bounces on. The case opens by itself, and five fairies – the Spice Girls – fly out. While one of the boys runs away frightened, the other boy stays, and the fairies play with him, give him a kiss on the nose, whisper a secret, and blow pixie dust in his face. They fly the boy to another place in front of a huge Rubik&#x27;s Cube, then dance on the cube to the song until the middle piece on the top opens. The boy, assisted by the fairies, climbs inside.

Meanwhile, the younger boy sees the fairies about to close the cube. By the time he gets to the cube, his friend and the fairies have vanished inside; the cube becomes smaller, but is still over-sized. He walks in the woods by himself with the cube, which has shrunken to a normal size, until he sees a giant coin-vending machine that contains other cases. A blue light shines in front of him. He puts the now-solved Rubik&#x27;s Cube inside a case, throws the case into the vending machine, and walks away sadly. The video ends with the fairies flying out of the vending machine, now including the other boy.

==Live performances==

&quot;Viva Forever&quot; was the group&#x27;s last song performed on television as a quintet before Halliwell&#x27;s departure. On 21 May 1998, the group recorded their performance for &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;, which was broadcast on 5 June 1998. The show&#x27;s producer, Chris Cowey, said that they originally intended to air the performance for the single&#x27;s release in July, but then pushed it given Halliwell&#x27;s departure from the Spice Girls. &quot;Viva Forever&quot; was also the first song they performed on television without Halliwell, on 27 May 1998 at &quot;The National Lottery Live&quot;. On 13 May 1998, the group taped an appearance for the French television show &quot;Hit Machine&quot;, where they performed four songs, including &quot;Viva Forever&quot;. The show aired later on 5 June 1998. The Spice Girls performed the song with Luciano Pavarotti in Modena, Italy, at the annually hosted Pavarotti &amp; Friends charity concert on 9 June 1998. The performance was broadcast in various countries, and released on the compilation album and DVD entitled &quot;Pavarotti &amp; Friends for the Children of Liberia&quot; (1998). On 13 July 1998, the Spice Girls performed the song in Toronto as part of their setlist for MuchMusic″s programme &quot;Intimate and Interactive&quot;. In August, while the group were on tour, a taped performance of the song aired on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; via satellite from Chicago.

The Spice Girls have performed the song on their four tours, the Spiceworld Tour, the Christmas in Spiceworld Tour, the Return of the Spice Girls Tour, and the Spice World – 2019 Tour. For the Spiceworld Tour, during their performance of &quot;Viva Forever&quot;, the group dressed in long white opera-style coats, designed by British stylist Kenny Ho. The performance at the tour&#x27;s final concert can be found on the video album &quot;Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium&quot;, filmed in London on 20 September 1998, and released on VHS around two months later. The song was re-imagined on the Return of the Spice Girls tour in 2007, with flamenco elements. Following a cape dance interlude, they performed &quot;Viva Forever&quot; with a Latin theme and a tango/fan dance break, and each member standing on rotating podiums, while the performance finished with Halliwell exiting the stage early, acknowledging her leaving the group in 1998. For the Spice World – 2019 Tour, after an interlude called Queer Tango, where two male dancers did a ballet routine before kissing at the end, they launched into the song dressed in flowing gowns.

==Formats and track listings==

UK/European/Malaysian CD1, Australian/Brazilian/Thai CD
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 4:10
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 5:30
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 5:42
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 4:10

UK/European/Malaysian CD2
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 4:10
#&quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 4:22
#&quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 4:25

Japanese CD
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 4:10
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 5:30
#&quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 4:22
#&quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 4:25

European 2-track/French CD
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 4:10
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 5:30

UK/Australian Cassette 
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 4:10
#&quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 4:22
#&quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 4:25

Digital EP
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 4:14
#&quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 4:22
#&quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot; – 4:26
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 5:21
#&quot;Viva Forever&quot; – 5:42

==Credits and personnel==
Credits of &quot;Viva Forever&quot; adapted from the booklet of &quot;Spiceworld&quot;:

*Spice Girls lyrics, vocals
*Matt Rowe lyrics, producer, keyboards and programming
*Richard Stannard lyrics, producer
*Mark &quot;Spike&quot; Stent audio mixing
*Adrian Bushby recording engineer

*Paul &quot;P. Dub&quot; Walton assistant
*Pete Davis additional programming
*Jake Davies additional engineering
*John Themis acoustic guitar
*Anne Dudley string arrangement
Credits of the remixes, interactive elements and artwork adapted from the liner notes of the &quot;Viva Forever&quot; CD singles UK CD1 and UK CD2:
&quot;Tony Rich Remix&quot; and &quot;Tony Rich Instrumental&quot;
*Tony Rich remixing

Interactive Video
*AMX Digital enhanced element
Artwork
*Aardman Animations puppets design
*Dean Freeman photography
*Joe@Virgin Art design
==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications and sales==



==Release history==
==References==
Citations
Bibliography
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1575913" start="6" end="18" title="Viva Forever" label="Viva Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q641066" start="46" end="56" title="girl group" label="girl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="61" end="72" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q934969" start="111" end="121" title="Spiceworld (album)" label="Spiceworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q75844915" start="192" end="208" title="Biffco" label="Richard Stannard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077388" start="266" end="276" title="pop ballad" label="pop ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="515" end="529" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609312" start="704" end="719" title="Spiceworld Tour" label="Spiceworld Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="906" end="922" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="1085" end="1114" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406366" start="1267" end="1276" title="Steve Box" label="Steve Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="1287" end="1298" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="1325" end="1332" title="fairy" label="fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="1591" end="1611" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137856" start="1689" end="1700" title="Spice World (film)" label="Spice World"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="1781" end="1795" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q934969" start="1891" end="1901" title="Spiceworld (album)" label="Spiceworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025558" start="2248" end="2257" title="Winnebago Industries" label="Winnebago"/>
<link wikidata="Q236005" start="2369" end="2382" title="Mel B" label="Melanie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q818781" start="2658" end="2663" title="Spice (album)" label="Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q727927" start="2908" end="2916" title="Absolute (production team)" label="Absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471038" start="2938" end="2962" title="Who Do You Think You Are (Spice Girls song)" label="Who Do You Think You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288763" start="3129" end="3142" title="Eliot Kennedy" label="Eliot Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349439" start="3163" end="3187" title="Say You&amp;#x27;ll Be There" label="Say You&amp;#x27;ll Be There"/>
<link wikidata="Q753110" start="3811" end="3822" title="songwriting" label="songwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q75844915" start="3828" end="3861" title="Biffco" label="Richard &amp;quot;Biff&amp;quot; Stannard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845" start="3936" end="3950" title="Geri Halliwell" label="Geri Halliwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q216884" start="4066" end="4077" title="Costa Brava" label="Costa Brava"/>
<link wikidata="Q215254" start="4081" end="4094" title="Costa del Sol" label="Costa del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="4110" end="4123" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q219878" start="4177" end="4188" title="Emma Bunton" label="Emma Bunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077388" start="4650" end="4660" title="pop ballad" label="pop ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="4666" end="4673" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="4735" end="4738" title="key (music)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q14254276" start="4742" end="4749" title="E-flat minor" label="E minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="4758" end="4772" title="time signature" label="time signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="4813" end="4818" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800792" start="4880" end="4892" title="introduction (music)" label="introduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="4907" end="4916" title="keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="4921" end="4936" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="4966" end="4980" title="string section" label="string section"/>
<link wikidata="Q273502" start="5010" end="5021" title="Anne Dudley" label="Anne Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616514" start="5052" end="5069" title="verse-chorus form" label="verse-chorus form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109478" start="5113" end="5119" title="Bridge (music)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q191609" start="5134" end="5140" title="Refrain" label="chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="5181" end="5198" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q183932" start="5294" end="5303" title="castanets" label="castanets"/>
<link wikidata="Q930531" start="5308" end="5315" title="Flamenco guitar" label="guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="5319" end="5327" title="flamenco" label="flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q847906" start="5706" end="5712" title="Online magazine" label="e-zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591267" start="5719" end="5733" title="Freaky Trigger" label="Freaky Trigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721514" start="5789" end="5804" title="Alexis Petridis" label="Alexis Petridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="5814" end="5826" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="6677" end="6680" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q121569" start="6783" end="6797" title="Refrigerator magnet" label="fridge magnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609312" start="6882" end="6897" title="Spiceworld Tour" label="Spiceworld Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071032" start="6998" end="7008" title="Smash Hits" label="Smash Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="7072" end="7078" title="Single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="7093" end="7106" title="double A-side" label="double A-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="7198" end="7203" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="7431" end="7448" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki, Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753197" start="7621" end="7646" title="The National Lottery Draws" label="The National Lottery Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471051" start="7710" end="7728" title="Spice Up Your Life" label="Spice Up Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="8001" end="8013" title="Oslo" label="Oslo, Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="8357" end="8372" title="eating disorder" label="eating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="8377" end="8387" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q163749" start="8625" end="8640" title="West Palm Beach" label="West Palm Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328489" start="8799" end="8809" title="Music Week" label="Music Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q408978" start="8973" end="8980" title="airplay" label="airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016767" start="9029" end="9032" title="Independent Local Radio" label="ILR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035441" start="9046" end="9056" title="Capital (radio network)" label="Capital FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166488" start="9074" end="9085" title="Pepsi Chart" label="Pepsi Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="9229" end="9238" title="BBC Radio 1" label="Radio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156992" start="9457" end="9468" title="enhanced CD" label="enhanced CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823265" start="9592" end="9601" title="Tony Rich" label="Tony Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q107602" start="9810" end="9816" title="Cursor (user interface)" label="cursor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="9856" end="9867" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186952" start="9898" end="9920" title="Interactive media" label="interactive multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q719645" start="10011" end="10020" title="CD single" label="CD single"/>
<link wikidata="Q22097653" start="10158" end="10167" title="Resorts World Arena" label="NEC Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="10171" end="10181" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246734" start="10290" end="10298" title="cassette single" label="cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591288" start="10401" end="10414" title="Music journalism" label="music critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388362" start="10439" end="10451" title="Sputnikmusic" label="Sputnikmusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710782" start="10666" end="10678" title="Yahoo! Music" label="Yahoo! Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="10922" end="10940" title="Billboard magazine" label="Billboard magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562831" start="11640" end="11651" title="Gina Arnold" label="Gina Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="11655" end="11664" title="Salon (website)" label="Salon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="11762" end="11775" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241080" start="11798" end="11808" title="David Wild" label="David Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="11890" end="11897" title="Hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="11902" end="11905" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328489" start="12012" end="12022" title="Music Week" label="Music Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413231" start="12168" end="12190" title="Orange County Register" label="Orange County Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q27623" start="12305" end="12313" title="Fernando (song)" label="Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="12324" end="12328" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390965" start="12376" end="12388" title="Daily Record (Scotland)" label="Daily Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071032" start="12450" end="12460" title="Smash Hits" label="Smash Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="12628" end="12635" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q939998" start="12689" end="12703" title="La Isla Bonita" label="La Isla Bonita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738681" start="12732" end="12754" title="The Hamilton Spectator" label="The Hamilton Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299463" start="12862" end="12870" title="Dotmusic" label="Dotmusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q666856" start="12912" end="12934" title="I Will Always Love You" label="I Will Always Love You"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="13030" end="13047" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q723229" start="13062" end="13075" title="Jim DeRogatis" label="Jim DeRogatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028115" start="13153" end="13161" title="Greg Kot" label="Greg Kot"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="13175" end="13190" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587159" start="13248" end="13264" title="Hartford Courant" label="Hartford Courant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12066347" start="13417" end="13427" title="Ann Powers" label="Ann Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13437" end="13455" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q818781" start="13655" end="13660" title="Spice (album)" label="Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="13699" end="13718" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="14015" end="14031" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="14389" end="14397" title="Music recording certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="14405" end="14434" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q266102" start="14668" end="14685" title="European Hot 100 Singles" label="Eurochart Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="15169" end="15180" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344164" start="15333" end="15336" title="RPM (magazine)" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q14918641" start="15514" end="15546" title="Official New Zealand Music Chart" label="Official New Zealand Music Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q843881" start="15778" end="15795" title="Recorded Music NZ" label="Recorded Music NZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="15892" end="15910" title="ARIA Charts" label="ARIA Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q550239" start="16119" end="16160" title="Australian Recording Industry Association" label="Australian Recording Industry Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396976" start="16224" end="16234" title="Anne-Marie" label="Anne-Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q113961995" start="16332" end="16341" title="The Voice UK (series 11)" label="The Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="16586" end="16597" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="16630" end="16637" title="fairy" label="fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="16655" end="16668" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406366" start="16676" end="16685" title="Steve Box" label="Steve Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q301092" start="16689" end="16707" title="Aardman Animations" label="Aardman Animations"/>
<link wikidata="Q870889" start="16749" end="16759" title="Clay animation" label="claymation"/>
<link wikidata="Q691528" start="16776" end="16794" title="Wallace and Gromit" label="Wallace and Gromit"/>
<link wikidata="Q156401" start="16832" end="16843" title="Chicken Run" label="Chicken Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137856" start="17002" end="17013" title="Spice World (film)" label="Spice World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913135" start="17078" end="17084" title="puppet" label="puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="17267" end="17290" title="Children&amp;#x27;s literature" label="children&amp;#x27;s annuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="17304" end="17315" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377323" start="17332" end="17343" title="Rupert Bear" label="Rupert Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="17360" end="17369" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722215" start="17996" end="18010" title="The Chart Show" label="The Chart Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510308" start="18405" end="18410" title="1970s in music" label="1970s"/>
<link wikidata="Q181042" start="18547" end="18562" title="Kinder Surprise" label="Kinder Surprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q853847" start="18958" end="18968" title="pixie dust" label="pixie dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q47043" start="19035" end="19052" title="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube" label="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="19494" end="19509" title="vending machine" label="vending machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="20005" end="20020" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106280" start="20090" end="20101" title="Chris Cowey" label="Chris Cowey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37615" start="20676" end="20693" title="Luciano Pavarotti" label="Luciano Pavarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q279" start="20697" end="20710" title="Modena" label="Modena, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898276" start="20735" end="20758" title="Pavarotti &amp;amp; Friends" label="Pavarotti &amp;amp; Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092356" start="20904" end="20955" title="Pavarotti &amp;amp; Friends for the Children of Liberia" label="Pavarotti &amp;amp; Friends for the Children of Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="21025" end="21032" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857828" start="21062" end="21071" title="Much (TV channel)" label="MuchMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057647" start="21090" end="21114" title="Intimate and Interactive" label="Intimate and Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="21251" end="21258" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609312" start="21326" end="21341" title="Spiceworld Tour" label="Spiceworld Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531737" start="21347" end="21375" title="Christmas in Spiceworld Tour" label="Christmas in Spiceworld Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471509" start="21381" end="21411" title="Return of the Spice Girls" label="Return of the Spice Girls Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q60978693" start="21421" end="21444" title="Spice World – 2019 Tour" label="Spice World – 2019 Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391082" start="21604" end="21612" title="Kenny Ho (stylist)" label="Kenny Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656511" start="21701" end="21736" title="Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium" label="Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="21799" end="21802" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q338450" start="22023" end="22028" title="tango" label="tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471038" start="22693" end="22717" title="Who Do You Think You Are (Spice Girls song)" label="Who Do You Think You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349439" start="22738" end="22762" title="Say You&amp;#x27;ll Be There" label="Say You&amp;#x27;ll Be There"/>
<link wikidata="Q602446" start="23517" end="23523" title="lyrics" label="lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="23525" end="23531" title="Singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="23551" end="23559" title="Record producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="23561" end="23570" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289786" start="23575" end="23586" title="Programming (music)" label="programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q75844915" start="23588" end="23604" title="Biffco" label="Richard Stannard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355977" start="23623" end="23651" title="Spike Stent" label="Mark &amp;quot;Spike&amp;quot; Stent"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="23652" end="23664" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="audio mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="23680" end="23698" title="Audio engineer" label="recording engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="23826" end="23841" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q273502" start="23843" end="23854" title="Anne Dudley" label="Anne Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="23855" end="23873" title="String section" label="string arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="23948" end="23959" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q719645" start="23992" end="24002" title="CD singles" label="CD singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823265" start="24090" end="24099" title="Tony Rich" label="Tony Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="24100" end="24105" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156992" start="24141" end="24157" title="Enhanced CD" label="enhanced element"/>
<link wikidata="Q301092" start="24167" end="24185" title="Aardman Animations" label="Aardman Animations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="24215" end="24226" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="24243" end="24249" title="Graphic design" label="design"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803677" wikidata="Q5645311" url="?curid=803677" title="Haminoeoidea">
<text>Haminoeoidea is a taxonomic superfamily of small sea snails or bubble shells, marine opisthobranch gastropod mollusks in the clade Cephalaspidea, the headshield slugs and bubble snails.

These cephalaspideans do have distinct anatomical and morphological characteristics, but unfortunately many species were described only from empty shells. For proper clarification of the taxonomy, those species still need the research necessary to provide a good description of the external and internal anatomy of the living animal.

==Description of live animal==

The soft parts of the animals can retract completely or partially into their shells, and yet this offers them scant protection, because the aperture is rather wide and there is no operculum. Furthermore, the shell is very fragile and can easily be crushed by a predator.

The cephalic shield of most species in this superfamily has two hind lobes that lie back on the front of the shell. The black eyes are usually buried just beneath the surface of the head.

==Shell description==

These bubble snails have thin, inflated shells ranging in shape from ovoid to flat and oval. They have an involute (sunken) spire.

==Habitat==
One can often find these bubble snails in enormous numbers, burrowing in mud on intertidal and sublittoral beds of green algae such as for example, the sea lettuce, &quot;Ulva lactuca&quot;.

==Feeding habits==
Haminoeid bubble snails are mostly herbivorous.

==Predators==
Their predators include species of carnivorous aglajids such as &quot;Navanax inermis&quot;.

==Families, genera, species==
Families, genera and species within the Haminoeoidea include:
* Superfamily Haminoeoidea
** Family Haminoeidae
** Family Bullactidae : synonym of Haminoeidae Pilsbry, 1895
*** Genus &quot;Bullacta&quot; 
**** &quot;Bullacta exarata&quot; – Distribution: China, Yellow Sea, Indo-Pacific
** Family Smaragdinellidae – Oval yellow-green shell with sunken spire; very large aperture.
*** Genus &quot;Phanerophthalmus&quot; 
**** &quot;Phanerophthalmus cylindricus&quot; – Distribution: Indo-Pacific, Hawaii
**** &quot;Phanerophthalmus smaragdinus&quot; – Distribution: tropical Indo-West Pacific, Hawaii – Length: 16 mm – Description: herbivore with a rather small cephalic shield; small enclosed mantle cavity ending in an exhalant siphon; small shell is partially enclosed in the mantle; color: brown to purple.
*** Genus &quot;Smaragdinella&quot; : synonym of Haminoeidae Pilsbry, 1895
**** &quot;Smaragdinella algirae&quot; 
**** &quot;Smaragdinella calyculata&quot; – Distribution: Japan, Indo-Pacific – Length: 8 mm – Description: green mantle with dark green spots 
**** &quot;Smaragdinella sieboldii&quot; 

==References==

* Rudman, W.B. (1972g) &quot;The herbivorous opisthobranch genera Phanerophthalmus&quot; A. Adams and &quot;Smaragdinella&quot; A. Adams. Proceedings of the Malacological Society of London, 40(3): 189-210, 11 figs.

==External links==
* Oskars T.R., Bouchet P. &amp; Malaquias M.A. (2015). A new phylogeny of the Cephalaspidea (Gastropoda: Heterobranchia) based on expanded taxon sampling and gene markers. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 89: 130-150</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5645311" start="0" end="12" title="Haminoeoidea" label="Haminoeoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="18" end="27" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="28" end="39" title="Taxonomic rank" label="superfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q381180" start="49" end="58" title="sea snail" label="sea snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="78" end="84" title="marine (ocean)" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q752186" start="85" end="98" title="opisthobranch" label="opisthobranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="99" end="108" title="gastropod" label="gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="109" end="116" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371035" start="193" end="206" title="cephalaspidea" label="cephalaspidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="226" end="236" title="Anatomy" label="anatomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="241" end="254" title="Morphology (biology)" label="morphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003497" start="334" end="340" title="gastropod shell" label="shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346768" start="694" end="702" title="aperture (mollusc)" label="aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480851" start="734" end="743" title="Operculum (gastropod)" label="operculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q271844" start="1297" end="1307" title="green alga" label="green alga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109330" start="1334" end="1345" title="sea lettuce" label="sea lettuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="1428" end="1439" title="Herbivore" label="herbivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="1462" end="1470" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q430342" start="1503" end="1511" title="Aglajidae" label="aglajids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173679" start="1526" end="1541" title="Navanax inermis" label="Navanax inermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126467" start="1679" end="1690" title="Haminoeidae" label="Haminoeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126467" start="1701" end="1712" title="Bullactidae" label="Bullactidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q851889" start="1768" end="1776" title="Bullacta" label="Bullacta"/>
<link wikidata="Q851889" start="1795" end="1811" title="Bullacta exarata" label="Bullacta exarata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126467" start="1876" end="1892" title="Smaragdinellidae" label="Smaragdinellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18588823" start="1975" end="1991" title="Phanerophthalmus" label="Phanerophthalmus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2010" end="2038" title="Phanerophthalmus cylindricus" label="Phanerophthalmus cylindricus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2093" end="2121" title="Phanerophthalmus smaragdinus" label="Phanerophthalmus smaragdinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581433" start="2405" end="2418" title="Smaragdinella" label="Smaragdinella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2475" end="2496" title="Smaragdinella algirae" label="Smaragdinella algirae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14361395" start="2515" end="2539" title="Smaragdinella calyculata" label="Smaragdinella calyculata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2659" end="2682" title="Smaragdinella sieboldii" label="Smaragdinella sieboldii"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803678" wikidata="Q1900114" url="?curid=803678" title="Provolone">
<text>Provolone (, ) is an Italian semi-hard cheese made from cow&#x27;s milk. It is an aged &quot;pasta filata&quot; (&#x27;stretched-curd&#x27;) cheese originating in the Campania region, near Vesuvius, where it is still produced in pear, sausage, or cone shapes long. Provolone-type cheeses are also produced in other countries. The most important provolone production region today is northwestern Italy and, in particular, the city of Cremona. Provolone, &quot;provola&quot;, and &quot;provoleta&quot; are versions of the same basic cheese. Some versions of provolone are smoked.

==History and varieties==
The term &quot;provolone&quot; (meaning &#x27;large &quot;provola&quot;&#x27;) appeared around the end of the 19th century, when it started to be manufactured in the southern regions of Italy and assumed its current large size. The smaller sized variant is called &quot;provola&quot; () and comes in plain and smoked (&quot;affumicata&quot;) varieties.

Provolone is a semi-hard cheese with taste varying greatly from &quot;provolone piccante&quot; (sharp, piquant), aged for a minimum of four months and with a very sharp taste, to &quot;provolone dolce&quot; (sweet) with a very mild taste. In &quot;provolone piccante&quot;, the distinctive piquant taste is produced with lipase (enzyme) derived from goat. The &quot;dolce&quot; version uses calf&#x27;s lipase instead.

Both &quot;provolone Valpadana&quot; and &quot;provolone del Monaco&quot; (meaning &#x27;monk&#x27;s provolone&#x27;; from the Naples area of Italy) have received protected designation of origin (PDO) from the European Union, meaning no country other than Italy may legally produce a cheese called that.

In Brazil, Argentina, Bolivia and Uruguay small discs of locally produced pulled-curd provolone of in diameter and in height are sometimes grilled until partially melted and eaten as a starter, often seasoned with herbs. The cheese when served this way is often called &quot;provoleta&quot; in Spanish.

Provolone makes up 2.5% of the cheese produced in the U.S. with of provolone made in 2023.

==See also==

* List of Italian cheeses
* List of stretch-curd cheeses

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1900114" start="0" end="9" title="Provolone" label="Provolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="21" end="28" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29" end="45" title="Types of cheese#Semi-hard cheese" label="semi-hard cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="56" end="59" title="Cattle" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412505" start="93" end="105" title="pasta filata" label="pasta filata"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="141" end="147" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="167" end="175" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q524" start="189" end="197" title="Mount Vesuvius" label="Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q434" start="229" end="233" title="pear" label="pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231" start="433" end="440" title="Cremona" label="Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089049" start="484" end="493" title="provoleta" label="provoleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="570" end="576" title="Smoking (cooking)" label="smoked"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="915" end="921" title="Smoking (cooking)" label="smoked"/>
<link wikidata="Q380967" start="1280" end="1286" title="lipase" label="lipase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="1506" end="1512" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="1542" end="1573" title="protected designation of origin" label="protected designation of origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1687" end="1693" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="1695" end="1704" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="1706" end="1713" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="1718" end="1725" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412505" start="1758" end="1769" title="Pasta filata" label="pulled-curd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089049" start="1959" end="1968" title="provoleta" label="provoleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230305" start="2096" end="2119" title="List of Italian cheeses" label="List of Italian cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088793" start="2122" end="2150" title="List of stretch-curd cheeses" label="List of stretch-curd cheeses"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803679" wikidata="Q865111" url="?curid=803679" title="Pandion I">
<text>In Greek mythology, Pandion I (; Ancient Greek: Πανδίων) was a legendary King of Athens, the son and heir to Erichthonius of Athens and his wife, the naiad Praxithea. Through his father, he was the grandson of the god Hephaestus.

== Family ==
Pandion married a naiad, Zeuxippe, and they had two sons Erechtheus and Butes, and two daughters Procne and Philomela. In some accounts, he was also called the father of Teuthras, father of Thespius, and of Cephalus, lover of Eos (Dawn).

== Mythology ==
Pandion I was the fifth king of Athens in the traditional line of succession as given by the third century BC Parian Chronicle, the chronographer Castor of Rhodes (probably from the late third-century Eratosthenes) and the &quot;Bibliotheca&quot;. He was preceded by Cecrops I, Cranaus, Amphictyon, and Erichthonius, and succeeded by Erechtheus, Cecrops II, and Pandion II. Castor makes Pandion I the son of Erichthonius (the earliest source for this) and says he ruled for 40 years (1437/6–1397/6 BC). It may be that either Pandion I or Pandion II was invented to fill a gap in the mythical history of Athens.

According to the &quot;Bibliotheca&quot;, Pandion fought a war with Labdacus, the king of Thebes, over boundaries, and married his daughter Procne to Tereus in exchange for help in the fighting, and it was during his reign that the gods Demeter and Dionysus came to Attica. After his death, the kingdom of Athens went to his son Erechtheus, while Butes received the priesthoods of Athena and &quot;Poseidon Erechtheus&quot; (in Athens, Erechtheus was a cult-title of Poseidon). He is said to have died of grief when he discovered that his daughters, Procne and Philomela, had died.

Either Pandion I or Pandion II was usually identified with Pandion, the eponymous hero of the Attic tribe Pandionis.

==See also==
*Sanctuary of Pandion

==Notes==
==References==
* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Gantz, Timothy, &quot;Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources&quot;, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2).
* Grimal, Pierre, &quot;The Dictionary of Classical Mythology&quot;, Wiley-Blackwell, 1996, .
* Harding, Phillip, &quot;The Story of Athens: The Fragments of the Local Chronicles of Attika&quot;, Routledge, 2007. .
* Hesiod, &quot;Works and Days&quot;, in &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White&quot;. Homeric Hymns. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hyginus, Gaius Julius, &quot;The Myths of Hyginus&quot;. Edited and translated by Mary A. Grant, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960.
* Kearns, Emily, &quot;The Heroes of Attica (Bulletin Supplement 57)&quot;, University of London Institute of Classical Studies 1989. .
* Ovid, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;, Brookes More. Boston. Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
*Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Thucydides, &quot;Thucydides translated into English; with introduction, marginal analysis, notes, and indices. Volume 1.&quot;, Benjamin Jowett. translator. Oxford. Clarendon Press. 1881. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Smith, William; &quot;A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities&quot;. William Smith, LLD. William Wayte. G. E. Marindin. Albemarle Street, London. John Murray. 1890. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q865111" start="20" end="29" title="Pandion I" label="Pandion I"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="33" end="46" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q780194" start="73" end="87" title="King of Athens" label="King of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q644921" start="109" end="131" title="Erichthonius of Athens" label="Erichthonius of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q182037" start="150" end="155" title="naiad" label="naiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q20871147" start="156" end="165" title="Praxithea" label="Praxithea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44384" start="218" end="228" title="Hephaestus" label="Hephaestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28071422" start="269" end="277" title="Zeuxippe" label="Zeuxippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q301219" start="301" end="311" title="Erechtheus" label="Erechtheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56234353" start="316" end="321" title="Butes" label="Butes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231743" start="341" end="347" title="Procne" label="Procne"/>
<link wikidata="Q115449" start="352" end="361" title="Philomela" label="Philomela"/>
<link wikidata="Q108365426" start="414" end="422" title="Teuthras (mythology)" label="Teuthras"/>
<link wikidata="Q952188" start="434" end="442" title="Thespius" label="Thespius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010239" start="451" end="459" title="Cephalus of Athens" label="Cephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178417" start="470" end="473" title="Eos" label="Eos"/>
<link wikidata="Q780194" start="523" end="537" title="king of Athens" label="king of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q547179" start="609" end="625" title="Parian Chronicle" label="Parian Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349817" start="645" end="661" title="Castor of Rhodes" label="Castor of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="700" end="712" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="728" end="739" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q500739" start="766" end="775" title="Cecrops I" label="Cecrops I"/>
<link wikidata="Q928411" start="777" end="784" title="Cranaus" label="Cranaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q474854" start="786" end="796" title="Amphictyon" label="Amphictyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q644921" start="802" end="814" title="Erichthonius of Athens" label="Erichthonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q301219" start="833" end="843" title="Erechtheus" label="Erechtheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q974346" start="845" end="855" title="Cecrops II" label="Cecrops II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076578" start="861" end="871" title="Pandion II" label="Pandion II"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1134" end="1145" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q847005" start="1179" end="1187" title="Labdacus" label="Labdacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="1201" end="1207" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138506" start="1261" end="1267" title="Tereus" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="1348" end="1355" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="1360" end="1368" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="1492" end="1498" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="1509" end="1517" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931911" start="1753" end="1760" title="Pandion (hero)" label="Pandion"/>
<link wikidata="Q607608" start="1788" end="1799" title="phyle" label="Attic tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415463" start="1800" end="1809" title="Pandionis" label="Pandionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818592" start="1826" end="1846" title="Sanctuary of Pandion" label="Sanctuary of Pandion"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1875" end="1886" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="2564" end="2570" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="2578" end="2592" title="Works and Days" label="Works and Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="2842" end="2863" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus, Gaius Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="3121" end="3125" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="3133" end="3146" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="3255" end="3264" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="3662" end="3672" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="3900" end="3914" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q783118" start="3922" end="3965" title="A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities" label="A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803680" wikidata="Q339043" url="?curid=803680" title="La Juive">
<text>La Juive (, ) is a grand opera in five acts by Fromental Halévy to an original French libretto by Eugène Scribe; it was first performed at the Opéra de Paris, on 23 February 1835.

==Composition history==
&quot;La Juive&quot; was one of the most popular and admired operas of the 19th century. Its libretto was the work of Eugène Scribe, the prolific dramatic author. Scribe was writing to the tastes of the Opéra de Paris, where the work was first performed – a work in five acts presenting spectacular situations (here the Council of Constance of 1414), which would allow a flamboyant staging in a setting which brought out a dramatic situation which was also underlined by a powerful historical subject. In addition to this, there could be choral interludes, ballet and scenic effects which took advantage of the entire range of possibilities available at the Paris Opera.

Because of the story of an impossible love between a Christian man and a Jewish woman, the work has been seen by some as a plea for religious tolerance, in much the same spirit as &quot;Nathan the Wise&quot;, which premiered in 1779, Giacomo Meyerbeer&#x27;s &quot;Les Huguenots&quot; which premiered in 1836, a year after &quot;La Juive&quot;, as well as the 1819 novel &quot;Ivanhoe&quot; by Sir Walter Scott which deals with the same theme. At the time of composition, the July Monarchy had liberalised religious practices in France. Meyerbeer and Fromental Halévy were both Jewish, and storylines dealing with topics of tolerance were common in their operas. Reviews of the initial performances show that journalists of the period responded to the liberalism and to the perceived anti-clericalism of Scribe&#x27;s text rather than to any specifically Jewish theme.

Some believe that the libretto of &quot;La Juive&quot; was designed to provoke audiences to reassess the status of Jews in French society. Others believe that the clichéd portrayal of the Jew Eléazar as secretive, vengeful and materialistic does not bear out this interpretation.

==Performance history==
The opera&#x27;s first, ornate production, costing 150,000 francs, was conducted by François Habeneck. The performances of the soprano Cornélie Falcon in the title role and the dramatic tenor Adolphe Nourrit as Eléazar were particularly noted. Nourrit had significant influence on the opera: Eléazar, originally conceived as a bass part, was rewritten for him, and it appears that it was largely his idea to end act 4 not with a traditional ensemble, but with the aria &quot;Rachel, quand du seigneur&quot; for which he may also have suggested the text. The production was notable for its lavishness, including the on-stage organ in Act I, the enormous supporting cast, and the unprecedentedly elaborate decor. Two teams of scenic artists took responsibility over the stage decorations, Charles Séchan, Léon Feuchère, Jules Diéterle and Édouard Desplechin designing Acts I, II, IV and V, and René-Humanité Philastre and Charles-Antoine Cambon providing the materials for Act III.
&quot;La Juive&quot; enjoyed an international success comparable to that of Meyerbeer&#x27;s popular grand operas. It made its American premiere at the Théâtre d&#x27;Orléans on 13 February 1844. The work was also used for the inaugural performance at the newly constructed Palais Garnier in Paris on 5 January 1875 (the title role was sung by Gabrielle Krauss; the scenery was recreated after the original designs by Jean-Baptiste Lavastre and Édouard Desplechin, Chéret, Charles-Antoine Cambon, and Auguste Alfred Rubé and Philippe Chaperon). 
&quot;La Juive&quot; received its first performance at the Metropolitan Opera in New York on 16 January 1885 with Amalie Materna as Rachel. 

Richard Wagner, who admired &quot;La Juive&quot;, may have borrowed from it the Act I organ effect, for his 1868 opera &quot;Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg&quot;. Moreover, Eléazar&#x27;s tapping at his goldsmith&#x27;s work is echoed by Hans Sachs&#x27;s cobbling during &quot;Die Meistersinger&quot;.

Having last been performed at the Metropolitan Opera in 1890 with Lilli Lehmann as Rachel, &quot; La Juive&quot; was revived in 1919 as a vehicle for the Met&#x27;s star tenor, Enrico Caruso. Eléazar was the last role Caruso added to his repertoire, as well as the last he ever sang in performance, on 24 December 1920. After Caruso&#x27;s death in August, 1921, Giovanni Martinelli succeeded him in the role at the Met and both he and Caruso recorded the opera&#x27;s best known aria, &quot;Rachel! Quand du seigneur&quot;.

After the 1919 revival with Caruso, the Metropolitan Opera programmed &quot;La Juive&quot; semi-regularly until 1936, when it was dropped from the repertory, not to be heard at the Met again for 67 years. The opera fell out of favor in Europe around the same time and has rarely been performed since. American tenor Richard Tucker was a champion of &quot;La Juive&quot; and lobbied for a Met revival with himself as Eléazar. He first sang the role in concert performances in London in 1964. In 1973, he appeared in the opera twice with the New Orleans Opera Association and gave two heavily cut concert performances of the opera, again in London. Tucker also persuaded RCA Red Seal to record a complete performance of &quot;La Juive&quot;, though eventually, RCA would consent only to finance a single record of the opera&#x27;s highlights. Tucker finally convinced the Met&#x27;s general manager, Schuyler Chapin, to mount a new production of &quot;La Juive&quot;, to be performed during the 1975-76 season, but tragically, Tucker died suddenly in January, 1975 and the Met&#x27;s revival of &quot;La Juive&quot; died along with him. The opera was finally revived at the Metropolitan in 2003 with tenor Neil Shicoff as Eléazar. Other modern revivals have been staged at the Vienna State Opera (1999), La Fenice in Venice (2005), the Paris Opera (2007), the Zurich Opera House (2007), the Staatstheater Stuttgart (2008), De Nederlandse Opera in Amsterdam (2009), the Tel Aviv (Israel) Opera and the Mikhailovsky Theatre at Saint Petersburg (both 2010) and the Göteborg Opera (2014). The Bavarian State Opera presented a new production by Calixto Bieito with Roberto Alagna and Aleksandra Kurzak in 2016. A new production was mounted at the Staatsoper Hannover in 2019. Oper Frankfurt produces the opera in 2024, staged by Tatjana Gürbaca and conducted by Henrik Nánási.

== Roles ==

== Synopsis ==
The synopsis below reflects the original version of the opera. Modern performing versions often somewhat adapt this storyline for convenience.

:Place: Constance
:Time: 1414

;Events before the opera begins

The following is a summary of events which took place before the first act of the opera, some of which are only revealed in the course of the action.

When he was young, the Jew Eléazar had lived in Italy near Rome and witnessed the condemnation and executions of his sons as heretics by Count Brogni. Eléazar himself was banished and forced to flee to Switzerland.

During his journey, Eléazar found a baby near death, abandoned inside a burnt-out house which turned out to be the home of the Count. Bandits had set fire to the house, attempting to kill the entire family of Brogni but unaware that the Count himself was in Rome at the time.

Eléazar took the child, a girl, and raised her as his own daughter, naming her Rachel. Brogni discovered the ruins of his house and the bodies of his family upon his return. He subsequently became a priest and later a cardinal.

At the beginning of the opera, in 1414 Rachel (now a young woman) is living with her adopted father in the city of Constance. The forces of the Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund have defeated the Hussites, in battles where Prince Leopold has distinguished himself. The Council of Constance, convened by Antipope John XXIII, has been arranged to resolve Church matters. John XXIII is represented there by Cardinal Gian Francesco Brogni, who was a historical personage. His part in the story of the opera is, however, entirely fictional.

===Act 1===
&quot;A square in the city of Constance in 1414&quot;

Eléazar is a goldsmith. The crowd condemns him for working during a day dedicated to Church festivities. He is saved from a lynching by the arrival of Brogni, who in the process recognises Eléazar as his old adversary.

Prince Léopold arrives in disguise as a young Jewish artist Samuel. Rachel is in love with Samuel and knows nothing of his true identity. Local laws reflect prejudice against the Jews: if a Jew and a Christian have sexual relations, the Christian is excommunicated and the Jew is killed. Léopold is thus taking a great risk in this affair, especially as he is already married to the Princess Eudoxie.
The crowd returns to attack Eléazar, but &#x27;Samuel&#x27; secretly instructs his troops to calm things down. The act closes with a grand triumphal procession.

===Act 2===
&quot;Inside the house of Éléazar&quot;

Rachel has invited &#x27;Samuel&#x27; for the Passover celebration in Eléazar&#x27;s house. He is present while Eléazar and the other Jews sing their Passover prayers. Rachel becomes anxious when she notices that &#x27;Samuel&#x27; refuses to eat the piece of unleavened bread that she has given him. He reveals to her that he is a Christian, without telling her his true identity. Rachel is horrified and reminds him of the terrible consequences of such a relationship.

Princess Eudoxie enters to order from Eléazar a valuable jewel as a present for her husband, at which point Samuel (Prince Léopold) hides.

After Eudoxie leaves, Léopold promises to take Rachel away with him. She tries to resist, worrying about abandoning her father, but as she is about to succumb to his advances, they are confronted by Eléazar, who curses Léopold before the latter runs off.

===Act 3===
&quot;Magnificent gardens&quot;

Rachel, who has followed &#x27;Samuel&#x27; to the Palace, offers her services as a lady&#x27;s maid to Princess Eudoxie. Eléazar arrives at the palace to deliver the jewel. He and Rachel recognise Léopold as &#x27;Samuel&#x27;.
Rachel declares before the assembly that Léopold seduced her and she, Eléazar and Léopold are arrested and placed in prison, on the instructions of Cardinal Brogni.

===Act 4===

&quot;A Gothic interior&quot;

Princess Eudoxie asks to see Rachel in prison, and persuades her to withdraw her allegations. Rachel agrees; Cardinal Brogni agrees to commute Léopold&#x27;s sentence, and to spare Rachel and Eléazar if they convert. Eléazar at first answers that he would rather die, but then makes plans to avenge himself. He reminds the Cardinal of the fire in his house near Rome many years before and tells the Cardinal that his infant daughter did not die. He says that she was saved by a Jew and that only he knows who he is. If he dies, his secret will die with him. Cardinal Brogni begs him to tell him where his daughter is, but in vain. Eléazar sings of the vengeance that he will have in dying, but he suddenly remembers that he will be responsible for the death of Rachel. The only way to save her is to admit that the Cardinal is her father and that she is not Jewish but Christian. The act ends with the opera&#x27;s most famous aria, Eléazar&#x27;s &#x27;Rachel, quand du Seigneur&#x27;. He does not want to sacrifice Rachel to his hatred of Christians, and renounces his revenge. However, when he hears the cries from a pogrom in the streets, he decides that God wants him to bear witness in death with his daughter to the God of Israel.

===Act 5===
&quot;A large tent supported by Gothic columns&quot;

Eléazar and Rachel are brought to the gallows where they will be thrown into a cauldron of boiling water. Rachel is terrified. Eléazar explains that she can be saved if she converts to Christianity. She refuses and climbs to the gallows before him. As the people are singing various prayers, Cardinal Brogni asks Eléazar if his own daughter is still alive. Eléazar says that she is and when Cardinal Brogni asks where she can be found, Eléazar points to the cauldron, saying &quot;There she is!&quot; He then climbs to his own death while the Cardinal falls on his knees. The opera ends with a chorus of monks, soldiers and the people singing &quot;It is done and we are avenged on the Jews!&quot;

==Recordings==
*1973 – Richard Tucker (Eléazar), Yasuko Hayashi (Rachel), Michèle Le Bris (Eudoxie), Juan Sabate (Léopold), David Gwynne (Brogni) – live concert performance, London, cond. Anton Guadagno – Opera d&#x27;Oro CD: OPD-1333.
*1974 (Highlights) – Richard Tucker (Eléazar), Martina Arroyo (Rachel), Anna Moffo (Eudoxie), Juan Sabate (Léopold), Bonaldo Giaiotti (Brogni) – Ambrosian Opera Chorus, New Philharmonia Orchestra, cond. Antonio de Almeida – RCA Red Seal LP: ARL1-0447 CD: 886446206530
*1989 – José Carreras (Eléazar), Júlia Várady (Rachel), June Anderson (Eudoxie), Dalmacio Gonzalez (Léopold), Ferruccio Furlanetto (Brogni) – Ambrosian Opera Chorus, Philharmonia Orchestra, cond. Antonio de Almeida – Philips CD: 420 190–2.
*2003 – Neil Shicoff (Eléazar), Soile Isokoski (Rachel), Regina Schörg (Eudoxie), Zoran Todorovic (Léopold), Alastair Miles (Brogni) – Chor und Orchester der Wiener Staatsoper, Cond. Simone Young – RCA Red Seal CD: 74321795962
*2003 – Neil Shicoff (Eléazar), Krassimira Stoyanova (Rachel), Simina Ivan (Eudoxie), Jianyi Zhang (Léopold), Walter Fink (Cardinal Brogni) – Chor und Orchester der Wiener Staatsoper, cond. Vjekoslav Šutej – Deutsche Grammophon DVD: 00440 073 4001
*The opera&#x27;s best known aria, &quot;Rachel! Quand du seigneur&quot;, has been recorded by numerous renowned tenors, including Enrico Caruso, Giovanni Martinelli, Beniamino Gigli, Placido Domingo, Jonas Kaufmann and Léon Escalaïs.

==Appropriations==
Rachel, the Jewish prostitute in Marcel Proust&#x27;s &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot;, is nicknamed by the narrator &quot;Rachel quand du Seigneur&quot;. As Halévy&#x27;s Rachel is both Jewish and Christian, so Proust&#x27;s Rachel is both sexual commodity and, in the eyes of her lover Robert de Saint-Loup, an idolised lady of great price. 

The Bollywood movie &quot;Yahudi&quot; may be based on this opera.

==References==
Notes

Sources
*Conway, David, &quot;Jewry in Music: Entry to the Profession from the Enlightenment to Richard Wagner&quot;, Cambridge, 2011. 
*Leich-Galland, Karl, &quot;Fromental Halévy: La juive – Dossier de la presse Parisienne&quot;, Saarbrücken, 1987.
*Macdonald, Hugh, &quot;La juive&quot;, &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Opera&quot;, ed. Stanley Sadie, Vol. Two. London: 1992 

==External links==
* &quot;La Juive&quot; French libretto (Oeuvres complètes de Scribe, vol. 2, Paris, 1841) at Google Books
* &quot;La Juive&quot; French libretto (Paris, 1935) at Gallica</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q599099" start="19" end="30" title="grand opera" label="grand opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q313917" start="47" end="63" title="Fromental Halévy" label="Fromental Halévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="86" end="94" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q319261" start="98" end="111" title="Eugène Scribe" label="Eugène Scribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q283339" start="143" end="157" title="Opéra National de Paris" label="Opéra de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="298" end="306" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q319261" start="323" end="336" title="Eugène Scribe" label="Eugène Scribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q283339" start="408" end="422" title="Opéra national de Paris" label="Opéra de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="525" end="545" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461198" start="950" end="962" title="La Belle Juive" label="Jewish woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q286611" start="1063" end="1078" title="Nathan the Wise" label="Nathan the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="1111" end="1128" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Giacomo Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q466848" start="1142" end="1155" title="Les Huguenots" label="Les Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q840974" start="1254" end="1261" title="Ivanhoe" label="Ivanhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="1275" end="1287" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="1353" end="1366" title="July Monarchy" label="July Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q313917" start="1428" end="1444" title="Fromental Halévy" label="Fromental Halévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="1629" end="1639" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="1661" end="1677" title="anti-clericalism" label="anti-clericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q957041" start="2136" end="2153" title="François Habeneck" label="François Habeneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604408" start="2187" end="2202" title="Cornélie Falcon" label="Cornélie Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q634623" start="2244" end="2259" title="Adolphe Nourrit" label="Adolphe Nourrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18197803" start="2839" end="2853" title="Charles Séchan" label="Charles Séchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188373" start="2870" end="2884" title="Jules Diéterle" label="Jules Diéterle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579809" start="2889" end="2907" title="Édouard Desplechin" label="Édouard Desplechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074717" start="2972" end="2994" title="Charles-Antoine Cambon" label="Charles-Antoine Cambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="3108" end="3117" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799913" start="3184" end="3206" title="Théâtre d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Théâtre d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q187840" start="3306" end="3320" title="Palais Garnier" label="Palais Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959810" start="3376" end="3392" title="Gabrielle Krauss" label="Gabrielle Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319386" start="3450" end="3472" title="Jean-Baptiste Lavastre" label="Jean-Baptiste Lavastre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579809" start="3477" end="3495" title="Édouard Desplechin" label="Édouard Desplechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074717" start="3505" end="3527" title="Charles-Antoine Cambon" label="Charles-Antoine Cambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q50356404" start="3533" end="3552" title="Auguste Alfred Rubé" label="Auguste Alfred Rubé"/>
<link wikidata="Q26241155" start="3557" end="3574" title="Philippe Chaperon" label="Philippe Chaperon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="3637" end="3655" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840970" start="3692" end="3706" title="Amalie Materna" label="Amalie Materna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="3720" end="3734" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q465540" start="3845" end="3875" title="Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg" label="Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q19543" start="3958" end="3968" title="Hans Sachs" label="Hans Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q61641" start="4090" end="4103" title="Lilli Lehmann" label="Lilli Lehmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q170726" start="4201" end="4214" title="Enrico Caruso" label="Enrico Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q944986" start="4387" end="4406" title="Giovanni Martinelli" label="Giovanni Martinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q943463" start="4866" end="4880" title="Richard Tucker (tenor)" label="Richard Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010759" start="5090" end="5119" title="New Orleans Opera Association" label="New Orleans Opera Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635905" start="5219" end="5231" title="RCA Red Seal" label="RCA Red Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433067" start="5448" end="5463" title="Schuyler Chapin" label="Schuyler Chapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q695476" start="5754" end="5766" title="Neil Shicoff" label="Neil Shicoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q209937" start="5825" end="5843" title="Vienna State Opera" label="Vienna State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q223942" start="5852" end="5861" title="La Fenice" label="La Fenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="5865" end="5871" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q670406" start="5908" end="5926" title="Zurich Opera House" label="Zurich Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128255" start="5939" end="5962" title="Staatstheater Stuttgart" label="Staatstheater Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281375" start="5971" end="5991" title="De Nederlandse Opera" label="De Nederlandse Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="6017" end="6025" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334387" start="6049" end="6069" title="Mikhailovsky Theatre" label="Mikhailovsky Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="6073" end="6089" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510029" start="6110" end="6124" title="Göteborg Opera" label="Göteborg Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q681931" start="6137" end="6157" title="Bavarian State Opera" label="Bavarian State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q328827" start="6188" end="6202" title="Calixto Bieito" label="Calixto Bieito"/>
<link wikidata="Q267617" start="6208" end="6222" title="Roberto Alagna" label="Roberto Alagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708573" start="6227" end="6244" title="Aleksandra Kurzak" label="Aleksandra Kurzak"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142443" start="6290" end="6309" title="Staatsoper Hannover" label="Staatsoper Hannover"/>
<link wikidata="Q568931" start="6319" end="6333" title="Oper Frankfurt" label="Oper Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452551" start="6372" end="6387" title="Tatjana Gürbaca" label="Tatjana Gürbaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834" start="6601" end="6610" title="Constanz" label="Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="7674" end="7692" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="7693" end="7702" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q131372" start="7721" end="7728" title="Hussite" label="Hussite"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="7794" end="7814" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q294599" start="7828" end="7847" title="Antipope John XXIII" label="Antipope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7938" end="7959" title="Gian Francesco Brogni" label="Gian Francesco Brogni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="8564" end="8580" title="miscegnation" label="sexual relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="9011" end="9019" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q943463" start="12344" end="12358" title="Richard Tucker (tenor)" label="Richard Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618863" start="12509" end="12523" title="Anton Guadagno" label="Anton Guadagno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702112" start="12604" end="12618" title="Martina Arroyo" label="Martina Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q235105" start="12629" end="12639" title="Anna Moffo" label="Anna Moffo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087536" start="12674" end="12690" title="Bonaldo Giaiotti" label="Bonaldo Giaiotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046309" start="12726" end="12752" title="Philharmonia Orchestra" label="New Philharmonia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q948465" start="12760" end="12778" title="Antonio de Almeida (conductor)" label="Antonio de Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635905" start="12781" end="12793" title="RCA Red Seal" label="RCA Red Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q485165" start="12833" end="12846" title="José Carreras" label="José Carreras"/>
<link wikidata="Q257381" start="12858" end="12870" title="Júlia Várady" label="Júlia Várady"/>
<link wikidata="Q269693" start="12881" end="12894" title="June Anderson" label="June Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q695741" start="12935" end="12955" title="Ferruccio Furlanetto" label="Ferruccio Furlanetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046309" start="12991" end="13013" title="Philharmonia Orchestra" label="Philharmonia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q695476" start="13073" end="13085" title="Neil Shicoff" label="Neil Shicoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q275213" start="13097" end="13111" title="Soile Isokoski" label="Soile Isokoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q113448" start="13122" end="13135" title="Regina Schörg" label="Regina Schörg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42892714" start="13147" end="13162" title="Zoran Todorovic" label="Zoran Todorovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194204" start="13174" end="13188" title="Alastair Miles" label="Alastair Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q209937" start="13200" end="13240" title="Vienna State Opera" label="Chor und Orchester der Wiener Staatsoper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635905" start="13263" end="13275" title="RCA Red Seal" label="RCA Red Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q695476" start="13300" end="13312" title="Neil Shicoff" label="Neil Shicoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191862" start="13378" end="13390" title="Jianyi Zhang" label="Jianyi Zhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q209937" start="13434" end="13474" title="Vienna State Opera" label="Chor und Orchester der Wiener Staatsoper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292439" start="13482" end="13497" title="Vjekoslav Šutej" label="Vjekoslav Šutej"/>
<link wikidata="Q170726" start="13671" end="13684" title="Enrico Caruso" label="Enrico Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q944986" start="13686" end="13705" title="Giovanni Martinelli" label="Giovanni Martinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q159473" start="13707" end="13722" title="Beniamino Gigli" label="Beniamino Gigli"/>
<link wikidata="Q130853" start="13724" end="13739" title="Placido Domingo" label="Placido Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q62358" start="13741" end="13755" title="Jonas Kaufmann" label="Jonas Kaufmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148496" start="13760" end="13773" title="Léon Escalaïs" label="Léon Escalaïs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="13828" end="13841" title="Marcel Proust" label="Marcel Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="13855" end="13877" title="In Search of Lost Time" label="In Search of Lost Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571323" start="14168" end="14174" title="Yahudi" label="Yahudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931629" start="14484" end="14499" title="Hugh Macdonald (musicologist)" label="Macdonald, Hugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764725" start="14533" end="14562" title="New Grove Dictionary of Opera" label="New Grove Dictionary of Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="14726" end="14738" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="14795" end="14802" title="Gallica" label="Gallica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803681" wikidata="Q1076578" url="?curid=803681" title="Pandion II">
<text>In Greek mythology, Pandion II ( or ; Ancient Greek: Πανδίων) was a legendary King of Athens, the son and heir of King Cecrops II and his wife Metiadusa, daughter of Eupalamus.

== Family ==
Pandion was the father of Aegeus, Pallas, Nisos, Lycus and the wife of Sciron by Pylia, daughter of King Pylas of Megara.

== Mythology ==
Pandion II was the eighth king of Athens in the traditional line of succession as given by the third century BC Parian Chronicle, the chronographer Castor of Rhodes (probably from the late third-century Eratosthenes) and the &quot;Bibliotheca&quot;. He was preceded by Cecrops I, Cranaus, Amphictyon, Erichthonius, Pandion I, Erechtheus, and Cecrops II, and succeeded by Aegeus and Theseus. Castor gives his reign as 25 years (1307/6–1282/1). Originally there may have been a single Pandion, and either Pandion I or Pandion II may have been a later invention in order to fill a gap in the mythical history of Athens. Pausanias calls this Pandion the father of Procne and Philomela, usually considered to be the daughters of Pandion I.

Pandion was exiled from Athens by the sons of his uncle Metion who sought to put Metion on the throne. Pandion fled to Megara where he married Pylia, daughter of King Pylas. Later, Pylas went into voluntary exile to Messenia, because he had killed his uncle, Bias. Pylas then arranged for his son-in-law to be king of Megara. Pylia bore Pandion his four sons. When Pandion died at Megara, Nisos succeeded him as king. He had a hero shrine at Megara at the Bluff of Athene the Diver-bird. After this death, his other sons returned to Athens and drove out the sons of Metion, putting Aegeus on the throne.

Either Pandion II or Pandion I was usually identified with Pandion, the eponymous hero of the Attic tribe Pandionis.

==See also==
*Sanctuary of Pandion

==Notes==
==References==
* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Gantz, Timothy, &quot;Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources&quot;, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2).
* Harding, Phillip, &quot;The Story of Athens: The Fragments of the Local Chronicles of Attika&quot;, Routledge, 2007. .
* Herodotus; &quot;Histories&quot;, A. D. Godley (translator), Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1920; . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Kearns, Emily, &quot;The Heroes of Attica (Bulletin Supplement 57)&quot;, University of London Institute of Classical Studies 1989. .
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
*Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Smith, William; &quot;A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities&quot;. William Smith, LLD. William Wayte. G. E. Marindin. Albemarle Street, London. John Murray. 1890. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Strabo, &quot;The Geography of Strabo.&quot; Edition by H.L. Jones. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Strabo, &quot;Geographica&quot; edited by A. Meineke. Leipzig: Teubner. 1877. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076578" start="20" end="30" title="Pandion II" label="Pandion II"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="38" end="51" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q780194" start="78" end="92" title="List of kings of Athens" label="King of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q974346" start="119" end="129" title="Cecrops II" label="Cecrops II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855596" start="143" end="152" title="Metiadusa" label="Metiadusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562019" start="166" end="175" title="Eupalamus" label="Eupalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191725" start="217" end="223" title="Aegeus" label="Aegeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q429306" start="225" end="231" title="Pallas (son of Pandion)" label="Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136201" start="233" end="238" title="Nisos" label="Nisos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566891" start="240" end="245" title="Lycus (mythology)" label="Lycus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469237" start="262" end="268" title="Sciron" label="Sciron"/>
<link wikidata="Q130244114" start="272" end="277" title="Pylia (mythology)" label="Pylia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411223" start="296" end="301" title="Pylas" label="Pylas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184864" start="305" end="311" title="Megara" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q547179" start="442" end="458" title="Parian Chronicle" label="Parian Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349817" start="478" end="494" title="Castor of Rhodes" label="Castor of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="533" end="545" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="561" end="572" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q500739" start="599" end="608" title="Cecrops I" label="Cecrops I"/>
<link wikidata="Q928411" start="610" end="617" title="Cranaus" label="Cranaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q474854" start="619" end="629" title="Amphictyon" label="Amphictyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q644921" start="631" end="643" title="Erichthonius of Athens" label="Erichthonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q865111" start="645" end="654" title="Pandion I" label="Pandion I"/>
<link wikidata="Q301219" start="656" end="666" title="Erechtheus" label="Erechtheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q974346" start="672" end="682" title="Cecrops II" label="Cecrops II"/>
<link wikidata="Q191725" start="701" end="707" title="Aegeus" label="Aegeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="712" end="719" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="947" end="956" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231743" start="990" end="996" title="Procne" label="Procne"/>
<link wikidata="Q115449" start="1001" end="1010" title="Philomela" label="Philomela"/>
<link wikidata="Q865111" start="1054" end="1063" title="Pandion I" label="Pandion I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1090" end="1096" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q591842" start="1122" end="1128" title="Metion" label="Metion"/>
<link wikidata="Q184864" start="1185" end="1191" title="Megara" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723843" start="1282" end="1290" title="Messenia" label="Messenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30096658" start="1325" end="1329" title="Bias (mythology)" label="Bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q591842" start="1632" end="1638" title="Metion" label="Metion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931911" start="1730" end="1737" title="Pandion (hero)" label="Pandion"/>
<link wikidata="Q244490" start="1765" end="1770" title="Attic" label="Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818592" start="1803" end="1823" title="Sanctuary of Pandion" label="Sanctuary of Pandion"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1852" end="1863" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="2447" end="2456" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="2458" end="2479" title="The Histories of Herodotus" label="&amp;quot;Histories&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647667" start="2481" end="2493" title="A. D. Godley" label="A. D. Godley"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2738" end="2747" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="3145" end="3159" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q783118" start="3167" end="3210" title="A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities" label="A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="3363" end="3369" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803684" wikidata="Q2471038" url="?curid=803684" title="Who Do You Think You Are (Spice Girls song)">
<text>&quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; is a song performed by British pop group Spice Girls. It was written by the group members with Paul Wilson and Andy Watkins—also known as Absolute—for the group&#x27;s debut album &quot;Spice&quot;, released in November 1996. The song is heavily influenced by early 1990s dance-pop, and has a nu-disco-style beat that resembles the music of the late 1970s. Its lyrics are about the superstar life, and how someone can get trapped in the world of fame.

In February 1997, the group opened the Brit Awards with &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot;. The Union Jack dress that Geri Halliwell wore during the performance made the front page of various newspapers, and is now remembered as one of the most iconic symbols of Cool Britannia. &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; became the official single of the 1997 Comic Relief. A video with the Sugar Lumps—a satirical version of the group—was released to help raise money for charitable causes and donated all the proceedings from the single.

&quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; was a commercial and critical success, with Melanie Chisholm&#x27;s vocals receiving praise from pop music critics. Released with &quot;Mama&quot; as a double A-side single in March 1997, it became the group&#x27;s fourth consecutive single to top the UK Singles Chart, making them the first act in UK chart history to have its first four singles reach number one. Additionally, it was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI), and performed well internationally, reaching the top ten in many European countries and New Zealand, and the top twenty in Australia, France, and Norway.

==Background==
In December 1994, the Spice Girls persuaded their former managers—father-and-son team Bob and Chris Herbert—to set up a showcase in front of industry writers, producers and A&amp;R men at the Nomis Studios in Shepherd&#x27;s Bush, London. Among the attendees was BMG Publishing&#x27;s Mark Fox, former percussionist of the 1980s new wave band Haircut One Hundred. Since the showcase, Fox was unofficially helping the group to get contacts in the business. In May 1995, he introduced the group to Paul Wilson and Andy Watkins—the songwriters and production duo known as Absolute. Fox phoned the duo and told them: &quot;You won&#x27;t believe it, but I&#x27;ve got your act. They&#x27;ve just walked in the door. They&#x27;re beautiful, everything you&#x27;ve been looking for. I&#x27;ll bring them down straight away.&quot;

Watkins remembers the first time they saw the group: &quot;I saw Mark Fox. And then I saw these little girls skipping and running around. And they looked about thirteen. This can&#x27;t be them. No way!&quot;. Nevertheless, the Spice Girls managed to impress them. They played a few of their tracks, but neither Watkins nor Wilson particularly liked them, except for a song the group wrote with Richard Stannard and Matt Rowe, called &quot;Feed Your Love&quot;, which the duo thought was &quot;dark and cool&quot;. A songwriting session was booked within the next days.

==Writing and recording==
The songwriting session—held at Absolute&#x27;s studio located on Tagg&#x27;s Island near Chertsey—did not seem to go well at the beginning, as the duo was heavily into R&amp;B music at the time, while the group according to Wilson was &quot;always very poptastic&quot;. After two sessions the duo phoned their managers and told them that the musical association between them and the group was not working. At this point, the duo heard &quot;Wannabe&quot; for the first time, Wilson remembers: &quot;We listen to it, and we didn&#x27;t get it at all. It was so different to what we were doing. We thought, &#x27;How&#x27;s this gonna work? We&#x27;re not the right people to be doing this band.&#x27;&quot; For the next session the group wanted to write something uptempo and a bit more fun. A full-on disco backing track came up, and &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; evolved from there. Wilson commented about that session:

The thing is when they wrote they were also writing the dance routine, constructing the video, all at the same time as writing the song. And that&#x27;s when the penny dropped. They say that the mother of invention is copying somebody and getting it wrong. Their sound was actually not getting R&amp;B quite right.

&quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; and three other tracks written by the group and Absolute appeared on the &quot;Spice&quot; album. The songs were produced and recorded for the most part at Olympic Studios in Barnes, London. At this time, the autotune facility was not available and most of the vocals were recorded with few adjustments made afterwards, as Wilson remembers: &quot;Because of the fact we were not using computers, we had to work them very hard. They were in that recording booth for hours because we just had to get the right take&quot;.

==Composition==

&quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; is an uptempo dance-pop song, with influences of the early &#x27;90s Europop, and a disco–style beat that resembles the music of the late &#x27;70s. It is written in the key of F minor, with a time signature set on common time, and moves at a fast tempo of 120 beats per minute.

The song is constructed in a verse-pre-chorus-chorus form, with a bridge before the third and final chorus. It starts with an instrumental introduction, with a simple chord progression of Fm7–Gm7, that is also used during the verses. In the first verse, Geri Halliwell and Emma Bunton trade lines in a wry manner, then the chord progression changes to G7–Bm–G7–Bm–G7–Fm7 during the pre-chorus, which features Melanie Chisholm&#x27;s vocals prominently. After the chorus, the same pattern occurs leading to the second chorus, with Victoria Beckham and Melanie Brown singing the second verse. Then the group sings the bridge, the pre-chorus, and repeats the chorus until the song gradually fades out, while Chisholm adds the high harmony—&quot;Swing it, shake it, move it, make it&quot;.

The inspiration for the lyrics comes from some of the people the group met in the music industry, and are about the presumptuous superstar life, and how someone can get trapped in the world of fame, much like the Temptations&#x27; 1971 classic &quot;Superstar (Remember How You Got Where You Are)&quot;.

==Reception==

===Critical response===
&quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; was generally well received by contemporary music critics. In a review of the group&#x27;s debut album &quot;Spice&quot;, Chuck Campbell of the &quot;Star-News&quot; said it is &quot;a slamming dance song&quot;. Daniel Incognito of Sputnikmusic said that with a &quot;dynamite chorus harmonising the girls voices, &#x27;Who Do You Think You Are&#x27; still feels relevant today&quot;, he added that &quot;each girl excels in their solo-lines&quot;, and believed that Chisholm &quot;provides [a] delicious contrast with her loud and spirited lines&quot;. The &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; called the song &quot;a full-on disco number which would get to No. 1 even if it wasn&#x27;t by Spice Girls and even if they weren&#x27;t giving all the money to Comic Relief&quot;.

Melissa Ruggieri of the &quot;Richmond Times-Dispatch&quot; criticised the track, referring to it as &quot;a quick blast of vapid fluff&quot;. AllMusic&#x27;s Jason Elias complimented Chisholm&#x27;s vocals and called her &quot;the star of the show&quot;. He also said that &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; was &quot;one of their strongest and underrated songs&quot;, adding that it was &quot;proof that the Spice Girls often had more savvy distilling different genres and styles than their American counterparts&quot;. In a review of the group&#x27;s 2007 compilation album &quot;Greatest Hits&quot;, Talia Kraines of BBC Music called it &quot;their piece de resistance [...][that] still manages to fill dancefloors&quot;. Dave Fawbert from &quot;ShortList&quot; noted it as &quot;a perfect little funky, soulful pop song&quot;.

===Chart performance===

&quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; was released in the UK as a double A-side single with &quot;Mama&quot; on 3 March 1997. It debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number one, with sales of 248,000 copies, becoming the group&#x27;s fourth consecutive chart-topper. This made the Spice Girls the first act in UK chart history to have its first four singles reach number one, breaking the record set by Gerry &amp; The Pacemakers, Frankie Goes to Hollywood, Jive Bunny and the Mastermixers and Robson &amp; Jerome with three number ones each. It spent three weeks at number one, nine weeks in the top forty, fifteen weeks in the top seventy-five, and sold 786,000 copies as of May 2019, earning a platinum certification by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI).

&quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; was commercially successful in Europe. It peaked at number three on the Eurochart Hot 100, and performed similarly in other European charts. It became the group&#x27;s third number-one single in Ireland, and peaked inside the top ten in Belgium (both the Flemish and French charts), Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Switzerland. In France, &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; was released as a standalone single in June 1997. It debuted and peaked at number sixteen, and stayed ten weeks on the chart. In December 1997, it was certified silver by the Syndicat National de l&#x27;Édition Phonographique (SNEP).

In New Zealand, it debuted on 23 March 1997 at number ten, while their three first singles were slowly descending from the chart. It peaked at number six and stayed fifteen weeks on the chart. In Australia, it did not perform as well as their previous releases. In July 1997, it debuted on the singles chart at number thirteen, but was unable to reach a higher position and dropped off the chart after fourteen weeks.

==Music video==

The music video for &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; was directed in February 1997 by Gregg Masuak, and filmed in a theatre located in the north of London. There are two edited versions of the video: the original version and the director&#x27;s cut. It features the Spice Girls singing and dancing solo in front of various colourful backgrounds whilst filmed with a Steadicam. Other scenes show the group performing on a stage in front of an energetic crowd. In addition, there are many background performers doing unusual tricks. Chisholm wrote about the shoot: &quot;We shot the video for &#x27;Who Do You Think You Are&#x27; in a really mad club—a real dive. The toilets were horrible and we had to have our make-up done in a Winnebago. The vibe was excellent, though—I think it was my favourite video because it was such good fun. I felt like a proper pop star. [...] It was just how you imagine it when you&#x27;re young&quot;.

A third version of the video (known as the Sugar Lumps version), which adds the Sugar Lumps—a satirical version of the Spice Girls played by Kathy Burke, Dawn French, Llewella Gideon, Lulu, and Jennifer Saunders—was filmed for the &quot;Red Nose Day&quot; of the 1997 Comic Relief, one of the two high-profile telethon events held in the United Kingdom. The video starts with the Sugar Lumps as schoolgirls dreaming of becoming Spice Girls, and ends with them joining the group on stage, while dancing and lip-synching the song. Halliwell commented about the shoot: &quot;The women were all really warm and funny and nice. The freakiest thing about it was seeing Jennifer Saunders. She looked just like me and everyone said they thought she was me. It was absolutely bizarre–the make-up, everything. It was scary–like, do I really do that?&quot;.
==Live performances==

The song was performed on television in both the UK and Continental Europe, including &quot;An Audience with...&quot;, &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;, the &quot;Bravo Supershow&quot;, the 1997 Royal Variety Performance, and the &quot;Red Nose Day&quot; of the 1997 Comic Relief—alongside the Sugar Lumps.

In February 1997, the group performed it at the 1997 Brit Awards. They started rehearsals a few days after they returned to the UK from a promotional tour in the US, with choreographer Priscilla Samuels, who worked with the group on Fuller&#x27;s recommendation. On 24 February 1997, in front of a thousand VIPs at the Earls Court Exhibition Centre, the group opened the show with a lip-synched rendition of &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot;. Halliwell&#x27;s oufit, a black coloured mini dress emblazoned with a Union Jack on the front and a white peace symbol on the back, made the front page of various newspapers, and is now remembered as one of the most iconic symbols of Cool Britannia. For the Return of the Spice Girls, Italian fashion designer Roberto Cavalli designed Halliwell a new Union Jack dress modelled on the original. The new version appeared slightly longer and the flag was made out of rhinestones and Swarovski crystals. Thirteen years later, at the 2010 Brit Awards, the group&#x27;s &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; performance won the Most Memorable Performance award of the BRITS last thirty years.

In October 1997, the group performed it as the second song of their first live concert at the Abdi İpekçi Arena in Istanbul, Turkey. The performance was broadcast on Showtime in a pay-per-view event titled &quot;Spice Girls in Concert Wild!&quot;, and was later included in the VHS and DVD release &quot;Girl Power! Live in Istanbul&quot;. The Spice Girls have performed the song on their four tours, the Spiceworld Tour, the Christmas in Spiceworld Tour, the Return of the Spice Girls Tour and the Spice World – 2019 Tour. The performance at the Spiceworld Tour&#x27;s final concert can be found on the video: &quot;Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium&quot;, filmed in London, on 20 September 1998. It remained in the group&#x27;s live set after Halliwell&#x27;s departure. The first verse had originally been sung by Halliwell with Bunton. After Halliwell&#x27;s departure, her parts were taken by Chisholm on the Spiceworld Tour, and by Brown on the Christmas in Spiceworld Tour. In 2019 during Spice World – 2019 Tour Geri sang absent Victoria&#x27;s original lines.

==Formats and track listings==
These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot;:

*UK CD2/Australian CD2/Brazilian CD/European CD2/South African CD/Digital EP 2
# &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 3:44
# &quot;Mama&quot; – 3:40
# &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 9:30
# &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 7:00

*French CD
# &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 3:44
# &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 3:44

*UK 12&quot; promo vinyl single
# A1: &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 9:30
# B1: &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 7:00
# B2: &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 4:40

*Italian 12&quot; vinyl single
# A1: &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 9:30
# A2: &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 4:40
# B1: &quot;Mama&quot; – 5:03
# B2: &quot;Who Do You Think You Are&quot; – 7:00
==Credits and personnel==
* Spice Girls – lead vocals, lyrics
* Absolute – lyrics, production, all instruments
* Dave Way – audio mixing
* Jeremy Wheatley – recording engineer
* Adam Brown – assistant
* Mary Pearce – additional background vocals

Published by Windswept Pacific Music Ltd, 19 Music and BMG Music Publishing Ltd.

==Charts==
All entries charted with &quot;Mama&quot; unless otherwise noted.


===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==




==Release history==
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2471038" start="6" end="30" title="Who Do You Think You Are (Spice Girls song)" label="Who Do You Think You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="68" end="71" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="78" end="89" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q727927" start="175" end="183" title="Absolute (production team)" label="Absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q818781" start="223" end="228" title="Spice (album)" label="Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q211756" start="309" end="318" title="dance-pop" label="dance-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045538" start="330" end="338" title="nu-disco" label="nu-disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209526" start="419" end="428" title="superstar" label="superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="483" end="487" title="Celebrity" label="fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117668" start="529" end="540" title="1997 Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603733" start="588" end="604" title="Union Jack dress" label="Union Jack dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845" start="610" end="624" title="Geri Halliwell" label="Geri Halliwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129660" start="755" end="769" title="Cool Britannia" label="Cool Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="847" end="859" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q151830" start="1109" end="1118" title="Melanie C" label="Melanie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916334" start="1201" end="1205" title="Mama (Spice Girls song)" label="Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="1217" end="1230" title="A-side and B-side" label="double A-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1317" end="1333" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="1461" end="1469" title="Music recording sales certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="1477" end="1506" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932766" start="1770" end="1773" title="Bob Herbert (manager)" label="Bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106862" start="1778" end="1791" title="Chris Herbert" label="Chris Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="1857" end="1864" title="Artists and repertoire" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026182" start="1893" end="1913" title="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush" label="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="1947" end="1961" title="Bertelsmann Music Group" label="BMG Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="2013" end="2021" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q366679" start="2027" end="2046" title="Haircut One Hundred" label="Haircut One Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q727927" start="2253" end="2261" title="Absolute (production team)" label="Absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q75844915" start="2904" end="2920" title="Biffco" label="Richard Stannard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675209" start="3172" end="3190" title="Tagg&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Tagg&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070428" start="3196" end="3204" title="Chertsey" label="Chertsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="3275" end="3282" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q418833" start="3548" end="3555" title="Wannabe (song)" label="Wannabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255006" start="3870" end="3877" title="uptempo" label="uptempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="3908" end="3913" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q818781" start="4468" end="4473" title="Spice (album)" label="Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q943742" start="4545" end="4560" title="Olympic Studios" label="Olympic Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q668140" start="4564" end="4570" title="Barnes, London" label="Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q784762" start="4598" end="4606" title="autotune" label="autotune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255006" start="4970" end="4977" title="uptempo" label="uptempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q211756" start="4978" end="4987" title="dance-pop" label="dance-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q517415" start="5033" end="5040" title="Europop" label="Europop"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="5048" end="5053" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q283910" start="5141" end="5148" title="F-sharp minor" label="F minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="5157" end="5171" title="time signature" label="time signature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5225" end="5241" title="Tempo#Dance music – Beats per minute" label="beats per minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561199" start="5273" end="5296" title="Song structure (popular music)" label="verse-pre-chorus-chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109478" start="5310" end="5316" title="Bridge (music)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="5370" end="5382" title="instrumental" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800792" start="5383" end="5395" title="Introduction (music)" label="introduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="5411" end="5428" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845" start="5498" end="5512" title="Geri Halliwell" label="Geri Halliwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q219878" start="5517" end="5528" title="Emma Bunton" label="Emma Bunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q151830" start="5653" end="5662" title="Melanie C" label="Melanie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q19810" start="5774" end="5790" title="Victoria Beckham" label="Victoria Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q236005" start="5795" end="5808" title="Mel B" label="Melanie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q848346" start="5932" end="5941" title="Fade (audio engineering)" label="fades out"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="5972" end="5979" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q846373" start="6244" end="6255" title="Temptations" label="Temptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4509310" start="6281" end="6327" title="Superstar (Remember How You Got Where You Are)" label="Superstar (Remember How You Got Where You Are)"/>
<link wikidata="Q818781" start="6521" end="6526" title="Spice (album)" label="Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600514" start="6562" end="6571" title="Star-News" label="Star-News"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="6976" end="6988" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="7157" end="7169" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331013" start="7208" end="7231" title="Richmond Times-Dispatch" label="Richmond Times-Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="7321" end="7329" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422534" start="7763" end="7776" title="Greatest Hits (Spice Girls album)" label="Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834855" start="7801" end="7810" title="BBC Music" label="BBC Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501707" start="7930" end="7939" title="ShortList" label="ShortList"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="8103" end="8116" title="double A-side" label="double A-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916334" start="8135" end="8139" title="Mama (Spice Girls song)" label="Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="8181" end="8197" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q733400" start="8438" end="8464" title="Gerry &amp;amp; The Pacemakers" label="Gerry &amp;amp; The Pacemakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q73597" start="8466" end="8491" title="Frankie Goes to Hollywood" label="Frankie Goes to Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689719" start="8493" end="8524" title="Jive Bunny and the Mastermixers" label="Jive Bunny and the Mastermixers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353495" start="8529" end="8548" title="Robson &amp;amp; Jerome" label="Robson &amp;amp; Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="8732" end="8740" title="Music recording sales certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="8762" end="8791" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q266102" start="8909" end="8926" title="European Hot 100 Singles" label="Eurochart Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q831044" start="9394" end="9444" title="Syndicat National de l&amp;#x27;Édition Phonographique" label="Syndicat National de l&amp;#x27;Édition Phonographique"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="9748" end="9761" title="ARIA Charts" label="singles chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q744618" start="10260" end="10269" title="Steadicam" label="Steadicam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025558" start="10623" end="10632" title="Winnebago Industries" label="Winnebago"/>
<link wikidata="Q444306" start="10969" end="10980" title="Kathy Burke" label="Kathy Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="10982" end="10993" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q96278967" start="10995" end="11010" title="Llewella Gideon" label="Llewella Gideon"/>
<link wikidata="Q229716" start="11012" end="11016" title="Lulu (singer)" label="Lulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q235415" start="11022" end="11039" title="Jennifer Saunders" label="Jennifer Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="11096" end="11108" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619206" start="11138" end="11146" title="telethon" label="telethon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749828" start="11790" end="11809" title="An Audience with..." label="An Audience with..."/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="11823" end="11838" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q593268" start="11856" end="11871" title="Bravo (magazine)" label="Bravo Supershow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300629" start="11888" end="11913" title="Royal Variety Performance" label="Royal Variety Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="11960" end="11972" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117668" start="12049" end="12065" title="1997 Brit Awards" label="1997 Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130746" start="12320" end="12349" title="Earls Court Exhibition Centre" label="Earls Court Exhibition Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556133" start="12384" end="12395" title="Lip-synching in music" label="lip-synched"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603733" start="12464" end="12469" title="Union Jack dress" label="oufit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="12517" end="12527" title="Union Jack" label="Union Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q510345" start="12553" end="12565" title="peace symbol" label="peace symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129660" start="12681" end="12695" title="Cool Britannia" label="Cool Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q352539" start="12757" end="12772" title="Roberto Cavalli" label="Roberto Cavalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q615476" start="12911" end="12921" title="rhinestone" label="rhinestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q611115" start="12927" end="12936" title="Swarovski" label="Swarovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632246" start="12976" end="12992" title="2010 Brit Awards" label="2010 Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q308162" start="13228" end="13245" title="Abdi İpekçi Arena" label="Abdi İpekçi Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="13249" end="13257" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="13300" end="13308" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277210" start="13438" end="13466" title="Girl Power! Live in Istanbul" label="Girl Power! Live in Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609312" start="13539" end="13554" title="Spiceworld Tour" label="Spiceworld Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531737" start="13560" end="13588" title="Christmas in Spiceworld Tour" label="Christmas in Spiceworld Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471509" start="13594" end="13624" title="Return of the Spice Girls" label="Return of the Spice Girls Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q60978693" start="13633" end="13656" title="Spice World – 2019 Tour" label="Spice World – 2019 Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656511" start="13751" end="13786" title="Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium" label="Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60978693" start="14132" end="14155" title="Spice World – 2019 Tour" label="Spice World – 2019 Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916334" start="14478" end="14482" title="Mama (Spice Girls song)" label="Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="15129" end="15140" title="lead vocals" label="lead vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q822146" start="15142" end="15148" title="Lyricist" label="lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q727927" start="15151" end="15159" title="Absolute (production team)" label="Absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="15170" end="15180" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230082" start="15200" end="15208" title="Dave Way" label="Dave Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="15211" end="15223" title="audio mixing (recorded music)" label="audio mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="15244" end="15262" title="recording engineer" label="recording engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="15315" end="15332" title="background vocals" label="background vocals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803685" wikidata="Q285141" url="?curid=803685" title="Beijing railway station">
<text>Beijing railway station, or simply Beijing station, is a passenger railway station in Dongcheng District, Beijing. The station is located just southeast of the city centre inside the Second Ring Road with Beijing Station Street to the north and the remnants of the city wall between Chongwenmen and Dongbianmen to the south. The Beijing railway station opened in 1959 and was the largest train station in China at the time. Though superseded by the larger Beijing West and Beijing South stations, this station remains the only one located inside the old walled city. Trains entering and leaving the station pass by the Dongbianmen corner tower. With gilded eaves and soaring clock towers, the architecture of the railway blends traditional Chinese and socialist realist influence.

Generally, trains for northeast China (Shenyang, Dalian, Harbin) on the Beijing–Harbin railway, for Shandong (Jinan, Qingdao) and the Yangtze River Delta (Shanghai, Nanjing and Hangzhou) on the Beijing–Shanghai railway and some for Inner and the Republic of Mongolia depart from this station. Some international lines (notably the railway line linking Beijing to Moscow and to Pyongyang, North Korea (DPRK), amongst others), also depart from this station.

Beijing railway station used to be the eastern terminus of Beijing Subway&#x27;s Line 1 until 1987, when the station became part of Line 2. More than 30 Beijing bus and trolleybus routes stop at or near the railway station.

==History==
===Predecessor station===
In 1901, Zhengyangmen East Station was constructed south-east of Zhengyangmen, the gate south of Tiananmen Square. It was the terminus of the Beijing–Shanhaiguan Railway built by Imperial Railways of North China. Zhengyangmen East closed in 1959 with the opening of the Beijing railway station 2.5 km to the east, and eventually become part of the China Railway Museum.

===Design and construction===
To commemorate the Tenth Anniversary of the founding of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party in 1958 began the planning and construction of ten large-scale projects, known as the &quot;Ten Great Buildings&quot; to showcase the new outlook of the country and the Beijing railway station was amongst the projects undertaken.

In late October 1958, according to the early 1950 Beijing municipal government&#x27;s construction and planning records, the design arrangements for the new railway station was commenced. The station&#x27;s design was assigned to the Ministry of Railway Institute&#x27;s third department (now the Third Railway Survey and Design Institute Group Co. Ltd) with the station house building chaired by then renowned architects Yang Tingbao () and Chen Deng&#x27;ao (), the National Building and Industry Department and the Nanjing Institute of Architectural Design were to cooperate in the design tasks. The station&#x27;s design progressed rapidly and by early December the same year, the whole design proposal was completed. On December 10, the design proposal was approved by the Central Committee. The then Premier Zhou Enlai was also very concerned about the design and construction of the new Beijing railway station, and dealt with aspects concerning the direction and positioning of station names to the layout of the VIP room environment. In determining the design program proposal, Zhou Enlai proposed that turrets be built on each of the two wings of the main building and this suggestion was adopted.

On 20 January 1959 the construction of the new station commenced with the number of construction workers reaching up to two million people during the peak stage and project investment amounted to 57.82 million yuan. Soviet experts were also hired to give technical guidance at the construction sites. In just over seven months, the project was completed on 10 September 1959. The new Beijing railway station covered an area of two hundred and fifty thousand square meters, the Station House Building site covered an area of , the station plaza comprised an area of forty thousand square meters. Chairman Mao Zedong wrote the calligraphic characters in the station sign.

The Beijing railway station was one of the largest construction projects in mainland China during that time with modern facilities and it was also China&#x27;s first large modern railway terminal. At the time of completion, the station has a twelve tracks and six railway platforms with canopies attached to them. The Station house building faced south and the architecture included both a Chinese traditional style and the Soviet Stalinist architecture. The twelve passenger waiting rooms comprised a total area of fourteen thousand square meters and was able to accommodate 14,000 waiting passengers. The inner complex of the Main Station Building contained a passenger waiting room, mother and child waiting room, movie theater, recreation hall, visitors&#x27; restaurants, post office, clinic and other facilities. The roof had two clock towers; bells marked 7 AM and 9 PM by playing &quot;The East Is Red&quot;.

The Beijing station equipment was considered to be relatively advanced at its -time with four AC2-59 type escalators installed in the interior; the joint design and production of the escalators were coordinated by the Shanghai Jiao Tong University and Shanghai Elevator Company. The four sets of escalators were replaced during the 1980 and again during 1990; the most recent replacement of the elevators occurred in early 2005 - the design being a product of Otis Company.
==Operation==
===China Railway===
After the completion of the new Beijing railway station, its transport capacity far exceeded the formerly used East railway station and it played an increasing role in heavy transport tasks, and today it is still Beijing&#x27;s most important passenger railway station, and has the largest station traffic in China. The number of trains and traffic has also increased year by year: In 1959 there were 33 train lines; in 1966 there were forty train lines; in 1978 there were sixty-one train lines; in 1985 there were seventy-eight train lines; and by 1993 there were eighty-two train lines. During the late 1950s, the number of passengers using the railway transportation system was six million people a year, in the late 1960 it was eight million people a year, in the late 1970 it reached fifteen million a year, and after the Chinese economic reform period, the usage soared to more than thirty million people. To alleviate the transport pressure on the Beijing railway station, the Beijing Municipal Government and the Ministry of Railways in 1980 started the planning and construction of Beijing&#x27;s second passenger station and hence the Beijing West railway station was completed in 1996, which provided transportation links for the Beijing–Guangzhou Railway and Beijing–Kowloon Railway helped alleviate pressure on the Beijing railway station - this led to a reduction in passenger traffic for the Beijing railway station to twenty million people.

Since 1976, the Beijing railway station had begun a series of upgrades to the passenger service facilities, for example a computer system had been set up for processing tickets, a TV monitoring screen, wireless communication, automatic broadcasting system, and extensions made to the railway platform expanded its length from in order to meet the needs of the expanding transportation flow. In 1988, the Shanghai Electric Clock Factory installed China&#x27;s first large screen display system in the Beijing railway station square. Between May 1998 and September 1999, the Ministry of Railways implemented a seismic strengthening project to the Beijing railway station and also introduced new passenger features such as a central air conditioning system, passenger guidance system, multi-functional radio broadcasting system. Since 18 June 2003, the Beijing railway station began an expansion of two new sites, comprising an area of and includes a specialized large parcel luggage line, renovations included the removal of the concrete canopy, alterations to the steel arch station poles, and alterations to the original site raised it from 1 to 1.2 meters.

In June 2008, in order to meet the needs of the Beijing Olympic Games, bilingual signs were created at the Beijing railway station to facilitate an overall increase in foreign tourists travelling to the games, in addition to putting up the English name &quot;Beijing Railway Station&quot;, several other signs were also erected at station entrances, exits and ticket booths.

On 25 June 2021, G902/903 and G907/908 trains will be extended to Beijing railway station, thus the Beijing-Shenyang high-speed railway has charted trains arriving and departing at Beijing railway station.


===Beijing Subway===
The Beijing railway station is a transportation hub in Beijing.
* Beijing Subway: Line 2 stops at the Beijing railway station, with Entrance D on the station plaza.
* Beijing Bus routes and stops near the station:
**Beijing Station East () east of the station plaza: 9, 10, 20, 25, 29, 39, 52, 59, 122, 203, 204, 209, 403, 420, 434, 637, 638, 639, 666, 668, 673, 674, 729, 804, 805, 827, 829, 938, 957
**Beijing Station West () west of the station plaza: 103, 104, 208, 209, 211, 673
**Beijing Station Front Street () north of the station plaza: 9, 24, 204, 673, 674, 729, 804, 
**Beijing Station Intersection East () on Chang&#x27;an Avenue, north of the station plaza: 1, 52, 90, 99, 120, 126, 205, 208, 420, 637, 666, 728, 
**Jianguomen Bridge South () east of the station plaza on the Second Ring Road: 25, 39, 43, 44, 52, 122, 434, 637, 638, 750, 
*Beijing Airport Bus Route 3 has a terminus located about east of the station plaza.
Bus route numbers in bold denotes bus terminus.

==== Station layout ====
The station has an underground island platform.

==== Exits ====
There are four exits, lettered A, B, C, and D. Exit A is accessible.

==Sister stations==
*Seoul Station, South Korea
*Tokyo Station (concluded 1980) and Ueno Station (concluded 1980), Japan

==Gallery==
== Notes ==
== External links ==

* Official site
* Beijing Train Schedule</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q285141" start="0" end="23" title="Beijing railway station" label="Beijing railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q285141" start="35" end="50" title="Beijing railway station" label="Beijing station"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="67" end="82" title="railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q394681" start="86" end="104" title="Dongcheng District, Beijing" label="Dongcheng District"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="106" end="113" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210412" start="183" end="199" title="Second Ring Road (Beijing)" label="Second Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567915" start="283" end="294" title="Chongwenmen" label="Chongwenmen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="299" end="310" title="Beijing_city_fortifications#Outer city gates#Dongbianmen" label="Dongbianmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q523887" start="456" end="468" title="Beijing West railway station" label="Beijing West"/>
<link wikidata="Q163962" start="473" end="486" title="Beijing South railway station" label="Beijing South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812732" start="550" end="565" title="Beijing city fortifications" label="old walled city"/>
<link wikidata="Q163972" start="657" end="662" title="eaves" label="eaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q957904" start="728" end="747" title="Chinese architecture" label="traditional Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134824" start="752" end="769" title="Stalinist architecture" label="socialist realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="804" end="819" title="northeast China" label="northeast China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="821" end="829" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="831" end="837" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="839" end="845" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074605" start="854" end="876" title="Beijing–Harbin railway" label="Beijing–Harbin railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="882" end="890" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q170247" start="892" end="897" title="Jinan" label="Jinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="899" end="906" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195076" start="916" end="935" title="Yangtze River Delta" label="Yangtze River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="937" end="945" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="947" end="954" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="959" end="967" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q915161" start="976" end="1000" title="Beijing–Shanghai railway" label="Beijing–Shanghai railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="1014" end="1019" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="1024" end="1048" title="Mongolia" label="the Republic of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="1145" end="1151" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="1159" end="1168" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="1170" end="1181" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q748987" start="1320" end="1326" title="Line 1, Beijing Subway" label="Line 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q680973" start="1371" end="1377" title="Line 2, Beijing Subway" label="Line 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881181" start="1392" end="1403" title="Beijing bus" label="Beijing bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881198" start="1408" end="1418" title="Beijing trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q197703" start="1567" end="1579" title="Zhengyangmen" label="Zhengyangmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164055" start="1599" end="1615" title="Tiananmen Square" label="Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881222" start="1644" end="1671" title="Beijing–Shanhaiguan Railway" label="Beijing–Shanhaiguan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q110192785" start="1681" end="1713" title="Kaiping Tramway and Imperial Railways of North China" label="Imperial Railways of North China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074280" start="1850" end="1870" title="China Railway Museum" label="China Railway Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547198" start="1922" end="1939" title="10th anniversary of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Tenth Anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1963" end="1994" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q50963" start="2000" end="2048" title="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567360" start="2141" end="2160" title="Ten Great Buildings" label="Ten Great Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="2437" end="2452" title="railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551770" start="2798" end="2839" title="Southeast University" label="Nanjing Institute of Architectural Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="3086" end="3093" title="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="3094" end="3104" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="3367" end="3377" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502179" start="3392" end="3398" title="Turret (architecture)" label="turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="3699" end="3703" title="Renminbi" label="yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="4084" end="4103" title="Chairman Mao Zedong" label="Chairman Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="4236" end="4250" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="4339" end="4355" title="railway terminal" label="railway terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q325358" start="4424" end="4440" title="railway platform" label="railway platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589116" start="4447" end="4455" title="Canopy (building)" label="canopies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="4521" end="4533" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q957904" start="4550" end="4575" title="Chinese architecture" label="Chinese traditional style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134824" start="4591" end="4613" title="Stalinist architecture" label="Stalinist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q853854" start="4996" end="5007" title="clock tower" label="clock tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q818918" start="5054" end="5069" title="The East Is Red (song)" label="The East Is Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q15003" start="5184" end="5193" title="escalator" label="escalator"/>
<link wikidata="Q525169" start="5296" end="5325" title="Shanghai Jiao Tong University" label="Shanghai Jiao Tong University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134069" start="5538" end="5542" title="Otis Elevator Company" label="Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="6414" end="6437" title="Chinese economic reform" label="Chinese economic reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="6571" end="6578" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="6579" end="6599" title="Municipal Government" label="Municipal Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q523887" start="6732" end="6760" title="Beijing West railway station" label="Beijing West railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673907" start="6828" end="6853" title="Beijing–Guangzhou Railway" label="Beijing–Guangzhou Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038486" start="6858" end="6881" title="Beijing–Kowloon Railway" label="Beijing–Kowloon Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15306266" start="7214" end="7220" title="train ticket" label="ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="7225" end="7227" title="TV" label="TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="7247" end="7269" title="wireless communication" label="wireless communication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7281" end="7300" title="broadcasting system" label="broadcasting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="7775" end="7791" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="7844" end="7859" title="radio broadcast" label="radio broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="8072" end="8080" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589116" start="8081" end="8087" title="Canopy (building)" label="canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="8252" end="8273" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="Beijing Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q29079" start="8275" end="8289" title="bilingual sign" label="bilingual sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q753181" start="8680" end="8715" title="Beijing-Shenyang high-speed railway" label="Beijing-Shenyang high-speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q235319" start="8875" end="8889" title="Beijing Subway" label="Beijing Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q680973" start="8891" end="8897" title="Line 2, Beijing Subway" label="Line 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881181" start="8976" end="8987" title="Beijing Bus" label="Beijing Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061850" start="9430" end="9450" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an Avenue" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q210412" start="9598" end="9614" title="Second Ring Road (Beijing)" label="Second Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881096" start="9663" end="9682" title="Beijing Airport Bus" label="Beijing Airport Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725290" start="9852" end="9867" title="island platform" label="island platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q20415" start="9977" end="9990" title="Seoul Station" label="Seoul Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="9992" end="10003" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q283196" start="10005" end="10018" title="Tokyo Station" label="Tokyo Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801551" start="10040" end="10052" title="Ueno Station" label="Ueno Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="10071" end="10076" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803695" wikidata="Q16386645" url="?curid=803695" title="List of Fighting Fantasy gamebooks">
<text>&quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot; is a series of single-player fantasy roleplay gamebooks created by Steve Jackson and Ian Livingstone. The first volume in the series was published by Puffin in 1982, with the rights to the franchise eventually being purchased by Wizard Books in 2002. The series distinguished itself by featuring a fantasy role-playing element, with the caption on each cover claiming each title was &quot;a Fighting Fantasy gamebook in which YOU are the hero!&quot; The popularity of the series led to the creation of merchandise such as action figures, board games, role-playing game systems, magazines, novels and video games.

==&quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot; titles published by Puffin Books (1982-95)==

===Main series===
===Steve Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Sorcery!&quot;===

===&quot;The Adventures of Goldhawk&quot;===

===&quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot; novels===
=== &quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot; roleplaying gamebooks ===

See also &quot;Advanced Fighting Fantasy&quot;.

===Two-player &quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot;===
===Miscellaneous &quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot; titles===

==&quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot; titles published by Wizard Books==

===Main series 1 (2002–2007)===
*Original stories (not reprints).

===Main series 2 (2009–2012)===
*Original stories (not reprints).

==&quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot; titles published by Snowbooks==

===&quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot; history===

===&quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot; colouring books===

==&quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot; titles published by Scholastic==

===Main series (2017–present)===

*Original stories (not reprints).

==Other media==

===Boardgames===
===Electronic gamebooks and computer games===

Some gamebooks were released as home computer games or as applications for smartphones.

==See also==
*&quot;Warlock&quot; (magazine)

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Fighting Fantasy&quot; Gamebooks - the official website&#x27;s homepage.
* Scholastic FF page - current publisher of the range
* Fighting Fantasy: An Illustrated Bibliography at SFandFantasy.co.uk
* FF Reviews Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1001255" start="6" end="22" title="Fighting Fantasy" label="Fighting Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361181" start="66" end="74" title="roleplay" label="roleplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q642946" start="75" end="83" title="gamebook" label="gamebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q727934" start="96" end="109" title="Steve Jackson (UK game designer)" label="Steve Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082789" start="114" end="129" title="Ian Livingstone" label="Ian Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907694" start="179" end="185" title="Puffin Books" label="Puffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q343566" start="551" end="564" title="action figure" label="action figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="567" end="577" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="618" end="623" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="629" end="639" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101085" start="950" end="975" title="Advanced Fighting Fantasy" label="Advanced Fighting Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969508" start="1766" end="1796" title="Warlock (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Warlock&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803696" wikidata="Q15515861" url="?curid=803696" title="Unusual types of gramophone records">
<text>The overwhelming majority of records manufactured have been of certain sizes (7, 10, or 12 inches), playback speeds (33, 45, or 78 RPM), and appearance (round black discs). However, since the commercial adoption of the gramophone record (called a phonograph record in the U.S., where both cylinder records and disc records were invented), a wide variety of records have also been produced that do not fall into these categories, and they have served a variety of purposes.
==Unusual sizes==

The most common diameter sizes for gramophone records are 12-inch, 10-inch, and 7-inch (, , and ). Early American shellac records were all 7-inch until 1901, when 10-inch records were introduced. 12-inch records joined them in 1903. By 1910, other sizes were retired and nearly all discs were either 10-inch or 12-inch, although both sizes were normally a bit smaller than their official diameter. In Europe, early 10-inch and 12-inch shellac records were produced in the first three decades of the twentieth century. 7-inch children&#x27;s records were sold before World War II, but nearly all were made of fragile shellac, not an ideal material for use by children. In the late 1940s, small plastic records, including some small picture discs, replaced them. Ten-inch children&#x27;s records were made as well, but the 7-inch size was more compatible with small hands. The 7-inch size was also used for flexi discs which were popular in Japan where they were known as sound-sheets and were often in traditional round format. In other areas, flexi discs were usually square and often included in a magazine (see Unusual materials and uses below).

Numerous unusual diameters have been produced since the early 1900s ranging from . Oddly shaped discs were also produced (see Unusually shaped discs below).


==Unusual speeds==
The earliest record players were purely mechanical devices with no amplification. The sonic energy was simply the amount of drag that the needle could place on the spinning disk. Consequently, high speeds such as 78 rpm were needed to drive the trumpet horn to reasonable volume. Once electronic amplification became accessible, slower speeds and the use of finer needles replaced 78 rpm disks. 

The most common rotational speeds for gramophone records became revolutions per minute (rpm), and 45 rpm. Established as the only common rotational speed prior to the 1940s, the 78 became increasingly less common throughout the 1950s and into more modern decades as the 33 and the 45 became established as the new standards for albums and singles respectively. Throughout the history of the recording industry. Numerous unusual turn-speeds ranging from 3 to 130 rpm have been utilized for a variety of purposes:


===Varying and variable play-speeds===

At least one attempt to lengthen playing time was made in the early 1920s. World Records produced records that played at a constant linear velocity, controlled by Noel Pemberton Billing&#x27;s patented add-on speed governor. These longer-playing records had speeds measured in inches per second (but specified on the label by a letter from A to D) rather than revolutions per minute. If the sound quality near the label of an ordinary record was considered acceptable, then playing time could be greatly increased by using that same groove-to-needle velocity throughout the recording. This is known as the CLV (constant linear velocity) format, as opposed to the usual CAV (constant angular velocity) format. The World Record Controller was an attachment for ordinary record players that slowed the turntable down when playing the outside of the record and allowed it to gradually speed up as the needle was carried inward by the groove. Of course, only special World records could be used. The World system was a commercial failure. The principle, first proposed in a fundamental U.S. sound recording patent in 1886, was briefly revived in 1939–1940 for the unusual &quot;Cinematone Penny Phono&quot; jukebox (price to play one selection: one cent), which used it to squeeze ten short recordings of current pop songs onto each side of one 12-inch record. Compact discs and DVDs use the CLV format to make efficient use of their surface areas.

The CLV format would reemerge in the 1940s and 1950s in office dictation machines known as the Gray Audograph and the CGS/Memovox, which combined it with the flexible-disc format and the inside-out recording format used by CDs today. Both machines recorded at a fixed pitch, but the Grey Audograph could only record at one linear speed allowing 15 minutes per side of a 7-inch disc. The CGS or Memovox, on the other hand, had a High Fidelity speed as well as a Speech speed, allowing over two hours of recording time per side on a 12-inch disc.

In the 1970s, Atlantic Records started producing a series of albums later designated on a label known as Syntonic Research. Each album consisted of two full-side tracks, usually at least half an hour long per side, of sounds recorded of various locations. For example, one side would have ocean waves crashing against the shore and the other would have the sounds of birds chattering away in an aviary; another record might have frogs, crickets and birds making their usual vocalizations that were heard in the early morning hours of a swamp or lake. There were a few dozen made. These were mostly used for soundscape or relaxation purposes. The first album in the series noted on its back cover that either side could be enjoyed in stereo at any playing speed (from 45 rpm to rpm) depending on the effect desired by the person playing the record.

===Microgrooved 78s===
The first instance of what could be considered a &quot;microgroove&quot; record could be traced back to the 1920s. More exactly, in 1926 the Edison Phonograph Company released a &quot;Long-Playing&quot; Diamond Disc, that could reproduce up to 12 minutes (10 inch) or 20 minutes (12 inch) per side, thanks to an increase in the density of grooves per cm (totalling to ca. 450 TPI). Nevertheless, the fragility and hyper-specificity of the new format proved them to be commercially unsuccessful, and only 14 different records were ever released.

A small number of 78 rpm microgroove vinyl recordings have been issued by smaller and underground performers, mainly as novelty items, from the 1970s to the present. In 2006, the Belfast singer Duke Special released a number of ten inch EPs in 78 rpm. A series of 78 rpm microgroove records was issued by the &quot;Audiophile&quot; label during the early LP era. They were supposed to provide higher quality sound than 33 rpm by virtue of their faster rotation speed combined while also providing significantly longer playing time than standard groove 78 rpm records. In 2011, to celebrate Record Store Day, Capitol Records released a 78rpm Microgroove record of The Beach Boys, containing the songs &quot;Good Vibrations&quot; and &quot;Heroes And Villains&quot;. In 2019, Rivermount Records released an audiophile 78rpm microgroove record, containing 4 classic Dixieland jazz songs, as recorded by The Chicago Cellar Boys.

==Unusual holes==
The vast majority of records used a standard small spindle hole slightly more than in diameter. The only common exception to this is the 7-inch 45 rpm record, which was designed with a center hole slightly more than in diameter both for convenience in handling and to accommodate a very fast record-changing mechanism contained inside a correspondingly large spindle, as implemented in RCA Victor&#x27;s early stand-alone &quot;45&quot; players. The spindle and any records stacked on it rotated with the turntable, so that each waiting disc was already up to speed before it dropped. Large mechanized spindle adaptors were supplied with most multi-speed automatic record changers sold in the 1950s and 1960s, but they were not as fast and efficient. The large hole also facilitates use in jukeboxes, which mechanically place the &quot;45&quot; onto a turntable with a conical spindle having a matching diameter at its base, making the placement operation easier, safer, and surer than it was with the small-diameter holes and spindles in 78 rpm jukeboxes. 

Most 7-inch records in the USA continue to be pressed with a large hole, requiring an adapter to be used on standard turntables. In other territories such as Europe, 7-inch records intended for home use have standard-sized holes. Many such 7-inch records had a center which could be easily snapped out, yielding a record with a larger hole to be used in jukeboxes or certain record-stacking players; this approach was common in the United Kingdom from the 1950s until the early 1980s, with standard, solid centres becoming gradually more common. Some 7-inch singles in the early-mid-1990s had large holes also, but this was a rarity.

Early on, some 78 rpm records had larger holes in freebie marketing schemes that sold a phonograph cheaply, but required purchase of compatible discs at full-price.

===Multi-hole records===
Some records had more than one hole in the label area. Early Zonophone records (essentially Berliner Gramophone pirated copies) employed a second spindle hole just outside the centre rim to guarantee that the records didn&#x27;t slip because of the felt turntable carpet (early gramophone machines were very harsh on the records, so engineers had to make them very abrasive and resistant to being tracked, which decreased sound quality in the long run). Busy Bee, in a marketing scheme similar to Standard &quot;et al.&quot; would employ a second cut-out area. This allowed the Busy Bee disc to also be played on a standard phonograph in addition to the proprietary format sold by the O&#x27;Neill-James Company.

Many blank acetate discs have multiple holes (usually three or four) intended to prevent slippage during cutting.

NON&#x27;s &quot;Pagan Muzak&quot; (Gray Beat, 1978) is a one-sided 7-inch with multiple locked grooves and two center holes, meaning each locked groove can be played at two different trajectories as well as any number of speeds. The original release came with instructions for the listener to drill more holes in the record as they saw appropriate. Later pressings of the release were made only with one standard center spindle hole.

==Unusual grooves==
=== &quot;Trimicron&quot; discs ===

Developed in the mid-1970s by the firm MDR (Magnetic Disc Recording), the Trimicron record enjoyed a brief success. The principle was to remove the empty space between each groove. On average, this empty space is as wide as two grooves, and because of this, its removal effectively triples the duration of the recording that could be engraved (on average, 55 minutes on a 33 rpm record). The Trimicron process was created by Dr. Rabe, a music lover in his spare time, and was originally intended for classical music listeners who could not stand having to flip a record in the middle of a piece. For example, all six Brandenburg concertos could fit on one Trimicron record.

However, this process suffered from a major problem: the finer groove decreased the dynamics and the level of recorded signal by nearly 40 percent. It is therefore necessary to play Trimicron records on silent, high performance turntables, equipped with new diamonds and very high performance. Almost 30 Trimicron records were released, though copies are nowadays rare, especially in good condition.

===Multiple bands===
Some records are cut with completely independent bands on the same side. In this case, the bands appear as separate tracks on the record and are not intertwined as with parallel grooves. This has most often been used on educational records but is also sometimes used on discs of commercial pop and rock music. These individual bands need not be cut at the same speed. The second Moby Grape album &quot;Wow/Grape Jam&quot; (1968) has this setup. Following the fourth song on side one there is a spoken announcement telling the listener to change the speed from 33 to 78 rpm to play the next band of the disc. To play the last song on the side the listener must pick up the stylus from the record, change the speed, then put the stylus at the start of the fifth and final song on side one.

The Gorillaz debut album, like the CD release, features the remix of &quot;Clint Eastwood&quot; as a bonus track but the LP has a recorded locked groove after what is meant to be the final track of the album so the needle has to be physically lifted and moved to play the bonus track.

This concept has been extended to the production of records consisting entirely of circular multiple bands to provide collections of infinite loop sound samples of duration limited to one revolution of the disc. Notable examples of this are the releases from RRRecords of the 7-inch RRR-100 (with 100 individual bands) and the 12-inch RRR-500 (with 500 bands) and RRR-1000 (with 1,000 bands.)

===Sound recorded in locked grooves===
Most records have a locked groove at the end of each side or individual band. It is usually a silent loop that keeps the needle and tonearm from drifting into the label area. However, it is possible to record sound in this groove, and some artists have included looping audio in the locked groove.

One of the best-known examples of this technique was The Beatles&#x27; &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; (1967). Many UK copies featured a multi-layered collage of randomized chatter in their run-off loops. However, two variations were made: the original British pressing (black label with gold logo) has the &quot;inner groove&quot; play through the entire locked groove and does not include the laughter at the beginning of the piece. The re-issue of the British pressing (black label with silver logo) starts playing the &quot;inner groove&quot; long before the needle reaches the locked groove, includes the laughter and, once the needle hits the locked groove, the listener only hears the last two seconds of the piece played over and over again.

The double record of the Outer Wilds soundtrack featured a locked groove on each face of the records. Each locked groove features a different instrument from the song Travelers, which is featured at the end of the game when characters come together to play the song.

===Sound recorded in lead-in grooves===
When automatic record changers, auto replay adapters and jukeboxes began appearing in the 1920s the need arose to find a more reliable and forgiving way to accurately direct the stylus to the start of the recorded area as well as signal the end of a performance. Appearing near the outer edge of the record and leading the stylus inward to the performance, Decca introduced the lead-in groove in 1935 in the US, with the industry following soon thereafter. Lead-in groove length, positioning, and motion varied by manufacturer and era, with some moving slower (some requiring several revolutions before encountering audio) and others being very short and jerky. As with the recorded locked groove at the end, it is possible to record sound into the lead-in groove. King Crimson&#x27;s &quot;USA&quot;, George Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Wonderwall Music&quot;, and the Dead Kennedys&#x27; &quot;Plastic Surgery Disasters&quot; all start in the lead-in groove.

===Parallel grooves===

Also known as concentric grooves, it is possible to master recordings with two or more separate, interlaced spiral grooves on a side. Such records have occasionally been made as novelties. There were so-called &quot;Puzzle Plates&quot; produced by the Gramophone Company in London in 1898 and 1899: these were discs with two interleaved tracks, issued as E5504, 9290, 9296. Their most famous was a three-track &quot;Puzzle Plate&quot; (9317) given as prize for a competition in 1901, for which many master recordings had to be made, distinguished by suffix letters against the catalogue number. Victor made one as early as 1901. Depending on where the needle is dropped in the lead-in area, it will catch more or less randomly in one of the grooves. Each groove can contain a different recording, so the record &quot;magically&quot; plays one of several different recordings. Victor marketed a few 10-inch 78s with two concentric grooves (called &quot;Puzzle Record&quot;). Columbia also issued a few 10-inch 78s in 1931 with concentric grooves for their cheap Harmony, Clarion, and Velvet Tone labels. In the blank edge of the record, there was a stamp &#x27;A&#x27; and &#x27;B&#x27;, which indicated where each of the concentric grooves started.

A 1950s RCA Victor 45 rpm single by The Fontane Sisters, &quot;The Fortune Teller Song&quot; offered a song with four different &quot;fortunes&quot; as endings. Due to the space consumed by the multiple grooves, the song itself played for only about one minute. In the 1960s, promoter George Garabedian of Mark 56 Records created a &quot;Magic Record&quot; which would randomly play a tune by Arthur Lyman, The Marathons&#x27; novelty song &quot;Peanut Butter,&quot; or an imitation Tijuana Brass number. Garabedian&#x27;s records were made to be given away as premiums, usually by potato chip manufacturers. The opening track of Zacherle&#x27;s 1962 LP &quot;Scary Tales&quot; consisted of three parallel grooves of the same song, each containing different lyrics (an assortment of humorous, macabre retellings of Mother Goose rhymes).

A more recent example is Monty Python&#x27;s &quot;Matching Tie and Handkerchief&quot;. A promotional EP by Rush, &quot;Rush &#x27;n Roulette&quot; (mentioned in the book &quot;Rare Rock: A Collector&#x27;s Guide&quot; by Tony Rees) had &quot;six&quot; parallel grooves of different Rush songs. Also Tool&#x27;s 1992 EP release &quot;Opiate&quot; featured on the second side a double groove that would either play the first track of side two or the hidden song that was found at the end of the CD version. The Marillion &quot;Brave&quot; vinyl has a double groove on side four, ending the album either happily with the track &quot;Made Again&quot; or less so with water noise. In 2005, a 7-inch single titled &quot;The Road Leads Where It&#x27;s Led&quot; by The Secret Machines was released in UK that contained both tracks on one side on parallel grooves. The Summer 1980 &quot;Mad&quot; magazine Super Special included a one-sided sound sheet (see &quot;flexidisc&quot; above), playable on a standard turntable. It had eight interlaced grooves, each track starts with the same happy and upbeat &quot;Super Spectacular Day&quot; beginning of the song but have eight different dark and gloomy endings. In the 1980s, Rhino Records re-released the Henny Youngman comedy album &quot;128 Greatest Jokes&quot; as a series of concentric grooves, which they call a &quot;Trick-Track Master&quot;. Each side of the album has four grooves. 

In the 1980s, the band Pink Slip Daddy released a 10-inch single called &quot;LSD&quot; on clear pink vinyl with pink glitter inside the vinyl. One side of the single had one song that played from inside out and, on the other side, there were two songs that were pressed as concentric grooves. Many of The Shins&#x27; 7-inch records have parallel grooves (such as their 2007 single &quot;Phantom Limb,&quot; which has &quot;Nothing at All&quot; and &quot;Split Needles (Alt. Version)&quot; on the b-side.) The band None of Your Fucking Business released a one-sided 7-inch called &quot;NOYFB Escapes from Hell&quot; (side 2 has a groove, but there is no audio encoded in the groove), with 2 grooves that started from the center and ended on the outside of the disc. One groove ran at 45 rpm, while the other ran at 33 rpm. UK punk rocker Johnny Moped&#x27;s debut album &quot;Cycledelic&quot; has a lead track with a parallel groove listed on the label as &quot;0. Mystery Track,&quot; which runs parallel to the track. The 12-inch single for rap group De La Soul&#x27;s 1989 song &quot;Me Myself and I&quot; has two different tracks in a parallel groove on the B-side. One groove has the Oblapos remixes of &quot;Me Myself and I,&quot; while the other has &quot;Brain Washed Follower. One version of the 12-inch single of The Sensual World by Kate Bush has the instrumental version of the track in a parallel groove – while the instrumental version also appears on side B as one of two sequential tracks.&quot;

Records with parallel grooves have been used in games to provide multiple outcomes, chosen either deliberately or randomly, depending on the game. In 1971, Mattel introduced a game called &quot;Talking Football,&quot; in which two players simulate a game of American football. Plays are recorded on small discs, each with six parallel grooves. The player on offense chooses one of ten possible offensive plays, each recorded on one disc, and inserts the corresponding disc into a handheld record player. The other player, without knowing which disc was inserted, then chooses one of six possible defensive plays, marked on the disc so that the record player plays the correct groove corresponding to the chosen combination of offensive and defensive plays. Some plays result in a penalty or turnover, which requires inserting a special disc for that situation, which is unmarked and therefore a random outcome is selected.

In 1975, Ronco UK released a parallel groove game called &quot;They&#x27;re Off,&quot; which featured four 12-inch discs each containing eight possible outcomes on a horse race. It featured Noel Whitcomb, a well-known horse-racing commentator of the day and the game revolved around betting which &quot;horse&quot; would win the race on that occasion. This appears to have been based on a Canadian product called &quot;They&#x27;re at the Post&quot; by Maas Marketing, which is more or less the same game with different recordings on the discs to reflect the target market.

===Inside-to-outside recording and hill-and-dale recording===
In the late 1920s and early 1930s, the Vitaphone sound system used large sixteen-inch  rpm records to provide the soundtrack for motion pictures. The record rotated in the usual clockwise direction but the groove was cut and played starting at the inside of the recorded area and proceeding outward. This inside start was dictated by the unusually long playing time of the records and the rapid wearing down of the single-use disposable metal needles which were standard for playing lateral-cut shellac records at that time. The signal degradation caused by a worn needle point was most audible when playing the innermost turns of the groove, where the undulations were most closely packed and tortuous, but fairly negligible when playing the outermost turns where they were much more widely spaced and easily traced. With an inside start the needle point was freshest where it mattered most.

Almost all analog disc records were recorded at a constant angular speed, resulting in a decreasing linear speed toward the disc&#x27;s center. The result was a maximum level of signal distortion due to low groove velocity nearest the center of the disc, called &quot;end-groove distortion&quot;. Loud musical passages were most audibly affected. Since some music, especially classical music, tends to start quietly and mount to a loud climax, such distortion could be minimized if the disc was recorded to play beginning at the inner end of the groove. A few such records were issued, but the domination of automatic record changers, and the fact that symphony movements, for example, varied greatly in length and could be difficult to arrange appropriately on 20-minute disc sides, made them no more than curiosities.

Until the 1920s, French Pathé Records used inside start and other commercially distinctive grooving. At that time they cut all discs vertically, meaning the vibrations in the grooves were &quot;hill and dale&quot;, as their wax cylinders had always been. The records required a special sapphire stylus and a vertically responsive reproducer for playback.

A number of radio transcriptions were standard lateral grooved records (either playing at or 78) but starting from the inside. An example was those made by the New York Judson Studios, starting in about 1928 or 1929 and running into the 1930s. Each record was 12 inches, made of standard shellac, started in the inner groove and had a locked groove at the outer edge. Some radio transcription discs had both outside and inside-start as a way to maintain the fidelity levels when the record was turned over.

Inventor Thomas Edison, who always favored the cylinder for all its advantages, also cut his discs with vertically modulated grooves from their introduction in 1912 until a year or two before his company&#x27;s demise in 1929 (Edison Disc Records). Edison pioneered fine groove discs that played for up to five minutes per 10-inch side; they were very thick to remain perfectly flat and played back with a precision-ground diamond stylus. A commercially unsuccessful extension of the system introduced grooves nearly twice as fine as those of microgroove LPs, yielding playing times of up to 20 minutes per side at 80 rpm and again requiring a special diamond stylus. Even more than with Pathé discs, Edison&#x27;s vertical-cut records called for specially designed equipment for playback.

When using a modern stereo cartridge to play these or other vertical-cut monophonic recordings, the polarity of one channel must be inverted at some point before the two channels are combined to produce a mono signal, as is desirable; otherwise, they largely cancel each other out, leaving little more than surface noise audible.
*In 1977, Mercury Records released a pair of dealer-only promotional LPs called &quot;Counter-Revolutions&quot; (samplers of various Mercury popular artists at the time) which played from the inside-out and had a locking groove at the disc&#x27;s edge.
*In 1984, Many Records in Italy released an Italo disco song named &quot;Back To Zero&quot; by Francis Lowe that played from the edge of the label outwards on side B, and normally on side A.
*In 1985, Memory Records in Germany released a limited-edition version of the Italo disco hit &quot;Talking to the Night&quot; by Brian Ice that played from the edge of the label outwards.
*In 1993, American metal band Megadeth released a single &quot;Sweating Bullets,&quot; on 12-inch blue vinyl with both sides running from the inside of the disc outwards.
*In 1994, the Cyrus 12-inch single &quot;Inversion&quot; released by Basic Channel had one side that played inside out.
*In 1997, English Sound Artist Janek Schaefer released his first ever record, &quot;His Master&#x27;s Voices&quot; a transparent two sided LP. Both sides play from the inside to the outside of the disc.
*In 1998, American hardcore punk band Dropdead released their second untitled album, the A side of which plays inside out.
*In 1999, English Noise Artist Paul Nomex released a Parallel Groove 12-inch, &quot;Are you more than just a product of your influence&quot; that plays from the inside out on both sides at both 16 and 78 speeds.
*In 2014, American alternative rock group Camper Van Beethoven released a two-disc reissue of their Key Lime Pie album, featuring one side that plays the song &quot;Closing Theme&quot; from the inside out at 45 rpm.
*In the 2010s, German classical music label Tacet issued some classical recordings that played from the inside out, including Ravel&#x27;s Boléro (2013) and the fourth movement of Beethoven&#x27;s Ninth Symphony (2016).

===Early multiple track (i.e., stereophonic) format===
Before the development of the single-groove stereo system circa 1957, at least three companies: Cook Records, Livingston Audio Products, and Atlantic Records, released a number of &quot;binaural&quot; recordings. These were not created using binaural recording techniques, but rather one side of each record consisted of two long, continuous tracks — one containing the left channel, and the other containing the right channel. It was intended that the buyer purchase an adapter from Cook Laboratories or a tonearm from Livingston that allowed two cartridges to be mounted together, with the proper spacing, on a single tone arm. Over 50 records were released using this format.

===Quadraphonic formats===
Quadraphonic records present four channels of audio, requiring specialized pickups and decoding equipment to reproduce the two additional channels&#x27; signals from the groove.

===Disc noise reduction formats===
In the 1970s and 1980s, more than a thousand audiophile records were produced with audio tracks specially encoded to be played back through various noise reduction systems in order to reduce noise and increase the dynamic range. Systems employed include dbx disc (1973–1982), Telefunken/Nakamichi High-Com II (1979–1982), CBS CX 20 (1981–1982), and UC (1983–1989).

===Vibration-resistant discs===
Highway Hi-Fi was a system of proprietary records and players designed for use in automobiles, utilizing a slower play speed and high stylus pressure.

==Unusual materials and uses==

With their origin stretching back to the dawn of recorded sound at the turn of the 20th century, flexible recording media have been made from a variety of materials including foil, paper, and–in the 1950s–thin flexible vinyl known as flexi discs.

Thin, flexible paper-based records were briefly popularized in the 1930s by Hit of the Week Records and Durium Records. &quot;Melody Cards&quot; were popular in the late 1950s. They took the form of an oversized rectangular postcard with the usual address and greeting space on one side and an illustration on the other. The illustration was overlaid with a transparent plastic material into which the grooving was impressed. The recording was usually musical as the name implies. They typically played at either 78 or 45 rpm. It was recommended to not write on them with a ball point pen, an invention which was just coming into common use at that time. Laminated cardboard records have been produced as integral promotional novelties on packaging, most notably on the backs of cereal boxes in the late 1960s and early 1970s.

Beginning in the 1940s, flexible records began to be used in the form of &quot;book records&quot;–spiral bound paper publications and four or five flexible record sheets bound in. A spindle hole went through the entire assembly. Book records could be opened to one of the records and completely folded back around itself, so that the whole thing could be placed on the turntable and played intact.

In the 1950s, advances in vinyl production technology led to the development of the 7-inch 33 rpm flexi disc record. Only seen occasionally in the 1950s, these recordings were increasingly used as inserts in magazines that included audio supplements from the 1960s through the 1980s. The recordings were pressed on very thin, flexible sheets of vinyl (or laminated paper), providing a mixture of economy, practical utility and novelty appeal. Flexi discs or Soundsheets were often provided by music publishers to their customers, frequently school band and orchestra directors, marching band and drum corps leaders and others, with their printed catalogs of sheet music. The director could then hear a sample recording of the piece as they looked at an excerpt from the musical score.

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, when computer programs and other binary data were often stored on audio cassettes, a number of microcomputer hobbyist magazines published &quot;flexible program sheets&quot; under various trademarked names including &quot;Floppy ROM&quot;, &quot;Flexisoft&quot;, and &quot;Discoflex&quot;. These bound-in thin plastic 33 rpm audio recordings stored computer data such as video game programs that would be played on a turntable and dubbed onto a cassette. It was also possible to connect the record player&#x27;s output to the computer&#x27;s cassette (analog signal) input port and load the data into the computer directly. This method of storing computer data later expanded to include non-flexi-disc novelty releases from musicians such as Chris Sievey.
Chocolate records about three inches in diameter, and small players made for them, were marketed as a novelty in Europe in 1903–1904. After a record or its amusement power wore out, it could be eaten.

In 1973, the Kingdom of Bhutan issued several unusual postage stamps that are playable miniature phonograph records. These thin plastic single-sided adhesive-backed 33 RPM discs feature folk music and tourism information. Not very practical for actual postal use and rarely seen canceled, they were designed as revenue-generating novelties and were initially scorned as such by most stamp collectors. Their small diameters (approximately 7 and 10 cm or 2.75 and 4 inches) make them unplayable on turntables with automatic return tonearms.

In the Soviet Union in the 1930s and 1960s, bootleg copies of banned Western music were individually recorded onto used medical x-ray film and sold on the black market. These were called &quot;ribs&quot; or &#x27;Roentgenizdat&#x27;.
==Unusual appearance==


===Colored records===
The first discs by Berliner Gramophone were black, and that has been the standard color for gramophone records ever since. But as early as 1899, the Vitaphone Talking Machine Co. made records that were brownish-red in color. 7&quot; and 10&quot; Nicole Records, about 1904–1908 made of laminated cardboard, were brown. The American Record Company produced records made of blue shellac for their flagship label, although pressings for client labels were made in standard black. Unusual colors, and even multi-colored shellac first appeared in the 1910s on such labels as Vocalion Records. In the 1920s, several companies made records of various shades of brown, including Perfect Records and Grey Gull Records.

When RCA Victor launched the 7-inch 45 rpm record, they initially had eight musical classifications (pop, country, blues, classical, children&#x27;s, etc.) each with not only its own uniquely colored label but with a corresponding color vinyl. According to experts at the Sarnoff Center in Princeton, New Jersey, the cost of maintaining eight vinyl colors became too high, but the different colored labels were continued, at least for popular music (black) and classical (red, as in &quot;Red Seal&quot;). In October 1945, RCA Victor put on the market its first &quot;non-breakable&quot; phonograph records. Made of a ruby-red, translucent vinyl resin plastic, they cost twice as much ($2 per disc) as the 12-inch Victor Red Seal. In the 1960s, a distinction was made in label colors of promotional copies of 45 RPM records as well, with pop music being issued on yellow labels and country on light green. &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Heart&#x27;s Club Band&quot; was at one point going to be printed on colored vinyl, but this never happened.

In the 1970s, such gimmicks started to reappear on records, especially on 7-inch and 12-inch singles. These included using colored acetate instead of black vinyl. Available colors included clear, translucent white, red, blue, yellow and multi-hued.

Faust released their debut album with transparent vinyl and cover in 1971, and a transparent 12-inch of Queen&#x27;s &quot;The Invisible Man&quot; was released. In the 1980s, the ska band Bad Manners released a single on Magnet Records called &quot;Samson And Delilah&quot; that was pressed on clear vinyl, with a clear label and clear print on the label and it came in a clear sleeve. In 1983, American post-punk band Talking Heads released the album &quot;Speaking in Tongues&quot;; a limited number of copies were pressed on clear vinyl and included in an elaborate plastic case designed by Robert Rauschenberg. 

Some recordings were released in several different colors, in a deliberate effort to sell the same product to one person multiple times as collector&#x27;s items. Currently, it is common practice for hardcore punk to release records of different colors at the same time, and press a smaller number of one color than the other. This has created a culture of hardcore record collecting based on having the same release multiple times, each copy with a different and more rare color.

The 1977 release of the 45 rpm single of &quot;Strawberry Letter 23&quot; by The Brothers Johnson was produced by A&amp;M Records with a slightly pink center label (as opposed to the usual buff color that A&amp;M uses), and had strawberry scent embedded into the plastic to make the record give off the odor of strawberries.

Adrian Snell&#x27;s 1979 album &quot;Something New Under the Sun&quot; was produced on opaque yellow vinyl, in reference to the name of the album.

Kraftwerk released a 12-inch single of &quot;Neon Lights,&quot; made of glow-in-the-dark plastic in 1978. Penetration released a luminous vinyl limited edition of the album &quot;Moving Targets&quot; in 1978 and the &quot;Translumadefractadisc&quot; (Han-O-Disc) punk sampler picture disc (which had a silk screened luminous ink under the litho on Mylar film image of Medusa) was released by The Label (U.K) in 1979. The Foo Fighters&#x27; debut single &quot;This Is a Call&quot; was available on 12-inch glow-in-the-dark vinyl, and Luke Vibert also released a glow-in-the-dark 11-inch EP in 2000. In late 2010 – early 2011, dubstep artist Skrillex released a limited 500 copy run of his EP &quot;Scary Monsters and Nice Sprites&quot; on 12-inch glow-in-the-dark vinyl.

The Canadian pressing of Devo&#x27;s &quot;&quot; album featured spattered-color vinyl, with a grey/white marbled base with splashes of color on the top of that. The UK pressing came in multiple (solid) colors of vinyl and a picture disc edition that came with a flexi-disc (the US edition, however, was plain black).

From the mid 1980s to the early 1990s, Canadian rock singer Bryan Adams released a small number of singles on colored vinyl. Notable examples are &quot;Christmas Time&quot;, originally on both black and clear green vinyl and later reissued on red vinyl, and a 12-inch single of &quot;Thought I&#x27;d Died And Gone To Heaven&quot; on silver colored vinyl in 1992, in order to commemorate the massive sales of his earlier hit single &quot;(Everything I Do) I Do It For You&quot;, which was featured in its full-length version on the disc.

Isis released their first EP &quot;Red Sea&quot;&#x27; on tri-colored vinyl. Divided like a pie, one third was red, one third was black, and one third was tan/gold. Other bands have released records with 2 colors, divided down the middle.

Colored vinyl records became increasingly popular in later years, with some albums having multiple releases in various different colors.

===Picture discs===

A picture disc has graphics visible in the grooved playing area, rather than just on an unplayable back side or large label.

Picture discs have been around since the 1920s—or since about 1910, if postcard-size rectangular picture records are included. In the early 1930s, they were a minor gimmick in an attempt to stimulate abysmal depression-era record sales. Most of these early picture discs were simply a very thin clear plastic laminated onto a sheet of printed cardboard before being stamped in a record press. One US series was more substantial. Some suffered from audible defects such as low-frequency noise due to a surface texture or were rapidly worn to shreds by the very heavy pickups and crude steel needles used to play records at that time.

Vogue Records 78 rpm picture discs were made by Sav-Way Industries in 1946 and 1947 and were of high quality both physically and sonically. Their playing surfaces were clear vinyl and there was a sturdy aluminum core disc between the printed sheets. The imagery was usually gaudy and done in 1940s calendar art style. They sold for US$1.05 each, only about 50 percent more than ordinary shellac records, but the list of available titles was short and the recording artists were second-rank at best.

The first &#x27;modern&#x27; rock picture disc was introduced as an assortment of artists such as MC5 and The Doors. It was released in 1969 by Elektra/Metronome of Germany and entitled &quot;Psychedelic Underground - Off 2, Hallucinations&quot;. The second release was the British progressive rock band Curved Air&#x27;s first album, &quot;Air Conditioning&quot;, a UK issue (1970).

In the 1950s, &quot;movie&quot; discs showing a repeating animation were produced, using the Praxinoscope technique, an example here: 

===Unusually shaped discs===

Shaped discs contain an ordinary grooved centre (typically the same as a standard 7-inch) but with a non-grooved outer rim that can be cut to any shape that does not cut into the grooves. These oddly shaped records were frequently combined with picture discs (see above); a trend that was pushed particularly hard by UK record company branches in the mid-1980s. Curiously, uncut test pressings of shaped discs in their original 12-inch form – with the clear vinyl surrounds still intact – are much more sought-after by collectors than the &quot;regular&quot; shapes themselves.

Shaped picture discs were first manufactured in the late 1970s for promotional purposes. An octagon-shaped promotional release of Toto&#x27;s 1979 single &quot;Georgy Porgy&quot; is cited as the first shaped release. Commercially released shaped picture discs followed in the 1980s. A well known release, also by Toto, is a shaped picture disc with the song &quot;Africa&quot; on side 1 and &quot;Rosanna&quot; on side 2. It was originally pressed in 1983 and reissued on Record Store Day in 2017. 

Screamo bands Jeromes Dream and Orchid released a split 10-inch in the shape of a skull in 2000. It spun at 45 rpm and was one sided. Some came in glow in the dark, some in blood red, and some black and white.

Some extreme examples required smaller grooving than standard 7-inch such as the single &quot;Montana&quot; by John Linnell (of the band They Might Be Giants) which was in the shape of the United States. This record was problematic because record players whose tonearms returned automatically after the record finished playing often did just that before the needle actually reached the song.

Canadian hardcore punk bands Left For Dead and Acrid released a split LP on No Idea Records on 31 July 1997 as a saw-blade shaped vinyl record. When these spun on the record player, they resembled a spinning saw. The rap duo Insane Clown Posse released a sample vinyl featuring songs from their studio album The Wraith: Shangri-La, in the shape of the album&#x27;s &quot;Joker Card&quot;, the Wraith. Alternative rock band Snow Patrol released a specially created web-shaped vinyl for the single &quot;Signal Fire,&quot; a song which was used in the film &quot;Spider-Man 3&quot;.

Queensrÿche released their singles &quot;Empire&quot; and &quot;Jet City Woman&quot; on limited edition shaped discs. The &quot;Jet City Woman&quot; picture disc is in the shape of the band&#x27;s Tri-Ryche logo.

===Etched discs===

Usually taking up a blank side of vinyl, rather than containing music, one side of a disc can be pressed with etched or embossed images. This can take the form of autographs, part of the artwork or logos. Earliest records produced by Emile Berliner, and those by other early companies as Zonophone before paper labels were widely used, had their titles and other information etched or incised into the master, or embossed into the stamper (or both) – either way therefore appearing on all the pressings. Many early Edison Diamond Discs did have etched labels as well, with many (if not all) also featuring a little etched picture of Thomas Edison. The Gramophone company pressed their logo at the blank side of their single sided records in the early 1900s, in the same way. Some later single-sided Red Seal records by Victor had a pattern with the word Victor on it.

After having already released both colored vinyl singles and picture discs in the 1980s, Canadian rock artist Bryan Adams issued a 12&quot; single of &quot;Can&#x27;t Stop This Thing We Started&quot; in autumn 1991, which had the front cover photography etched onto side B.

Coheed and Cambria released their fourth album &quot;Good Apollo, I&#x27;m Burning Star IV, Volume Two: No World for Tomorrow&quot; with side four having etched artwork on it incorporating the band&#x27;s logo. The &quot;B side&quot; of Dinosaur Jr&#x27;s cover of The Cure&#x27;s &quot;Just like Heaven&quot; has a bas-relief &quot;sculpture&quot; embossed on its surface. Side 6 of Boards of Canada&#x27;s Geogaddi has an etching of a nuclear family for the track &quot;Magic Window&quot;, albeit to replace the 1 minute 46 second long silent track that appears on digital versions. 

Although these etchings cannot be seen while the record is playing, some are pressed on clear vinyl so the etchings can be seen from both sides. An example of this is the 1997 7-inch of &quot;Freeze the Atlantic&quot; by Cable which has etched fish.

The Japanese rock band Boris (known for their unique LPs; their 2006 album Pink was released on pink vinyl) pressed their 2006 album, Vein, on transparent vinyl with etched artwork on the outer two inches of the record. This causes problems with auto-start phonographs, as the actual grooves of music do not start where the needle is designed to drop. This may cause damage to the needle and record artwork.
The 1980 A&amp;M Records LP of Split Enz&#x27;s album &quot;True Colours&quot; was remarkable not only for its multiple cover releases (in different color patterns), but for the laser-etching process used on the vinyl. The logo from the album cover, as well as other shapes, were etched into the vinyl in a manner that, if hit by a light, would reflect in polychromatic colors. This laser etching does not affect the playing grooves. This same process was also used for the 45 single of the band&#x27;s song &quot;One Step Ahead&quot; from the album &quot;Waiata&quot;.

The 1981 A&amp;M Records LP of Styx&#x27;s album &quot;Paradise Theatre&quot; had a laser-etched design of the band&#x27;s logo on side two.

The 1990 Mute XL12Bong18 release from Depeche Mode features &quot;Enjoy the Silence&quot; The Quad: Final Mix on side A and the etched image of a rose and a hand-drawn &quot;DM&quot; on side B.

The original soundtrack recording for the film &quot;Superman II&quot; had a special edition with the Superman &quot;S&quot; shield logo etched five times on each side of the standard black vinyl album.

Disturbed Immortalized (LP) Side 4 is Decorated with etching on whole side.
The 2008 album &quot;Unfamiliar Faces&quot; by Matt Costa has a Double Vinyl release but it had music only on three sides, Side A, Side B and Side C featured all the tracks from the CD release. Side D had etched artwork instead of music.

The 2020 release of the Quake soundtrack by Nine Inch Nails has program code from the game etched into side D.

The 2018 EP &quot;Play&quot; by Dave Grohl (of Foo Fighters) has a representation of the studio layout with the various instrument stations as laid out in the studio for recording.

Some unofficial vinyl releases of Glenn Danzig&#x27;s 1992 release Black Aria had the logo of Glenn&#x27;s band Danzig etched on side B.

First US vinyl pressings of American rock band Rage Against the Machine&#x27;s third studio album, The Battle of Los Angeles, have a faint etching of the graffiti outline featured on the cover.

===Liquid-filled discs===

For the release of the soundtrack for the Disney film &quot;The Black Hole&quot;, a prototype disc filled with aniline dye colored silicone fluids and oils that freely move around was produced; however, leakage proved too great a problem and it was never released.

In 2012, Third Man Records announced a limited edition 12-inch single release of Jack White&#x27;s &quot;Sixteen Saltines&quot; on a liquid-filled disc, calling it &quot;the first-ever disc of its kind to be made available to the public&quot; and noting the unreleased &quot;Black Hole&quot; release.

Also in 2012, The Flaming Lips released an extremely limited (and expensive) edition of their double album of collaborations &quot;The Flaming Lips and Heady Fwends&quot;, which was filled with a diluted mix of blood contributed by several of the collaborators, including Kesha, Chris Martin and Neon Indian&#x27;s Alan Palomo. It was pressed at United Record Pressing in Nashville at the same time as Jack White&#x27;s liquid-filled &quot;Sixteen Saltines&quot; 12-inch, and the first copy of the &quot;Fwends&quot; blood vinyl was traded for two copies of &quot;Saltines.&quot;

In 2014, Waxwork Records released a blood-filled record for the soundtrack of Friday the 13th, limited to under 75 copies.

In 2023, Needlejuice Records released a green-ooze filled LP of Nature Tapes by Lemon Demon

===Other concepts===
A BP Fallon single entitled &quot;Fame #9&quot;, another product of Third Man Records, was pressed in a process dubbed &quot;Single Signal&quot;, in which the B-side has different content on the left and right channels of the stereo groove. Listeners with a balance knob on their stereo are instructed to turn it either to the left or the right to play the record correctly.

An album by Christian Contemporary Rock band, Prodigal, titled &quot;Electric Eye&quot;, included a &quot;locked groove&quot; at the end of their 1984 vinyl, containing a computer software program for the Commodore 64 personal computer. The short BASIC program shows a static screen containing a lightly paraphrased quotation from Albert Einstein and a Biblical verse (John 14:27).

A limited edition version of the album Jar of Flies by Alice in Chains contains carcasses of real flies embedded into the vinyl.

===Hologram discs===
One of the many features added to the vinyl version of Jack White&#x27;s 2014 album &quot;Lazaretto&quot; is a floating hologram image of a spinning angel that appears when the record is played and viewed at from a certain angle.
Additionally, alongside a standard vinyl release, the soundtrack for &quot;Star Wars: The Force Awakens&quot; was made available on a holographic record that displays an image of the &quot;Millennium Falcon&quot; on one side and a TIE fighter on the other, both spinning at the speed of the record. The deluxe vinyl edition of Rush&#x27;s &quot;2112&quot; features a hologram of a spinning Red Star of the Federation. All three of these were produced by Tristan Duke for his studio Infinity Light Science.

==See also==
* Capacitance Electronic Disc (CED)
* Hidden track
* Lenticular printing
* List of picture discs
* Pocket Disc
* Shaped CD
* Voyager Golden Record
* VinylVideo

==References==
==External links==

*The Internet museum of records Site devoted entirely to &quot;strange but true recorded anomalies&quot; such as a Chinese frozen-food package lid that was also a playable record.
*Articles from Kempa.com on &quot;parallel grooves&quot;, &quot;vinyl video&quot; and &quot;locked grooves&quot;
*The 45 Adaptor A short article looking at the history of the 45 RPM spindle adaptor.
*Vinyl Underground, a Gallery of Picture Discs and Colored Vinyl Records. Contains hundreds of discs to view.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="219" end="236" title="gramophone record" label="gramophone record"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="247" end="257" title="phonograph" label="phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q691783" start="289" end="304" title="cylinder record" label="cylinder record"/>
<link wikidata="Q429659" start="606" end="613" title="shellac" label="shellac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758398" start="1223" end="1235" title="picture disc" label="picture disc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1605" end="1631" title="#Unusual materials and uses" label="Unusual materials and uses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1767" end="1789" title="#Unusually shaped discs" label="Unusually shaped discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="2544" end="2549" title="album (music)" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="2555" end="2561" title="single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163660" start="2893" end="2917" title="constant linear velocity" label="constant linear velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047162" start="2933" end="2955" title="Noel Pemberton Billing" label="Noel Pemberton Billing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163660" start="3381" end="3405" title="constant linear velocity" label="constant linear velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="4126" end="4138" title="Compact disc" label="Compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="4144" end="4147" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598158" start="4310" end="4324" title="Gray Audograph" label="Gray Audograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920132" start="4337" end="4344" title="Memovox" label="Memovox"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="6358" end="6365" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q290028" start="6373" end="6385" title="Duke Special" label="Duke Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="6769" end="6785" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="6842" end="6856" title="The Beach Boys" label="The Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q906647" start="7042" end="7056" title="Dixieland jazz" label="Dixieland jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q815249" start="7913" end="7920" title="jukebox" label="jukebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q972935" start="8867" end="8884" title="freebie marketing" label="freebie marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673255" start="9733" end="9745" title="acetate disc" label="acetate disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q848640" start="9837" end="9840" title="Boyd Rice" label="NON"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124168" start="9854" end="9865" title="Pagan Muzak" label="Pagan Muzak"/>
<link wikidata="Q208224" start="10947" end="10967" title="Brandenburg concerto" label="Brandenburg concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q669759" start="11806" end="11816" title="Moby Grape" label="Moby Grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492782" start="11829" end="11842" title="Wow/Grape Jam" label="Wow/Grape Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q189991" start="12220" end="12228" title="Gorillaz" label="Gorillaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q538380" start="12229" end="12240" title="Gorillaz (album)" label="debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076318" start="12761" end="12770" title="RRRecords" label="RRRecords"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="13067" end="13074" title="tonearm" label="tonearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="13287" end="13298" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="13311" end="13353" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q19631660" start="14033" end="14044" title="Outer Wilds" label="Outer Wilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="15081" end="15093" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195271" start="15107" end="15110" title="USA (King Crimson album)" label="USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="15118" end="15133" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072711" start="15147" end="15163" title="Wonderwall Music" label="Wonderwall Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q208211" start="15179" end="15192" title="Dead Kennedys" label="Dead Kennedys"/>
<link wikidata="Q615252" start="15205" end="15230" title="Plastic Surgery Disasters" label="Plastic Surgery Disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="16553" end="16563" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520937" start="16581" end="16600" title="The Fontane Sisters" label="The Fontane Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16608" end="16631" title="The Fortune Teller Song" label="The Fortune Teller Song"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16830" end="16847" title="George Garabedian" label="George Garabedian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16851" end="16866" title="Mark 56 Records" label="Mark 56 Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799590" start="16938" end="16950" title="Arthur Lyman" label="Arthur Lyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772498" start="16952" end="16965" title="The Marathons" label="The Marathons"/>
<link wikidata="Q344822" start="17028" end="17041" title="Tijuana Brass" label="Tijuana Brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15516717" start="17175" end="17183" title="John Zacherle" label="Zacherle"/>
<link wikidata="Q142305" start="17360" end="17372" title="Mother Goose" label="Mother Goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="17408" end="17420" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752136" start="17434" end="17463" title="The Monty Python Matching Tie and Handkerchief" label="Matching Tie and Handkerchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="17491" end="17495" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="17683" end="17687" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503756" start="17717" end="17723" title="Opiate (album)" label="Opiate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17909" end="17914" title="Brave (Marillion album)#Vinyl edition" label="Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780237" start="18142" end="18161" title="The Secret Machines" label="The Secret Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="18257" end="18281" title="Mad (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Mad&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288072" start="18317" end="18328" title="sound sheet" label="sound sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="18600" end="18613" title="Rhino Records" label="Rhino Records"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18840" end="18855" title="Pink Slip Daddy" label="Pink Slip Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58391" start="19119" end="19128" title="The Shins" label="The Shins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901269" start="19205" end="19217" title="Phantom Limb (The Shins song)" label="Phantom Limb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19332" end="19361" title="None of Your Fucking Business" label="None of Your Fucking Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267328" start="19655" end="19667" title="Johnny Moped" label="Johnny Moped"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19693" end="19703" title="Cycledelic" label="Cycledelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q918887" start="19841" end="19855" title="12-inch single" label="12-inch single"/>
<link wikidata="Q685595" start="19870" end="19880" title="De La Soul" label="De La Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802985" start="19904" end="19919" title="Me Myself and I (De La Soul song)" label="Me Myself and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="20486" end="20492" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="20588" end="20605" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809118" start="21930" end="21939" title="Vitaphone" label="Vitaphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="23438" end="23446" title="symphony" label="symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q691783" start="23830" end="23843" title="phonograph cylinder" label="wax cylinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="23892" end="23900" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="24479" end="24492" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116788" start="24697" end="24715" title="Edison Disc Record" label="Edison Disc Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561855" start="25568" end="25581" title="surface noise" label="surface noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="25601" end="25616" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q744417" start="25888" end="25899" title="Italo disco" label="Italo disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815685" start="26045" end="26059" title="Memory Records" label="Memory Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q744417" start="26113" end="26124" title="Italo disco" label="Italo disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679874" start="26135" end="26155" title="Talking to the Night" label="Talking to the Night"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26165" end="26174" title="Brian Ice" label="Brian Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="26254" end="26262" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667206" start="26287" end="26303" title="Sweating Bullets (song)" label="Sweating Bullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q574739" start="26464" end="26477" title="Basic Channel" label="Basic Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153017" start="26546" end="26560" title="Janek Schaefer" label="Janek Schaefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="26737" end="26750" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040013" start="26756" end="26764" title="Dropdead" label="Dropdead"/>
<link wikidata="Q179448" start="26859" end="26864" title="Noise" label="Noise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26872" end="26882" title="Paul Nomex" label="Paul Nomex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="27072" end="27088" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030927" start="27095" end="27115" title="Camper Van Beethoven" label="Camper Van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398063" start="27153" end="27165" title="Key Lime Pie (album)" label="Key Lime Pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="27395" end="27407" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Ravel&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q327331" start="27408" end="27414" title="Boléro" label="Boléro"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="27449" end="27465" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11989" start="27466" end="27480" title="Symphony No. 9 (Beethoven)" label="Ninth Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="27589" end="27595" title="stereo" label="stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166998" start="27641" end="27653" title="Cook Records" label="Cook Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="27686" end="27702" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612967" start="27787" end="27805" title="binaural recording" label="binaural recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q782526" start="28252" end="28264" title="Quadraphonic" label="Quadraphonic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28720" end="28728" title="dbx disc" label="dbx disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q325635" start="28742" end="28752" title="Telefunken" label="Telefunken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963952" start="28753" end="28762" title="Nakamichi" label="Nakamichi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28763" end="28774" title="High-Com II" label="High-Com II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009249" start="28788" end="28791" title="CBS Laboratories" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014901" start="28792" end="28797" title="CX (noise reduction)" label="CX 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q106920583" start="28815" end="28817" title="UC (noise reduction)" label="UC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759894" start="28864" end="28877" title="Highway Hi-Fi" label="Highway Hi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288072" start="29282" end="29292" title="flexi disc" label="flexi disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871512" start="29372" end="29395" title="Hit of the Week Records" label="Hit of the Week Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18574662" start="29400" end="29414" title="Durium Records" label="Durium Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038259" start="29961" end="29977" title="cardboard record" label="cardboard record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288072" start="30621" end="30631" title="flexi disc" label="flexi disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426710" start="31101" end="31114" title="marching band" label="marching band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261230" start="31119" end="31129" title="drum and bugle corps (modern)" label="drum corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="31181" end="31192" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662607" start="31566" end="31576" title="Floppy ROM" label="Floppy ROM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31715" end="31734" title="list of video game soundtracks released on vinyl#Vinyl data" label="video game programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077742" start="32086" end="32098" title="Chris Sievey" label="Chris Sievey"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="32315" end="32332" title="Kingdom of Bhutan" label="Kingdom of Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="32356" end="32369" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="32849" end="32861" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322429" start="33035" end="33039" title="ribs (recordings)" label="ribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642176" start="33142" end="33161" title="Berliner Gramophone" label="Berliner Gramophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q466592" start="33446" end="33469" title="American Record Company" label="American Record Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122815" start="33693" end="33709" title="Vocalion Records" label="Vocalion Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q909314" start="33794" end="33809" title="Perfect Records" label="Perfect Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915888" start="33814" end="33831" title="Grey Gull Records" label="Grey Gull Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="34124" end="34145" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q679697" start="35132" end="35137" title="Faust (band)" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740292" start="35153" end="35164" title="Faust (album)" label="debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="35236" end="35241" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="35311" end="35314" title="ska" label="ska"/>
<link wikidata="Q798739" start="35320" end="35331" title="Bad Manners" label="Bad Manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997189" start="35353" end="35367" title="Magnet Records" label="Magnet Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="35536" end="35545" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="35551" end="35564" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q236304" start="35590" end="35609" title="Speaking in Tongues (Talking Heads album)" label="Speaking in Tongues"/>
<link wikidata="Q164358" start="35726" end="35745" title="Robert Rauschenberg" label="Robert Rauschenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="35949" end="35962" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622450" start="36278" end="36298" title="Strawberry Letter 23" label="Strawberry Letter 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078198" start="36308" end="36328" title="The Brothers Johnson" label="The Brothers Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q277626" start="36345" end="36360" title="A&amp;amp;M Records" label="A&amp;amp;M Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685370" start="36557" end="36569" title="Adrian Snell" label="Adrian Snell"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="36705" end="36714" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q535525" start="36750" end="36761" title="Neon Lights (Kraftwerk song)" label="Neon Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q192275" start="36777" end="36793" title="Phosphorescence" label="glow-in-the-dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422795" start="36811" end="36822" title="Penetration (band)" label="Penetration"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="37126" end="37138" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q645322" start="37164" end="37178" title="This Is a Call" label="This Is a Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352724" start="37238" end="37249" title="Luke Vibert" label="Luke Vibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q20474" start="37330" end="37337" title="dubstep" label="dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q19004" start="37345" end="37353" title="Skrillex" label="Skrillex"/>
<link wikidata="Q20870" start="37402" end="37433" title="Scary Monsters and Nice Sprites" label="Scary Monsters and Nice Sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q908848" start="37501" end="37505" title="Devo" label="Devo"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="37642" end="37644" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="37755" end="37757" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="37855" end="37866" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111446" start="37947" end="37961" title="Christmas Time (Bryan Adams song)" label="Christmas Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808255" start="38079" end="38119" title="Thought I&amp;#x27;d Died And Gone To Heaven" label="Thought I&amp;#x27;d Died And Gone To Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q158549" start="38233" end="38266" title="(Everything I Do) I Do It For You" label="(Everything I Do) I Do It For You"/>
<link wikidata="Q740430" start="38334" end="38338" title="Isis (band)" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759930" start="38369" end="38376" title="The Red Sea (EP)" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302859" start="39238" end="39250" title="record press" label="record press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547545" start="39493" end="39506" title="Vogue Records" label="Vogue Records"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40137" end="40154" title="Elektra/Metronome" label="Elektra/Metronome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40185" end="40232" title="Psychedelic Underground - Off 2, Hallucinations" label="Psychedelic Underground - Off 2, Hallucinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="40275" end="40291" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145899" start="40297" end="40307" title="Curved Air" label="Curved Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945953" start="40334" end="40350" title="Air Conditioning (album)" label="Air Conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="40436" end="40445" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501341" start="40471" end="40483" title="Praxinoscope" label="Praxinoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q166080" start="41215" end="41222" title="octagon" label="octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207472" start="41253" end="41257" title="Toto (band)" label="Toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578892" start="41283" end="41295" title="Georgy Porgy (song)" label="Georgy Porgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q383842" start="41487" end="41493" title="Africa (Toto song)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q525539" start="41520" end="41527" title="Rosanna (song)" label="Rosanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="41595" end="41611" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080874" start="41637" end="41650" title="Jeromes Dream" label="Jeromes Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502635" start="41655" end="41661" title="Orchid (screamo band)" label="Orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q707352" start="41945" end="41957" title="John Linnell" label="John Linnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q420880" start="41971" end="41991" title="They Might Be Giants" label="They Might Be Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q929731" start="42452" end="42470" title="Insane Clown Posse" label="Insane Clown Posse"/>
<link wikidata="" start="42535" end="42557" title="The Wraith: Shangri-La" label="The Wraith: Shangri-La"/>
<link wikidata="Q188407" start="42650" end="42661" title="Snow Patrol" label="Snow Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454883" start="42729" end="42740" title="Signal Fire (song)" label="Signal Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182212" start="42788" end="42800" title="Spider-Man 3" label="Spider-Man 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q462380" start="42809" end="42820" title="Queensrÿche" label="Queensrÿche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374016" start="42850" end="42856" title="Empire (Queensrÿche song)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177772" start="42873" end="42887" title="Jet City Woman" label="Jet City Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="43676" end="43689" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="44022" end="44033" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569961" start="44068" end="44105" title="Can&amp;#x27;t Stop This Thing We Started" label="Can&amp;#x27;t Stop This Thing We Started"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299" start="44187" end="44205" title="Coheed and Cambria" label="Coheed and Cambria"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44240" end="44312" title="Good Apollo, I&amp;#x27;m Burning Star IV, Volume Two: No World for Tomorrow" label="Good Apollo, I&amp;#x27;m Burning Star IV, Volume Two: No World for Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q622944" start="44424" end="44435" title="Dinosaur Jr" label="Dinosaur Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="44452" end="44460" title="The Cure" label="The Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q956305" start="44474" end="44490" title="Just Like Heaven (The Cure song)" label="Just like Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="44503" end="44513" title="bas-relief" label="bas-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q722778" start="44571" end="44587" title="Boards of Canada" label="Boards of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503114" start="44595" end="44603" title="Geogaddi" label="Geogaddi"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="44624" end="44638" title="nuclear family" label="nuclear family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015621" start="44995" end="45000" title="Cable (British band)" label="Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q893604" start="45048" end="45053" title="Boris (band)" label="Boris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813605" start="45464" end="45473" title="Split Enz" label="Split Enz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541103" start="45493" end="45505" title="True Colours (Split Enz album)" label="True Colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997979" start="45989" end="45995" title="Waiata (album)" label="Waiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q590102" start="46035" end="46039" title="Styx (band)" label="Styx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895023" start="46059" end="46075" title="Paradise Theater (album)" label="Paradise Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="46184" end="46196" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q279097" start="46212" end="46229" title="Enjoy the Silence" label="Enjoy the Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q267672" start="46394" end="46405" title="Superman II" label="Superman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884320" start="46642" end="46658" title="Unfamiliar Faces" label="Unfamiliar Faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378707" start="46668" end="46678" title="Matt Costa" label="Matt Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217423" start="46884" end="46889" title="Quake (video game)" label="Quake"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630911" start="46890" end="46900" title="Quake (original soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="46904" end="46919" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q56051798" start="46990" end="46994" title="Play (Dave Grohl EP)" label="Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="47004" end="47014" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="47019" end="47031" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q558325" start="47159" end="47184" title="Bootleg recordings" label="unofficial vinyl releases"/>
<link wikidata="Q354654" start="47188" end="47200" title="Glenn Danzig" label="Glenn Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920283" start="47221" end="47231" title="Black Aria" label="Black Aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q649175" start="47266" end="47272" title="Danzig (band)" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="47339" end="47363" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="47377" end="47389" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q754834" start="47391" end="47416" title="The Battle of Los Angeles (album)" label="The Battle of Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="47446" end="47454" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q304029" start="47574" end="47588" title="The Black Hole" label="The Black Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q186414" start="47625" end="47636" title="aniline dye" label="aniline dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q377453" start="47789" end="47806" title="Third Man Records" label="Third Man Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q272031" start="47861" end="47871" title="Jack White (musician)" label="Jack White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533062" start="47885" end="47901" title="Sixteen Saltines" label="Sixteen Saltines"/>
<link wikidata="Q523184" start="48096" end="48112" title="The Flaming Lips" label="The Flaming Lips"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734358" start="48213" end="48246" title="The Flaming Lips and Heady Fwends" label="The Flaming Lips and Heady Fwends"/>
<link wikidata="Q33605" start="48354" end="48359" title="Kesha" label="Kesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q712860" start="48361" end="48373" title="Chris Martin" label="Chris Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986540" start="48378" end="48389" title="Neon Indian" label="Neon Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q114223261" start="48672" end="48687" title="Waxwork Records" label="Waxwork Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243029" start="48741" end="48756" title="Friday the 13th (1980 film)" label="Friday the 13th"/>
<link wikidata="Q112128196" start="48796" end="48815" title="Needlejuice Records" label="Needlejuice Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q119717025" start="48851" end="48863" title="Nature Tapes" label="Nature Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19830585" start="48867" end="48878" title="Lemon Demon" label="Lemon Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247598" start="49323" end="49331" title="Prodigal (band)" label="Prodigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10271274" start="49340" end="49364" title="Electric Eye (album)" label="&amp;quot;Electric Eye&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49377" end="49402" title="#Sound recorded in locked grooves" label="&amp;quot;locked groove&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="49482" end="49494" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q912288" start="49699" end="49711" title="Jar of Flies" label="Jar of Flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="49715" end="49730" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="49758" end="49763" title="Fly" label="flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q272031" start="49866" end="49876" title="Jack White" label="Jack White"/>
<link wikidata="Q16262781" start="49901" end="49910" title="Lazaretto (album)" label="Lazaretto"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50116" end="50144" title="Star Wars: The Force Awakens" label="Star Wars: The Force Awakens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901" start="50230" end="50247" title="Millennium Falcon" label="Millennium Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19884" start="50272" end="50283" title="TIE fighter" label="TIE fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="50368" end="50372" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q204404" start="50380" end="50396" title="2112 (album)" label="&amp;quot;2112&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246349" start="50563" end="50590" title="Capacitance Electronic Disc" label="Capacitance Electronic Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q927803" start="50599" end="50611" title="Hidden track" label="Hidden track"/>
<link wikidata="Q356186" start="50614" end="50633" title="Lenticular printing" label="Lenticular printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758398" start="50636" end="50657" title="List of picture discs" label="List of picture discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206364" start="50660" end="50671" title="Pocket Disc" label="Pocket Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q993254" start="50674" end="50683" title="Shaped CD" label="Shaped CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q156315" start="50686" end="50707" title="Voyager Golden Record" label="Voyager Golden Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="50710" end="50720" title="VinylVideo" label="VinylVideo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803698" wikidata="Q1743710" url="?curid=803698" title="Kishi">
<text>Kishi may refer to:

==People==
* Kishi (biblical figure)
*, Japanese actress and AV Idol
*, Japanese culinary critic
*, Japanese gravure idol, actress, and variety tarento
*, Japanese trampoline gymnast
*, Japanese baseball player
*, Japanese actress and writer
*, Japanese politician
*, Japanese composer, conductor and violinist
* Kichimatsu Kishi (1871–1956), Japanese–American agriculturalist
*, Japanese film critic and screenwriter
*, Japanese politician and prime minister
*, Japanese politician, grandson of Nobusuke Kishi
*, Japanese football player and manager
*, Japanese baseball player
* Yoshito Kishi (1937–2023), Japanese-American chemist
*, Japanese singer and actor
*, Japanese author
*, Japanese singer, actor and television personality
*, Japanese actor and voice actor

==Places==
* Kishi, Hormozgan, Iran
* Kisi, Nigeria
* Kishi Station (disambiguation), several places

==Other uses==
* Kishi (folklore), a two-faced demon in Angolan folklore

==See also==

*Kish (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1743710" start="0" end="5" title="Kishi" label="Kishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416566" start="34" end="57" title="Kishi (biblical figure)" label="Kishi (biblical figure)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196336" start="334" end="350" title="Kichimatsu Kishi" label="Kichimatsu Kishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q906949" start="602" end="615" title="Yoshito Kishi" label="Yoshito Kishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q616326" start="804" end="820" title="Kishi, Hormozgan" label="Kishi, Hormozgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416680" start="829" end="842" title="Kisi, Nigeria" label="Kisi, Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416574" start="845" end="875" title="Kishi Station (disambiguation)" label="Kishi Station (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416567" start="910" end="926" title="Kishi (folklore)" label="Kishi (folklore)"/>
<link wikidata="Q453373" start="982" end="1003" title="Kish (disambiguation)" label="Kish (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803704" wikidata="Q1892938" url="?curid=803704" title="USS Maryland (1799)">
<text>USS &quot;Maryland&quot; was a sloop-of-war in the United States Navy. She served during the Quasi-War with France.

&quot;Maryland&quot; was built by public subscription in Baltimore under the Act of 30 June 1798; launched at Price Shipyard, Baltimore, 3 June 1799; and accepted by the Navy in August 1799, Captain John Rodgers in command.

&quot;Maryland&quot; departed Baltimore 13 September 1799 for the Surinam station. Arriving 1 October, the sloop cruised from French Guiana to Curaçao protecting American shipping from attacks by French warships and privateers. The Napoleonic Wars were ongoing in Europe and the French were searching and seizing merchant vessels trading with the British West Indies, causing much loss to American commerce. &quot;Maryland&quot; captured the schooner &quot;Clarissa&quot;, an American slave trader without papers 4 January 1800, and then on 26 July fell in with and recaptured without a fight the Portuguese brig &quot;Gloria da Mar&quot;, which had been captured by French privateer &quot;Cherry of Bourdeaux&quot; 13 days previous.

The sloop left Surinam for home 9 August 1800, having served since December 1799 as the only American naval vessel on the Surinam station. Sailing by way of St. Kitts, and St. Thomas, &quot;Maryland&quot; escorted a large convoy of American and British merchant vessels to safe waters, in addition to capturing &quot;Aerial&quot;, an American merchantman on 2 September. &quot;Aerial&quot; had been trading with the enemy and arraigned a fake capture by a privateer as cover. On 10 September 1800 she set sail for St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, with , escorting a convoy of 52 ships. On an unknown date she and the USS &quot;Maryland&quot; recaptured the brig &quot;Mahitable&quot;.

&quot;Maryland&quot; arrived at Baltimore on 1 October for repairs. In a letter dated 20 February to Josiah Parker, Chaiman of the Committee on Naval Affairs, Navy Secretary Stoddert recommended selling her. The sloop departed Baltimore on 22 March 1801 with Congressman John Dawson of Virginia, President Adams&#x27; designated bearer of the amended and ratified Treaty of Mortefontaine with France, and arrived Havre de Grâce, France, in early May. The sloop remained until 15 July, when, because of difficulties in obtaining ratification, she was released by Congressman Dawson and sent home. Carrying several diplomatic passengers and important letters and dispatches, she returned to her home port in Baltimore on 28 August. Captain Rodgers discharged the crew and then sold &quot;Maryland&quot; on 2 October 1801 for $20,200.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1892938" start="0" end="18" title="USS Maryland (1799)" label="USS &amp;quot;Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="31" end="43" title="sloop-of-war" label="sloop-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="51" end="69" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q655480" start="93" end="102" title="Quasi-War" label="Quasi-War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="174" end="183" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="227" end="241" title="Price Shipyard" label="Price Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733407" start="316" end="328" title="John Rodgers (1772–1838)" label="John Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646305" start="408" end="415" title="Surinam (Dutch colony)" label="Surinam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="468" end="481" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="485" end="492" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="558" end="567" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="574" end="589" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="689" end="708" title="British West Indies" label="British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="784" end="792" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q202539" start="950" end="954" title="brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q204989" start="1234" end="1243" title="Saint Kitts" label="St. Kitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q463937" start="1249" end="1259" title="Saint Thomas, United States Virgin Islands" label="St. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q463937" start="1591" end="1601" title="Saint Thomas, United States Virgin Islands" label="St. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="1603" end="1617" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q392894" start="2029" end="2040" title="John Dawson (US politician)" label="John Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="2054" end="2069" title="John Adams" label="President Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q284553" start="2122" end="2145" title="Convention of 1800 (Treaty of Mortefontaine)" label="Treaty of Mortefontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="2171" end="2185" title="Le Havre" label="Havre de Grâce"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803706" wikidata="Q2058417" url="?curid=803706" title="Golden Hill Paugussett Indian Nation">
<text>The Golden Hill Paugussett is a state-recognized Native American tribe in Connecticut. Granted reservations in a number of towns in the 17th century, their land base was whittled away until they were forced to reacquire a small amount of territory in the 19th century. Today they retain a state-recognized reservation in the town of Trumbull, and have an additional reservation acquired in 1978 and 1980 in Colchester, Connecticut.

They descend from the historic Quiripi-speaking Paugussett, an Algonguian-speaking nation who historically occupied much of western Connecticut prior to the arrival of European colonists. They are among the five tribes recognized by the state. They were denied federal recognition in 2004.

==Present day==
The 100-member tribe lives primarily in urban areas of Southwestern Connecticut due to the minuscule size of its reserve in the Nichols section of Trumbull, Connecticut. Several members presently reside in Colchester, Connecticut, where the tribe has a second reservation.

In 2009, a state court dismissed a challenge to the tribe&#x27;s status as Indians, refusing to eject members of the Golden Hill Paugussett Tribe from reservations in Trumbull and Colchester.

==History==

While the history of the Paugusset people began long before the European encounter, the early written records are European accounts. Their language, called Quiripi by lexicographers, was one of numerous Eastern Algonquian tongues in the coastal areas of the Atlantic. In addition to the Paugussett, Quiripi-speaking tribes included the Quinnipiack, Wampano, Unkechaug, Naugatuck, Mattabesic, and Schaghticoke. Quiripi has been extinct since at least the early 1800s.

Historically, the Paugussett occupied a region from present-day Norwalk to West Haven, and from Long Island Sound inland for as far as they could navigate by canoe on the Housatonic and Naugatuck rivers.

The tribe was made up of four primary sub-groups, the Paugussett Proper in what is present-day Milford, Derby and Shelton; the Pequonnock, along the coast; the Potatuck in Newtown, Woodbury and Southbury; and the Weantinock in New Milford. They had a farming and fishing culture. The women cultivated varieties of staple crops: corn, beans, and squash, and tobacco, which was used for ritual purposes. The men fished in both fresh and salt water. The size of midden shell heaps along the coast and the amount of cleared land attested to both a long period of occupation and a high degree of social organization among the people.

===Encroachment by settlers===
While the Paugusset did not have early direct contact with Europeans, they came in contact with other Native Americans who did, and were exposed to the smallpox epidemic in 1633–35, which caused many deaths. They learned of the English and allies&#x27; war against the Pequot in 1637, with the defeat of that nation. English settlers first arrived in Paugussett lands in 1638–39, establishing settlements in New Haven, Guilford, Milford, Stratford and Fairfield.

===Golden Hill and Turkey Hill===
Within a few years, the Paugussett had been divested by the colonists of the vast majority of their lands. A reservation was set aside in 1639 at Golden Hill, site of a spring sacred to the tribe, in present-day Bridgeport. Another reservation was established at Turkey Hill in present-day Derby. In 1802, the state-appointed tribal overseer sold Golden Hill. A replacement reservation was created at Turkey Meadows in Trumbull in 1841, but it was sold off in 1854. The last of Turkey Hill was also sold by the state in 1826 for the people&#x27;s &quot;own benefit&quot;.

===Ethiope or Liberia===
According to Bridgeport City Historian Charles Brilvitch&#x27;s history of the Golden Hill tribe, beginning in the 1820s a number of Paugussett, under the leadership of Joel Freeman, a Turkey Hill Indian from Derby, relocated to Bridgeport. They settled in the city&#x27;s South End. The area became known as Ethiope or Liberia. While this community consisted substantially of residents who identified as Paugussett, it included Natives from the Mahican, Shinnecock, Nehantic, and Munsee-Delaware nations as well. Freeman was followed by two of his sisters, Mary and Eliza, who built houses in 1848 that are still standing. They have been listed in the National Register of Historic Places.

During the antebellum period, the Paugussett and other Native Americans achieved a substantial degree of economic success. Many of the men worked on whaling ships and West Indies trading vessels, while many women residents worked as cooks and waitstaff on the steamboats plying Long Island Sound and the Hudson River. Two churches, a Masonic lodge, resort hotel, school and other community institutions were built in the village.

Only one individual named &quot;Joel Freeman&quot; was recorded in Census and vital records of the state of Connecticut during this period. Nevertheless, the Bureau of Indian Affairs disputed whether the man who led the Ethiope-Liberia community was the same individual listed as a signatory on Turkey Hill Indian deeds. Because the National Register of Historic Places nomination for the Mary and Eliza Freeman Houses identified the builders as African Americans, the BIA disputed whether the sisters and Joel Freeman could be considered members of the Paugusset community. However, Charles Brilvitch, who ironically had authored the 1998 nomination, maintains that his African American identification was merely a mistaken attempt to interpret the term &quot;coloured&quot; used in documents of the period

The confusion about cultural identification as Native Americans has affected other communities that have worked to demonstrate cultural continuity. Native American nations were used to absorbing people of other ethnicities and intermarried with neighbors. There has been disagreement among groups over an interpretation of the term &quot;mulatto,&quot; which has a primary association of African-European mixed race but has frequently been applied to other people of colour. 

===Restoration of the land base===
Around 1857 William Sherman (1825–1886), a whaler by trade withdrew from the Liberia community and settled in the village of Nichols Farms in the Town of Trumbull, Connecticut, the site of the 1841-54 Turkey Meadows reservation. In 1875, he purchased a quarter-acre plot of land that contained a Paugussett burial ground; he used funds from the Golden Hill Tribal Fund to construct a house on it. He is referred to in local histories of the 1880s as the chief of the tribe. Prior to his death in 1886, Sherman turned the property over to the state overseer in trust for the Golden Hill tribe. The land was accepted by the State of Connecticut in that year as an official reservation.

Subsequently, his son George Sherman (b. 1871) took over the leadership of the Golden Hill people; he lived on the reservation and led the people until his death in 1938. He was succeeded by his son Edward (1896–1974), who was known as &quot;Chief Black Hawk.&quot; Meanwhile, Edward&#x27;s sister, Ethel (1893–1993), was installed in 1933 as &quot;Chieftess Rising Star&quot;. Ethel was active in the Pan-Indian movement and was a staunch advocate of Indian rights, fighting many battles in the courts of law and public opinion. She named her son Aurelius H. Piper (1916–2008) as &quot;Chief Big Eagle&quot; in 1959. Following the death of Chief Black Hawk in 1974, Piper (Chief Big Eagle) assumed full leadership of the tribe and took up residency on the Trumbull reservation. He obtained grants to purchase land in Colchester, Connecticut for the community in 1978 and 1980. This land was granted formal reservation status by the state legislature in 1981.

===Leadership===

On May 1, 1991, due to advancing age, Chief Big Eagle named his son, Aurelius H. Piper, Jr. (1945–2021), as Hereditary Chief of the Golden Hill Tribe. Known as Chief Quiet Hawk, Piper was an ex-Marine and former social worker who was then serving as executive director of American Indians for Development, Inc. Immediately upon assuming leadership he launched the Golden Hill Indian Development Corporation, with the purpose of economic development of the reservation properties for the benefit of the tribal membership.

In September, 1992, Quiet Hawk filed a lawsuit to reclaim lands taken from the tribe in violation of the federal Nonintercourse Act. The tribe at first sought to reclaim the 12-acre Nimrod Lot and the 8-acre Rocky Hill Lot in the city of Bridgeport, both sold off by the State of Connecticut in 1802 without the stipulated approval of both houses of Congress. In November, 1992, he advanced the claim to include the 19 3/4-acre Turkey Meadows Reservation in Trumbull. Concurrently, the tribe sued for the remainder of the 80-acre Golden Hill Reservation in Bridgeport. Within a few short weeks historic reservation lands in the towns of Milford, Orange, Woodbridge, Stratford, and Shelton were added; intent was made known to press claims in 24 state municipalities, comprising $44 billion worth of property and 640,000 defendants.

An overriding priority of Chief Quiet Hawk&#x27;s administration was the quest for federal recognition. A grant for this purpose was obtained from the Department of Housing and Urban Development in 1992. Another priority was to utilize modern technology to facilitate interaction among tribal members and to strengthen community bonds and spiritual focus.

Chief Quiet Hawk died at age 76 on April 26, 2021. A vote of the tribal membership affirmed his succession by his brother Aureliuse H. Piper III, oldest surviving son of Chief Big Eagle, on November 14, 2022. Aureliuse is known as Chief Bear Eagle.

===Challenge over cigarette sales===
In 1993 the tribe made national headlines when it opened a tax-free cigarette shop on the Colchester reservation, asserting its sovereignty in selling the product without taking taxes. An armed standoff with state police ensued that ended without violence when Chief Moon Face Bear (Kenneth Piper) agreed to close the shop. In the resulting state court case, the court ruled in &quot;State v. Piper,&quot; No. CR21-57349 (May 3, 1996), that the tribe did not have exemption from the state requirement to collect taxes on sales of cigarettes as it was not federally recognized.

==Quest for federal recognition==
Chief Big Eagle first submitted a request to the BIA in 1982 seeking federal recognition of the Golden Hill Paugussett tribe. That request was not acted on or further pursued by the BIA. Early in 1990 Chief Big Eagle appointed Chief Quiet Hawk to pursue the quest for federal recognition and also to pursue the land claims in the state of Connecticut. 

Opposition to federal recognition came from local residents who were opposed to proposed Golden Hill casino development in Bridgeport. Some scholars have attributed opposition to anti-Indigenous and anti-Black racism, noting the mixed-race heritage of many Golden Hill Paugussetts.

In a final determination in 1996, the Bureau of Indian Affairs denied recognition to the Golden Hill Paugussett. The tribe appealed under BIA provisions and submitted additional historic and genealogical documentation. They were denied federal recognition in 2004. Since the legislative changes that have enabled federally recognized tribes to establish gambling casinos on their lands, some tribes have gained significant revenue for welfare, education, and development from gambling revenues, including two in Connecticut.

In 2015, the Bureau of Indian Affairs revised the acknowledgment criteria, requiring petitioners to prove continuity only back to 1900 (rather than to the time of first contact) and accepting State recognition and the existence of tribal reservations as evidence of a continuing government-to-government relationship. Seeing that this would virtually guarantee recognition of the Paugussett and other state tribes, the Connecticut congressional delegation insisted on the insertion of a clause stipulating that tribes which have previously been denied federal recognition could not re-petition. In 2017, the Golden Hill Paugussett announced their intention to contest the &quot;no second chance&quot; rule as unconstitutional and said that they were working on another application for federal recognition.

==State opposition to federal recognition==
While the state has gained considerable revenues from its share of income generated by the two major established casino resorts, Connecticut officials have been opposed to recognition of additional tribes and addition of gambling sites in the state. State officials lobbied the BIA in opposition to recognition of the Golden Hill Paugussett.

The governor, Congressional delegation, and private property owners later mounted challenges and conducted lobbying to reverse the federal recognition granted to the Eastern Pequot Nation in 2002, and the Schaghticoke Tribal Nation in 2004. They succeeded in gaining a BIA review of both cases; after a change in political administrations, recognition of both tribes was revoked in 2005, actions without precedent.

==Land rights claims==
Together with providing documentation and working to regain tribal status, the Paugusset filed land rights claims against the state, saying the state did not have the authority to manage or sell land on their behalf and had cost them the loss of substantial lands since colonial times. Lack of federal recognition has deprived them of automatic standing in such suits.

Initiated by Chief Big Eagle, the Paugussett originally had claimed legal rights to of land running from Orange/Woodbridge in New Haven County though Fairfield County to Greenwich and extending North into Eastern Litchfield County up to the Massachusetts border. The Paugusset have since dropped these large claims.

In 1992, Chief Quiet Hawk filed a lawsuit claiming 80 acres in Bridgeport, the site of Golden Hill, which the state had sold in 1802, as well as land in Trumbull and Orange. In 1993, the federal District Court judge Peter Dorsey concluded that Connecticut had violated the 1790 Non-Intercourse Act by selling Indian lands without the approval of the federal government. But he dismissed the case, pending resolution of the BIA&#x27;s review of the Paugusset petition for federal recognition. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals overturned the dismissal in 1999. Citing other cases, it noted that criteria for an Indian group&#x27;s pursuit of land claims were not necessarily the same as for federal recognition.

In 2006, a federal district court judge dismissed the Golden Hill Paugussett&#x27;s 14-year-old lawsuit claiming lands in Orange, Trumbull and Bridgeport, based on the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs&#x27; rejection of the tribe&#x27;s petition for federal recognition. The Golden Hill Paugusset had contended that, since they were a Native American nation, the state did not have the authority to deal with them on land sales or dispose of their land. Since the United States was formed, the federal government had reserved to itself authority over dealings with Native American nations and required approval by the Senate of any sale of Indian lands.

==Notable Golden Hill Paugusett people==
* Aurelius H. Piper, Sr. (1916–2008), Chief Big Eagle - hereditary chief, died at age 92 in Trumbull. Beginning in the late 20th century, he encouraged revival of the Paugusset language. &quot;It is a sacred obligation,&quot; says the Golden Hill Paugussett Chief, Big Eagle. &quot;Indian people must keep their languages alive. If the language is not spoken, it must be made to live again.&quot;
* Aurelius H. Piper, Jr. (1945–2021), Chief Quiet Hawk - appointed by his father, Big Eagle, to succeed him as Chief of Chiefs.

==Notes==
==References==
*

==External links==
*Official website
*Timeline

==See also==

* History of Trumbull, Connecticut</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2058417" start="4" end="26" title="Golden Hill Paugussett Indian Nation" label="Golden Hill Paugussett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669249" start="32" end="48" title="State recognized tribes" label="state-recognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="49" end="64" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="74" end="85" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q755134" start="333" end="341" title="Trumbull, Connecticut" label="Trumbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107717" start="407" end="430" title="Colchester, Connecticut" label="Colchester, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414714" start="464" end="471" title="Quiripi language" label="Quiripi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058417" start="481" end="491" title="Paugussett" label="Paugussett"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="565" end="576" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979966" start="694" end="713" title="Native American recognition in the United States" label="federal recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026545" start="868" end="875" title="Nichols, Connecticut" label="Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q755134" start="887" end="908" title="Trumbull, Connecticut" label="Trumbull, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107717" start="946" end="969" title="Colchester, Connecticut" label="Colchester, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414714" start="1376" end="1383" title="Quiripi" label="Quiripi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="1431" end="1441" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q54217" start="1752" end="1759" title="Norwalk, Connecticut" label="Norwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q54219" start="1763" end="1773" title="West Haven, Connecticut" label="West Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631368" start="1859" end="1869" title="Housatonic River" label="Housatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576133" start="1874" end="1883" title="Naugatuck River" label="Naugatuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q755798" start="1988" end="1995" title="Milford, Connecticut" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q755197" start="1997" end="2002" title="Derby, Connecticut" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q594109" start="2007" end="2014" title="Shelton, Connecticut" label="Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578261" start="2053" end="2061" title="Potatuck" label="Potatuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q738356" start="2065" end="2072" title="Newtown, Connecticut" label="Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q607420" start="2074" end="2082" title="Woodbury, Connecticut" label="Woodbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q917350" start="2087" end="2096" title="Southbury, Connecticut" label="Southbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978040" start="2106" end="2116" title="Weantinock" label="Weantinock"/>
<link wikidata="Q977989" start="2120" end="2131" title="New Milford, Connecticut" label="New Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="2144" end="2151" title="farming" label="farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="2156" end="2163" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="2221" end="2225" title="corn" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="2227" end="2232" title="beans" label="beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="2238" end="2244" title="Squash (plant)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="2250" end="2257" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="2359" end="2370" title="shell heaps" label="shell heaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2706" end="2714" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="2715" end="2723" title="epidemic" label="epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207617" start="2807" end="2829" title="Pequot War" label="war against the Pequot"/>
<link wikidata="Q49174" start="3264" end="3274" title="Bridgeport, Connecticut" label="Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q755197" start="3342" end="3347" title="Derby, Connecticut" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3689" end="3706" title="Charles Brilvitch" label="Charles Brilvitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="3959" end="3966" title="Liberia" label="Ethiope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4303" end="4339" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="4931" end="4955" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781010" start="5162" end="5191" title="Mary and Eliza Freeman Houses" label="Mary and Eliza Freeman Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q755134" start="6248" end="6269" title="Trumbull, Connecticut" label="Trumbull, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822279" start="7327" end="7344" title="Aurelius H. Piper, Sr." label="Aurelius H. Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107717" start="7597" end="7620" title="Colchester, Connecticut" label="Colchester, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049434" start="8393" end="8411" title="Nonintercourse Act" label="Nonintercourse Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979966" start="11242" end="11261" title="Native American recognition in the United States" label="federal recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="11369" end="11375" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330378" start="12892" end="12913" title="Eastern Pequot Nation" label="Eastern Pequot Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017869" start="12931" end="12957" title="Schaghticoke Tribal Nation" label="Schaghticoke Tribal Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q754766" start="13640" end="13657" title="Orange, Connecticut" label="Orange/Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q54234" start="13661" end="13677" title="New Haven County, Connecticut" label="New Haven County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54231" start="13685" end="13701" title="Fairfield County, Connecticut" label="Fairfield County"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="13705" end="13714" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q54235" start="13740" end="13765" title="Litchfield County, Connecticut" label="Eastern Litchfield County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="13776" end="13789" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="14742" end="14766" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822279" start="15264" end="15286" title="Aurelius H. Piper, Sr." label="Aurelius H. Piper, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15661" end="15683" title="Aurelius H. Piper, Jr." label="Aurelius H. Piper, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5866925" start="15880" end="15912" title="History of Trumbull, Connecticut" label="History of Trumbull, Connecticut"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803710" wikidata="Q5517395" url="?curid=803710" title="Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory">
<text>The Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory is a historic astronomical observatory on DeSellum Avenue in Gaithersburg, Maryland. It was established in 1899 as part of a system of six International Latitude Observatories to precisely measure the wobble of the Earth&#x27;s rotating axis. The observatory building and adjacent monuments were designated a National Historic Landmark in 1989 as a testament to international scientific cooperation. The observatory was taken out of service in 1982 after automation eliminated the need for human observations; the property is now owned by the city.

==History==
The Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory was one of six observatories — and one of the four original observatories built by 1899 — tracking the degree of &quot;wobble&quot; occurring on the earth&#x27;s north-south axis and resultant variation of latitude. The Observatory — along with observatories in Cincinnati, Ohio; Ukiah, California; Mizusawa, Japan; Charjui in Russian Turkestan; and Carloforte, Sardina, Italy — performed in concert to carry out a coordinated program of star observation designed to investigate and calculate the degree of earth &quot;wobble&quot; or latitude variation.

On the grounds of the Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory stands a plaque that reads:

This small framed structure played a key role in the scientific investigation of the Earth&#x27;s rotation. In 1898, the International Geodetic Association established a network of observatories to measure the wobble of the planet on its axis by plotting the locations of specific stars. This hilltop in Gaithersburg was chosen together with sites in California, Italy, Japan, and the Soviet Union. All five lay along the same latitude (39° 8&#x27; N). The American Stations were supervised by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey. The observatory&#x27;s roof was designed to part in the middle on two sets of tracks to expose the reflecting telescope inside to the night sky. Its slatted exterior walls stabilize the inside air to limit the effects of the temperatures on the accuracy of the telescope. The building&#x27;s white paint minimizes heat retention that creates air turbulence around the telescope at night, distorting the stars. Knowledge gained from the observations recorded here nightly until 1982 assisted scientists in the study of the Earth&#x27;s geophysical make-up and aided spacecraft orbiting the planet and navigating the universe.

A second portion of the observatory was constructed to house the Photographic Zenith Tube. The observers used the Photographic Zenith Tube to capture picture data using the Zenith telescope as a guide of alignment and star track. However, nothing now remains of this addition to the Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory.

==History==
The Gaithersburg observatory was established as part of the International Polar Motion Service in 1899. The Gaithersburg observatory was built by Edwin Smith, chief of the Instrument Division of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, who had conducted similar measurements as a volunteer in 1891-92 from his home in Rockville, Maryland. During its operation twelve groups of stars were studied in the program, each group containing six pairs of stars. Each night, the station observed two of the star groups along a preset schedule and later compared the data against the measurements taken by the five sister stations. The station operated on this schedule until 1915, when it was temporarily closed as a result of economy measures. Operations resumed in 1932 and continued until 1982 when advances in computer technology and satellite observations rendered it obsolete, although data collected by the observatory over the years still has use to scientists, and has been applied to studies of polar motion, the physical properties of the Earth, climatology and satellite tracking and navigation.

==Description==
The Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory stands on the north side of DeSellum Avenue, just north of the Gaithersburg High School campus. The building measures square with a small gable-roofed louvered entrance porch on the west side. There is a small shed-roofed addition on the east side. The structure rests on a mortar and fieldstone foundation. Each gable features a decorative wood five-pointed star. A metal ventilator is mounted over each half-section&#x27;s roof, topped with similar metal star. A system of metal-capped wood rails allows the building to be pulled apart in the middle using ropes and pulleys. The halves operate independently. The structure is double-walled, with an inner frame of 4×4s sheathed with tongue-and-groove boards, separated by from the outer, louvered wall, also framed with 4×4s.

On the interior, a double floor surrounds a pyramidal concrete pier that supported the observing instruments. A 1½ story brick caretaker&#x27;s house, built in 1947, is located to the south; it is excluded from the landmark designation.

The site was extensively surveyed and documented to support its mission. The Meridian Mark Pier, about to the south, was used to align the zenith telescope. Five United States Coast and Geodetic Survey monuments are on the property. The RM-1 monument has been used by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration for testing associated with the Global Positioning Satellite system.

==See also==
*List of astronomical observatories
*List of National Historic Landmarks in Maryland
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Montgomery County, Maryland

==References==
==External links==
*City web site about the observatory
*1989 Drawings of the Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory at the Library of Congress
*, including photo in 1991, at Maryland Historical Trust</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5517395" start="4" end="37" title="Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory" label="Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q752719" start="99" end="121" title="Gaithersburg, Maryland" label="Gaithersburg, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619348" start="177" end="213" title="International Latitude Observatory" label="International Latitude Observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732048" start="235" end="245" title="Chandler wobble" label="the wobble"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="347" end="373" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732048" start="751" end="769" title="Chandler wobble" label="&amp;quot;wobble&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133151" start="937" end="945" title="Mizusawa, Iwate" label="Mizusawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q103439667" start="1777" end="1816" title="United States Coast and Geodetic Survey" label="United States Coast and Geodetic Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q327022" start="3088" end="3107" title="Rockville, Maryland" label="Rockville, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517394" start="3987" end="4011" title="Gaithersburg High School" label="Gaithersburg High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402843" start="4209" end="4219" title="fieldstone" label="fieldstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q103439667" start="5103" end="5142" title="United States Coast and Geodetic Survey" label="United States Coast and Geodetic Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="5213" end="5260" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="5293" end="5321" title="Global Positioning Satellite" label="Global Positioning Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344875" start="5345" end="5379" title="List of astronomical observatories" label="List of astronomical observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591425" start="5381" end="5428" title="List of National Historic Landmarks in Maryland" label="List of National Historic Landmarks in Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976921" start="5430" end="5506" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Montgomery County, Maryland" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Montgomery County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="5642" end="5661" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803715" wikidata="Q577081" url="?curid=803715" title="Battle of Camperdown">
<text>The Battle of Camperdown (Dutch: &quot;Zeeslag bij Kamperduin&quot;) was fought on 11 October 1797 between the British Royal Navy&#x27;s North Sea Fleet under Admiral Adam Duncan and a Batavian Navy fleet led by Vice-Admiral Jan Willem de Winter. Duncan&#x27;s fleet won a complete victory over de Winter&#x27;s in what was the most significant engagement between British and Batavian forces during the French Revolutionary Wars, capturing eleven ships without losing any of their own.

In 1795, the Dutch Republic was occupied by France and reorganised into the Batavian Republic, a French sister republic. 
After several French Navy campaigns ended in disaster, the Batavian navy was ordered move to Brest in 1797. This rendezvous never occurred, as the French and their allies failed to capitalise on the Spithead and Nore mutinies that paralysed the British Channel and North Sea fleets in the spring of 1797. By September, the Batavian fleet was blockaded in the Texel by the North Sea Fleet under Duncan, though the British were forced to return to Yarmouth for supplies in October. De Winter used the opportunity to lead the Batavian fleet into the North Sea; when they returned to the Dutch coast on 11 October, a waiting Duncan intercepted them off Camperduin. 

Attacking the Batavian line of battle in two groups, Duncan&#x27;s ships broke through its rear and van before engaging with Winter&#x27;s frigates. The battle split into a leeward melee, where superior British forces overwhelmed the Batavian rear, and a windward melee, where a more even exchange centred on battling flagships. As the Batavians attempted to reach shallower waters and escape Duncan&#x27;s attack, the British leeward ships joined the windward melee and forced de Winter&#x27;s flagship &quot;Vrijheid&quot; and ten other ships to strike their colours. 

The loss of &quot;Vrijheid&quot; prompted the remaining Batavian ships to disperse and retreat, and Duncan ordered his fleet to sail back to Yarmouth with their prizes. Struck by gales &quot;en route&quot;, two prizes were wrecked and another had to be recaptured before Duncan&#x27;s fleet reached England. Casualties in both fleets were heavy, and the Batavian Navy was broken as an independent fighting force, losing eleven ships and more than 1,100 men. 

==Background==
In the winter of 1794–1795, forces of the French Republic overran the neighbouring Dutch Republic during the French Revolutionary Wars. The French then reorganised the country as a client state named the Batavian Republic, and it joined France against the allies in the War of the First Coalition. One of the most important Dutch assets of which the French gained control was the Dutch Navy. The Dutch fleet provided a substantial reinforcement to the French forces in northern European waters, which were principally based at Brest on the Atlantic Ocean and whose main opponent was the Royal Navy&#x27;s Channel Fleet. The location of the main anchorage of the Dutch fleet in the waters off the Texel prompted a reorganisation of the distribution of British warships in Northern European waters, with a new focus on the importance of the North Sea. With the Navy suffering severe shortages in men and equipment and with other theatres of war deemed more important, small, old and poorly maintained ships were activated from reserve and based in harbours in East Anglia, principally the port of Yarmouth, under the command of Admiral Adam Duncan. The 65-year-old Duncan was a veteran of the wars of the War of the Austrian Succession (1740–1748), the Seven Years&#x27; War (1756–1763) and the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783) and had fought at numerous engagements with distinction and success. Standing at 6&#x27;4&quot; (1,93m) he was also noted for his physical strength and size: a contemporary described him as &quot;almost gigantic&quot;.

The French Navy had suffered a series of one-sided defeats in the opening years of the war, suffering heavy losses at the Glorious First of June in 1794 and during the &quot;Croisière du Grand Hiver&quot; the following January. In late 1796, after prompting from representatives of the United Irishmen (a society dedicated to ending British rule of the Kingdom of Ireland), the French Atlantic Fleet launched a large scale attempt to invade Ireland, known as the &quot;Expédition d&#x27;Irlande&quot;. This too ended in disaster, with twelve ships lost and thousands of men drowned in fierce winter gales. Their ambitions frustrated, the representatives of the United Irishmen, led by Wolfe Tone, turned to the new Batavian state for support and were promised assistance in the coming year by a united French and Dutch fleet. A plan was formulated to merge the French and Dutch fleets and attack Ireland together in the summer of 1797. Tone joined the staff of Vice-Admiral Jan Willem de Winter on his flagship &quot;Vrijheid&quot; in the Texel and 13,500 Dutch troops were equipped in preparation for the operation, the fleet waiting only for the best moment to take advantage of easterly winds and sweep past the British blockade and down the English Channel.

===Spithead Mutiny===

For the Royal Navy, the early years of the war had been successful, but the commitment to a global conflict was creating a severe strain on available equipment, men and financial resources. The navy had expanded from 134 ships at the start of the conflict in 1793, to 633 by 1797, and personnel had increased from 45,000 men to 120,000, an achievement possible only as a result of the impressment service, which abducted criminals, beggars and unwilling conscripts for compulsory service at sea. Wages had not been increased since 1653, and were usually months late, rations were terrible, shore leave forbidden, and discipline harsh. Tensions in the fleet had been gradually rising since the start of the war, and in February 1797, anonymous sailors from the Channel Fleet at Spithead sent letters to their former commander, Lord Howe, soliciting his support in improving their conditions. The list was deliberately ignored on the instructions of First Lord of the Admiralty Lord Spencer, and, on 16 April, the sailors responded with the Spithead Mutiny: a largely peaceful strike action led by a delegation of seamen from each ship tasked with negotiating with the authorities and enforcing discipline. For a month the fleet remained at stalemate, until Lord Howe was able to negotiate a series of improvements in conditions that induced the strikers to return to regular service. The mutiny had achieved almost all of its aims; increasing pay, removing unpopular officers, and improving conditions for the men serving in the Channel Fleet and, ultimately, the whole navy.

While the upheaval continued at Spithead, Duncan had retained order in the North Sea Fleet at Yarmouth by the sheer force of his personality. When men from his flagship, , clambered up into the rigging and roared three cheers in a prearranged signal for the revolt to begin on 1 May, Duncan initially threatened to run the ringleader through with his sword. Calmed by his subordinates, he instead assembled his officers and the Royal Marines aboard his ship and advanced on the men in the rigging, demanding to know what they were doing. So fierce was his tone that the men fell silent and hesitantly returned to their quarters except for five ringleaders, whom he admonished personally on his quarterdeck before issuing a general pardon and dismissing them to their duty. The following week, he assembled all of the men and demanded to know whether they would follow his orders: in response, the crew nominated a spokesman, who apologised for their actions, saying, &quot;we humbly implore your honour&#x27;s pardon with hearts full of gratitude and tears in our eyes for the offense we have given to the worthiest of commanders who has proved a father to us&quot;. A week later, when a similar outbreak of mutiny affected the fourth rate ship, , under Captain William Hotham, Duncan again acted decisively, coming aboard &quot;Adamant&quot; as the crew rebelled and demanding to know if there was any man who disputed his authority. When a sailor stepped forward, Duncan seized him by his shirt and dangled him over the side of the ship with one arm crying, &quot;My lads – look at this fellow – he who dares to deprive me of command of the fleet&quot;. The mutiny evaporated almost instantly.

===Nore Mutiny===

Despite his initial success, Duncan was unable to retain control in the face of a more widespread revolt on 15 May among the ships based at the Nore, which became known as the Nore Mutiny. Led by a sailor named Richard Parker, the Nore mutineers quickly organised and became a significant threat to water traffic in the Thames Estuary. Duncan was informed that his fleet at Yarmouth might be ordered to attack the mutineers and, although reluctant, responded, &quot;I do not shrink from the business if it cannot otherwise be got the better of&quot;. When rumours of the plan reached the fleet at Yarmouth, the crew of &quot;Venerable&quot; also expressed their distaste with the plan, but reaffirmed their promise of loyalty to their admiral whatever the circumstances. News then arrived that the Dutch fleet under De Winter was preparing to sail, and Duncan&#x27;s fleet was ordered by Lord Spencer to blockade the Dutch coast. Duncan issued orders for the fleet to weigh anchor, but the men disobeyed and ship after ship overthrew their officers and joined the mutineers at the Nore. Eventually Duncan was left with only his own &quot;Venerable&quot; and Hotham&#x27;s &quot;Adamant&quot; to contain the entire Dutch fleet. Duncan later wrote that, &quot;To be deserted by my own fleet in the face of the enemy is a disgrace which I believe never before happened to a British admiral, nor could I have supposed it possible.&quot;

Aware that the escape of the Dutch fleet into the North Sea at such a vulnerable time could be disastrous for Britain, Duncan maintained his position off the Texel for three days, during which the wind was ideal for a Dutch foray, and he disguised his two vessels as different ships on each day and ordered the frigate to make a flurry of nonsensical signals to a fictitious British fleet beyond the horizon. He was subsequently joined by two additional ships, and , and on the fourth day, with conditions still perfect for the Dutch, he anchored his squadron in the Marsdiep Channel and gave orders for them to fight until their ships sank, thereby blocking the channel. In a speech to his men, he announced that &quot;The soundings are such that my flag will continue to fly above the water after the ship and her company have disappeared&quot;. The expected attack never came: the Dutch army that was to have joined the fleet was not prepared, and Duncan&#x27;s misleading signals had successfully convinced De Winter that a large British fleet waited just beyond the horizon. The winds subsequently changed direction, and, on 10 June, six more ships joined Duncan&#x27;s squadron from the Channel Fleet, and, on 13 June, a Russian squadron arrived. While Duncan had been at sea, the Nore Mutiny had acrimoniously fallen apart under blockade by government forces. Cut off from food supplies and with public support decidedly against the mutiny, Parker issued threats that the ships under his control would be handed over to the French government. Fighting subsequently broke out between the radical leaders and the moderate majority of seamen, and the ships gradually deserted Parker and returned to their anchorages, so that by 12 June only two ships still flew the red flag of the mutineers. Eventually, the last rebellious ship, Parker&#x27;s own , surrendered on 14 June.

==De Winter&#x27;s cruise==

By the middle of August 1797, after six weeks of constant easterly winds that kept his ships trapped in their harbour, De Winter decided that an attempt to join the French at Brest as the first stage of an invasion of Ireland was impractical and he abandoned the plan. In part this decision was due to the strength of Duncan&#x27;s reconstituted fleet, which had increased to 17 ships of the line with the addition of the vessels returned from the Nore. Duncan&#x27;s men were also better trained and more experienced than their Dutch counterparts, having spent considerably longer at sea and having been taught to fire three rounds a minute to the Dutch two. In addition to his concerns about the proficiency of his men, De Winter was also worried about their loyalty: the dominion of France over the Batavian Republic and the country&#x27;s enforced participation in distant theatres of warfare were unpopular among the Dutch people. Although De Winter was an avowed republican, who had fought in the French Army against the Netherlands between 1793 and 1795, support for the House of Orange remained strong among the Dutch population and with the fleet&#x27;s sailors. Wolfe Tone wrote in frustration that &quot;The destiny of Europe might have been changed for ever . . . the great occasion is lost, and we must do as well as we can.&quot;

When news of this decision reached the Admiralty, they recalled Duncan&#x27;s blockade fleet to Yarmouth for a refit on 1 October; the admiral insisted on sending some of his ships back to the Dutch coast two days later under Captain Henry Trollope in HMS &quot;Russell&quot;, accompanied by HMS &quot;Adamant&quot; and the small ships , &quot;Circe&quot; and with the hired armed cutter &quot;Black Joke&quot;. Their arrival off Texel on 6 October coincided with De Winter&#x27;s much delayed expedition. Although some sources, particularly in France, have claimed that De Winter was determined to bring Duncan to battle, in reality he was more concerned that his men were disaffected and inexperienced by their long stay in port, and had reluctantly acceded to orders from the Batavian government to conduct a brief sweep in the Southern North Sea in search of weak British forces that could be overwhelmed by his fleet or drawn into the dangerous shallow waters of the Dutch coastline. He may also have been hoping to resurrect the plan to augment the French at Brest if he was able to pass westwards down the English Channel undetected. His fleet consisted of 16 ships of the line and a number of smaller support craft, and his orders from The Hague included instructions to remember &quot;how frequently Dutch Admirals have maintained the honour of the Dutch flag, even when the enemy&#x27;s forces were sometimes superior to theirs.&quot; Preparing the ships for sea took some time, and the Dutch did not manage to leave the Texel until 10:00 on 8 October, De Winter turning southwest in the hope of linking with another Dutch ship of the line at the mouth of the River Maas. Within hours, Trollope had discovered and followed De Winter.

The Dutch fleet was watched constantly by the ships Duncan had sent to observe them, and when Dutch preparations to sail were observed, a message was sent back to Duncan informing him of the Dutch movements. The despatch vessel flew the signal for an enemy as it entered Yarmouth roads early in the morning on 9 October, so that by the time it had docked the British fleet was already preparing to sail, Duncan sending the final message to the Admiralty: &quot;The wind is now in the NE and [I] shall make good course over to them, and if it please God, hope to get at them. The squadron under my command are unmoored and I shall put to sea immediately.&quot; Before midday, Duncan had sailed with the 11 ships that were ready and steered for the mouth of the Texel, intending to intercept De Winter on his return. By evening his fleet was at full strength, three stragglers having rejoined, and on the afternoon of 10 October his ships were anchored off the Dutch port, scouts reporting 22 merchant ships in the harbour but no sign of De Winter&#x27;s warships. Since leaving the Texel, De Winter had been unable to escape from Trollope&#x27;s ships: on the evening of 10 October, several Dutch vessels were detached to drive his squadron away while the Dutch fleet lay off the Maas, but could not close with the faster British vessels. Having failed to make the rendezvous off the Maas, De Winter then turned to the northwest, cruising off Lowestoft in Suffolk and again unsuccessfully attempting to drive away Trollope&#x27;s squadron. There, reports from Dutch fishing vessels of Duncan&#x27;s appearance off the Texel reached De Winter and he immediately recalled his ships and ordered the fleet to turn back towards the Dutch coast, aiming for the village of Scheveningen. Meanwhile, further messages from Trollope reporting the Dutch movements had reached Duncan and he turned his fleet west, following the Dutch coastline. At 07:00 on the morning of 11 October Trollope&#x27;s squadron sighted sails to the northeast and, after confirming that they were Duncan&#x27;s fleet, signalled that the Dutch fleet was approximately further to the southwest, becoming visible to the fleet by 08:30. The first clear sighting was reported by Captain Peter Halkett of &quot;Circe&quot;, who had climbed the mainmast to get a better view. At this point, the Dutch were sailing towards land, approximately off the coast of North Holland, close to the village of Camperduin. The weather was poor, with heavy seas and strong wind from the southeast broken by frequent rain squalls, but this did not prevent hundreds of Dutch civilians gathering on the dunes to watch the impending combat.

===Duncan&#x27;s attack===

At 09:00, Duncan made the signal to prepare for battle while De Winter organised his ships into a line of battle to meet the British attack in a solid defensive formation, sailing on the port tack in a northeasterly heading. As they manoeuvred into their assigned stations, the Dutch fleet drew closer to the shore. Duncan intended to follow Lord Howe&#x27;s manoeuvres at the Glorious First of June three years earlier and bring each ship through the Dutch line between two opponents, but the Dutch formation and proximity to the shore rendered this plan impractical. To compensate, Duncan signalled for his ships to form line and sail southeast on the port tack so that they had the wind directly behind them. Shortly afterwards, concerned that the Dutch might make the shoreline before he could bring them to battle despite his wry insistence that &quot;I am determined to fight the ships on land if I cannot by sea&quot;, Duncan ordered his fleet to turn southwards and advance on the enemy and &quot;bear up and sail large&quot;. He fired signal guns to alert his captains and then ordered them to &quot;engage the enemy as arriving up&quot; and for his van to attack the Dutch rear. At 11:00, Duncan sought to remedy increasing gaps between his vessels by ordering the faster ships to slow down and wait for their compatriots. He then made an effort to re-establish the line on the starboard tack before realising that the Dutch fleet was still in order awaiting the British attack and continually drawing closer to the dangerous coastline. Abandoning his previous signals, Duncan ordered the entire fleet to turn towards the Dutch and attack directly, each ship to &quot;steer for and engage her opponent&quot;. Many of these signals were poorly executed and incorrect, visibility was low and Trollope&#x27;s squadron was still using obsolete signal codes, so a number of vessels failed to comprehend Duncan&#x27;s intentions, turning the advancing line into a ragged pattern of scattered vessels clustered into two loose groups. The flurry of orders was so quick and contradictory that at least one captain gave up entirely: the Scottish captain, John Inglis, of HMS &quot;Belliqueux&quot; threw his signal book to the deck in frustration and shouted &quot;Up wi&#x27; the hel&#x27;lem and gang into the middle o&#x27;t.&quot;

The combined effect of Duncan&#x27;s orders was to split his fleet into two uneven divisions, each sailing in a loose formation towards the unified Dutch line. The northern, or windward, division comprised six third rate ships of the line, two fourth rate ships and the frigate &quot;Circe&quot;, tasked with repeating signals from the flagship &quot;Venerable&quot;, which led the division with and close behind. This force was aiming for the Dutch flagship, &quot;Vrijheid&quot;, which lay fifth in the Dutch line. The southern, or leeward, division comprised eight third rate ships of the line and the repeater frigate , and was led by Vice-Admiral Richard Onslow on . Onslow&#x27;s force was aiming for the rear of the Dutch line, to strike the fourth ship from the end. Behind the two divisions lay a line of small craft tasked with repeating Duncan&#x27;s signals so that the entire fleet could see his intentions. At 11:53, Duncan raised the signal for each ship to pass through the Dutch line and attack from the far side, but the poor weather prevented the more distant ships from recognising the signal.

De Winter had originally intended to close his line up into a solid defensive platform and retreat to shallower waters while Duncan formed his own line of battle, but the sudden, disorganised British attack had thrown his plans into confusion. As a result, gaps had opened up between his van, centre and rear, leaving the last four ships greatly outnumbered and unsupported. De Winter gave urgent orders for the van and centre to drop back and assist the rear, but there was little time, and his situation looked desperate: although the Dutch and British lines each mustered 16 ships, the British vessels were almost all larger and more strongly built than their Dutch counterparts, and their crews were experienced seamen in the heavy weather conditions, while the Dutch crews, confined to port for the previous year, had little understanding of the skills required in combat at sea. The Dutch line of battle was accompanied by a second line to the east, formed from ten frigates, brigs and smaller craft. These vessels, unlike the smaller ships with the British fleet, were well armed and situated so that their guns covered the gaps between the ships that formed the Dutch line of battle, ready to rake any British vessels that attempted to break through.

==Battle==

===Collapse of the Dutch rear guard===
At 12:05, Duncan raised the signal ordering his ships to engage the enemy closely. At the same time, the Dutch ship &quot;Jupiter&quot;, under Rear-Admiral Hermanus Reijntjes, fourth from the southern end of the line, opened fire on the rapidly approaching &quot;Monarch&quot;. The Dutch ships had waited until the British were well within effective range in order to maximise the effect of their shot, and soon Onslow&#x27;s flagship was under fire from the entire rearguard of the Dutch line, the ship suffering damage while attempting to break through the Dutch line between &quot;Jupiter&quot; and &quot;Haarlem&quot; at 12:30. On &quot;Monarch&quot;, Captain Edward O&#x27;Bryen remarked to Onslow that he could not see where his ship could pass between the closely formed Dutch ships, to which the Admiral responded that &quot;the &quot;Monarch&quot; will make a passage.&quot; Striking the small gap between the ships, Onslow fired raking broadsides into both vessels and then turned to lay his ship alongside Reyntjes&#x27; flagship. As he did, the Dutch frigate &quot;Monnikkendam&quot; and the brig &quot;Daphné&quot; pulled out of the second line and attempted to fill the gap &quot;Monarch&quot; had created, firing into the British ship of the line as they did so. In response, Onslow opened fire on the smaller vessels, destroying the frigate&#x27;s wheel and damaging the rigging, so that the ship fell back, followed later by the severely damaged brig.

&quot;Monarch&quot; was almost immediately followed by under Captain William O&#x27;Bryen Drury, which passed through the same gap, raked &quot;Haarlem&quot; again and poured a destructive fire into the wallowing &quot;Monnikkendam&quot;. At the same time, attacked &quot;Alkmaar&quot;, the next in line, from the west, while HMS &quot;Russell&quot;, under Captain Trollope, attacked the last Dutch ship, the 56-gun &quot;Delft&quot;. These attacks were accompanied by fire from , which passed between &quot;Alkmaar&quot; and &quot;Delft&quot;, and raked both ships, and from (under William Bligh of fame), which passed up the Dutch line until it reached the battered &quot;Haarlem&quot;, engaging the ship at close range. The straggling joined the northern part of the engagement, cutting across &quot;Jupiter&quot; and then turning in pursuit of the Dutch centre, while &quot;Adamant&quot; reached the fight late, joining the attack on the already battered &quot;Haarlem&quot;. Only remained apart from the battle entirely, passing up the Dutch line at extreme range; one anecdotal account reports that on board &quot;Agincourt&quot; a stray shot passed high over the deck and an officer was seen to flinch, drawing a scornful call from the crew that &quot;There is no danger yet, sir&quot;. &quot;Agincourt&quot;″s captain John Williamson was subsequently court-martialled and dismissed.

In the confusion, the tail of the Dutch line disintegrated into a chaotic melee, with eight British ships of the line fighting four Dutch and the frigate &quot;Monnikkendam&quot;. So close was the action that the British ships found themselves at risk of firing into one another in the high seas, heavy rain and poor visibility. The Dutch centre, consisting of the ships of the line &quot;Brutus&quot;, &quot;Leijden&quot; and the fifth rate razee &quot;Mars&quot;, pulled away from the engagement behind them under Rear-Admiral Johan Bloys van Treslong, coming under only distant fire from the ships of Onslow&#x27;s division. Isolated, the Dutch rearguard were rapidly overwhelmed, with &quot;Jupiter&quot;, &quot;Haarlem&quot;, &quot;Alkmaar&quot; and &quot;Delft&quot; all surrendering to Onslow&#x27;s attack before 13:45, while the battered &quot;Monnikkendam&quot; was seized by the frigate &quot;Beaulieu&quot;.

===Battle of the vanguards===

While the Dutch rearguard was overwhelmed by British numbers, a more equal combat was being contested to the north. There the combat was centred around the two flagships, Duncan&#x27;s &quot;Venerable&quot; engaging De Winter&#x27;s &quot;Vrijheid&quot; 18 minutes after &quot;Monarch&quot; broke the line to the south. Duncan had originally intended to break the line between &quot;Vrijheid&quot; and the next ship &quot;Staaten Generaal&quot; under Rear-Admiral Samuel Story, but Story ensured that there was no gap between his vessel and the flagship to break through, and their combined fire was so dangerous to the advancing &quot;Venerable&quot; that Duncan instead cut through behind &quot;Staaten Generaal&quot;, raking Story&#x27;s ship twice and causing it to drift off in confusion as Duncan engaged &quot;Vrijheid&quot; from the east.

While &quot;Venerable&quot; had diverted south, &quot;Vrijheid&quot; had been attacked from the west by &quot;Ardent&quot; under Captain Richard Rundle Burges. The smaller British ship had soon suffered more than a hundred casualties, including Burges killed, under the combined fire of De Winter&#x27;s flagship and the next ship ahead &quot;Admiraal Tjerk Hiddes De Vries&quot;. Only the arrival of &quot;Venerable&quot; alongside &quot;Vrijheid&quot; allowed &quot;Ardent&quot; a brief respite. During the fight, Burges&#x27; men &quot;fought like maniacs&quot;, including the wife of one of the gunners who insisted on joining her husband at his gun, until her legs were torn off by cannon fire. Within a short period however both &quot;Venerable&quot; and &quot;Ardent&quot; were surrounded, as at least one of the frigates from the second line joined the attack on the two isolated British vessels. At the height of the combat, the colours and signal flags on &quot;Venerable&quot; were brought down by cannon fire. To ensure that there was no suggestion that the flagship had surrendered, a sailor named Jack Crawford scrambled to the top of the mainmast and replaced them as the battle raged beneath him. To support Duncan, Captain William Essington of HMS &quot;Triumph&quot; and Captain Sir Thomas Byard of drove forward into the battle, &quot;Triumph&quot; coming close alongside the Dutch &quot;Wassenaar&quot; and opening a heavy fire while &quot;Bedford&quot; attacked &quot;Admiraal Tjerk Hiddes De Vries&quot; and &quot;Hercules&quot;. At the tip of the line, &quot;Beschermer&quot; was attacked by &quot;Belliqueux&quot; to starboard, Captain Inglis passing through the gap between &quot;Beschermer&quot; and &quot;Hercules&quot;. Ahead of this combat, the lead ships and &quot;Gelijkheid&quot; fought alongside one another, &quot;Isis&quot; having failed to break through the Dutch line and instead drawn up to port.

The Dutch central division joined the battle at the head of the line shortly after the engagement of &quot;Triumph&quot; and &quot;Bedford&quot;, causing considerable damage to all of the British vessels, particularly &quot;Venerable&quot;. The British flagship was soon isolated in the midst of the Dutch van, engaging &quot;Vrijheid&quot;, &quot;Staaten General&quot;, &quot;Admiral Tjerk Hiddes De Vries&quot; and &quot;Wassenaar&quot; simultaneously. Despite the heavy odds Duncan continued to fight hard, the British succeeded in knocking out two opponents by wounding Captain Dooitze Eelkes Hinxt of &quot;Beschermer&quot;, which drifted eastwards in confusion, while shots from either &quot;Bedford&quot; or &quot;Triumph&quot; set a powder barrel on &quot;Hercules&quot; on fire. The blaze on the latter ship, which soon spread to the sails and rigging, prompted a lull in the battle as the crew of &quot;Hercules&quot; desperately attempted to extinguish the blaze and other Dutch ships scrambled to escape the burning vessel as it drifted through the melee. Shortly afterwards, the battered &quot;Wassenaar&quot; surrendered to &quot;Triumph&quot;, with Captain Holland dead on his quarterdeck. &quot;Triumph&quot; then moved on towards the battle between &quot;Vrijheid&quot; and &quot;Venerable&quot;, at which time the crew of &quot;Wassenaar&quot; raised their colours again after being fired on by a Dutch brig.

===Onslow&#x27;s reinforcement===

Following Onslow&#x27;s victory over the Dutch rearguard, the admiral ordered the least damaged of his ships to sail in support of the outnumbered British ships in the melee at the Dutch van. &quot;Powerful&quot; and &quot;Director&quot; were the quickest to respond, joining the attack on &quot;Vrijheid&quot; at 14:00. &quot;Russell&quot;, driving northwards to join the attack, encountered the now extinguished &quot;Hercules&quot;, whose crew had thrown all of their ammunition overboard during the fire to prevent the ship exploding. The ship was thus defenceless, Commander Ruijsoort surrendering immediately. The remainder of the British fleet now arrived in the battle, Captain John Wells of firing on the &quot;Beschermer&quot; near the head of the Dutch line. Aware that their vessel would be unable to resist the attack, &quot;Beschermer&quot;″s surviving officers turned away towards the shore, rapidly followed by the unengaged portions of the Dutch line. With the arrival of British reinforcements and the retreat of sections of the Dutch fleet, the battle was almost complete; the battered &quot;Wassenaar&quot; surrendered for the second time, to &quot;Russell&quot;, while &quot;Admiraal Tjerk Hiddes De Vries&quot; and &quot;Gelijkheid&quot;, both of which were too badly damaged to escape, also struck their colours. Eventually only the Dutch flagship remained in combat.

For an hour De Winter continued his resistance, with &quot;Director&quot; holding station off the stern of &quot;Vrijheid&quot; and repeatedly raking it. By 15:00, all three masts had been brought down, obstructing the fire of the starboard battery, while De Winter was the only officer who remained uninjured, standing on his wrecked quarterdeck and still refusing to lower his colours. In an attempt to settle the combat, Captain William Bligh of &quot;Director&quot; closed to within of the Dutch flagship and demanded to know if De Winter surrendered. The Dutch admiral replied &quot;What do you think about it?&quot;, and then attempted to personally raise signals demanding reinforcements from the rest of his fleet, only to find that the halyards had been shot away. De Winter then summoned the ship&#x27;s carpenter and ordered him to repair his barge, so that the admiral could transfer command to another ship and continue the battle. When British sailors from &quot;Director&quot; boarded the drifting flagship, De Winter was discovered assisting the carpenter with repairs to the barge. On being informed that he was a prisoner of war, he replied &quot;This is my destiny not foreseen&quot; and, after checking on a mortally wounded officer who lay on the quarterdeck, he followed the boarding party back to their boat for the trip to &quot;Venerable&quot;.

==Aftermath==

De Winter was immediately taken to see Duncan, the Dutch officer holding out his sword as a token of surrender. Duncan refused the weapon, instead shaking De Winter&#x27;s hand and insisting &quot;I would much rather take a brave man&#x27;s hand than his sword&quot;. In addition to the losses in the rear, five ships of the Dutch van had been captured as well as the frigate &quot;Ambuscade&quot; that had attacked from the second line. The remainder of the Dutch ships had fled, making rapid progress towards the coastal shallows. Duncan did not follow them: the Dutch coast between Kamperduin and Egmond was only away, his ship lay in just 9 fathoms () of water and the weather was too fierce and his ships too battered to risk combat in shoal waters. Instead he ordered his ships to ensure control of their prizes and to return to Britain. Many ships were now undermanned due to the terrible casualties they had suffered: surgeon Robert Young of &quot;Ardent&quot;, the worst hit of the British ships, worked for more than twelve hours without a break and later wrote:

Casualties in the battle were very heavy on both sides, and historians such as William James have noted that the losses among the British ships were proportionally much higher than when British fleets met French or Spanish opposition. This was attributed to the Dutch tactics, mirrored by the British, of firing at the enemy hulls rather than attempting to disable their masts and rigging as in other continental navies. The worst hit of the British ships were those in the first wave, such as &quot;Ardent&quot; with 148 casualties, &quot;Monarch&quot; with 136 and &quot;Belliqueux&quot; under Cpt John Inglis with 103, while both &quot;Adamant&quot; and &quot;Agincourt&quot; escaped without a single man killed or wounded. Among the dead were Captain Burges of &quot;Ardent&quot; and two lieutenants, while the wounded included Captain Essington of &quot;Triumph&quot; and twelve lieutenants. In total, British losses were recorded after the battle as 203 killed and 622 wounded, although later assessments based on charitable requirements of those wounded or killed gave the higher figures of 228 killed and 812 wounded, including 16 of the latter who subsequently died. Many of the British ships were badly damaged, taking on large quantities of water through damaged hulls. One of the worst hit was &quot;Venerable&quot;, which had to be completely dismantled and reconstructed after returning to Britain before the ship was ready for active service again.

Dutch casualty returns, particularly on the captured ships, were vague, and only partially complete. Among the losses were Captain Hinxt of &quot;Beschermer&quot; and Captain Holland of &quot;Wassenaar&quot;, both of whom were killed early in the battle. Also lost were Captain Van Rossum of &quot;Vrijheid&quot;, who was struck in the thigh by a cannonball and died shortly afterwards from the effects of the wound, and Admiral Reijntjes who died while a prisoner in England as a result of the wounds he suffered aboard &quot;Jupiter&quot;. His remains were subsequently returned to the Netherlands with full military honours. There were also large numbers of wounded among the Dutch fleet, including Rear-Admirals Bloys van Treslong and Story; one of the few Dutch officers to escape injury or death was De Winter himself, who later commented &quot;It is a matter of marvel that two such gigantic objects as Admiral Duncan and myself should have escaped the general carnage of this day.&quot; In total, Dutch losses were later reported as 540 men killed and 620 wounded, with &quot;Vrijheid&quot; the worst hit with the loss of almost half of its total complement.

===Return journeys===

On &quot;Venerable&quot;, Duncan assembled all of those men fit to attend for a church service to &quot;return thanks to Almighty God for all His mercies showered on them and him.&quot; For the next 24 hours the 66-year-old Duncan remained on duty without a break, organising the scattered fleet on its journey home. The British admiral did find time however to play a game of whist in his cabin with De Winter after dinner: when the Dutch admiral lost a rubber, he commented that it was hard to be beaten twice in one day by the same man. On 13 October, Duncan completed his official despatch and sent it ahead of his wallowing ships with Captain William George Fairfax on the cutter &quot;Rose&quot;: he praised all of his men, reserving special mention for Trollope and the late Burges, whom he called a &quot;good and gallant Officer...a sincere Friend&quot;. De Winter was permitted to send despatches to the Batavian government, in which he blamed Story and his centre for not maintaining the combat longer. He also attributed overwhelming British numbers to his defeat and suggested that he may have captured some of the British fleet if he had been better supported. When this letter was later published it provoked a storm of criticism in Britain, one officer describing it as &quot;a garbled account which, for ought I know, might have been collected by people on shore who knew nothing of the action&quot;.

During the afternoon of 12 October, a gale sprang up which inflicted further damage to the battered ships and caused water to gush through the many shot holes in the ships&#x27; hulls. Aboard the Dutch ships, the situation was especially dangerous. Casualties had been significantly higher, particularly on &quot;Vrijheid&quot;, than on board the British vessels and the small numbers of British sailors placed aboard as prize crews were unable to cope alone, and in the high winds many masts collapsed to the deck and huge quantities of water leaked into the hulls.

&quot;Delft&quot;, captured in the early stages of the battle, was under the command of the Dutch Lieutenant Heilberg and the British Lieutenant Charles Bullen, with a small prize crew of 69 men. Ninety-three Dutch prisoners had been removed, and among the remaining Dutch sailors were 76 wounded men. As the gale intensified, it rapidly became clear that despite a tow line attached from &quot;Veteran&quot; the ship would never reach Britain, and a large board was raised on deck with the chalked message &quot;The ship is sinking&quot;. Reacting at once, boats from nearby ships organised an evacuation and began loading the Dutch prisoners for transfer to more seaworthy vessels. Bullen offered a place in the first rescue boat, from &quot;Veteran&quot;, to Heilberg, but the Dutch officer refused, gesturing to the immobile wounded who had been brought onto the maindeck as the lower decks had flooded and replying &quot;But how can I leave these men?&quot;. In response, Bullen cried out &quot;God bless you, my brave fellow! Here is my hand; I give you my word I will stay here with you!&quot;. The prize crew left on the second rescue boat sent from &quot;Russell&quot;, and Bullen and Heilberg waited for a third trip to bring them off with the remaining 30 wounded men and three junior Dutch officers who had also elected to stay. Before further help could arrive, however, &quot;Delft&quot; suddenly foundered, Bullen and Heilberg throwing themselves clear as the ship sank. Both were seen in the water but only Bullen reached safety, swimming to &quot;Monmouth&quot; alone.

Two other prizes were lost to the British fleet: &quot;Monnikkendam&quot; had been supplied with a prize crew of 35 men from &quot;Beaulieu&quot;, but had become separated during the gales and lost its remaining masts and spars. The crew fitted jury masts, but they too collapsed and the hull flooded to a depth of . On 12 October, aware that the ship would soon founder, the prize master instructed the Dutch boatswain to run the ship onto the Dutch coast at West Cappel. Local boats came out to the stranded vessel and all aboard were saved, the 35 British prisoners taken to a prison hulk at Flushing. The ship itself was wrecked beyond repair and abandoned. The other captured frigate, &quot;Ambuscade&quot;, was also driven ashore in a sinking state and the prize crew made prisoner, but in that case the ship was salvaged and later returned to Dutch service.

In contrast to the British difficulties, the survivors of the Dutch fleet had few problems returning to the Texel, with the exception of &quot;Brutus&quot;. Admiral Bloys van Treslong had sailed for the coast off Hinder with two brigs, and there on 13 October the 40-gun British frigate under Captain Sir Thomas Williams found him. At 16:30, &quot;Endymion&quot; closed with the larger, but damaged, Dutch ship and opened fire, &quot;Brutus&quot; responding with a broadside of its own. Williams successfully raked his opponent twice, but the complicated tides of the Dutch coast dragged his ship out of range at 17:30 before he could press his attack any further. Firing rockets in the hope of attracting attention from any of Duncan&#x27;s ships, Williams was rewarded at 22:30 by the arrival of &quot;Beaulieu&quot;. On 14 October the frigates hunted for their opponents, and found the Dutch ships off the Goeree channel at 05:00. The frigates closed, and Bloys van Treslong withdrew, passing deeper into Dutch waters and reaching safety at Maese by 07:00. The British frigates, their quarry having escaped, returned to Duncan&#x27;s struggling fleet.

==Results==
On 17 October 1797, Duncan&#x27;s limping convoy began to arrive at Yarmouth to be greeted with great celebrations. Several ships were delayed, with three wallowing off Kentish Knock, three more in Hosley Bay and several still at sea due to an adverse northwesterly wind. News of the victory had already spread across Britain, and on 20 October Duncan was created Viscount Duncan of Camperdown and Baron Duncan of Lundie. Admiral Onslow was made a baronet and Captains Henry Trollope and William George Fairfax were knighted. King George III insisted on meeting Duncan personally, and on 30 October set out for Sheerness in the royal yacht HMY &quot;Royal Charlotte&quot; before strong winds and waves forced him back to port on 1 November. Unable to reach Duncan&#x27;s flagship, the King instead rewarded the fleet as a whole by pardoning 180 men condemned for their role in the Nore Mutiny and held aboard the prison hulk in the River Medway. Similar pardons were awarded by Rear-Admiral Peter Rainier to mutineers in the East Indies Squadron. Gold medals were created and presented to the captains and both Houses of Parliament voted their thanks for their victory. All first lieutenants were promoted to commander and Duncan and Onslow were presented with valuable presentation swords valued at 200 and 100 guineas each respectively. Duncan was also given a pension of £2,000 a year by the government, made a freeman of numerous towns and cities and was subject to presentations from numerous patriotic societies, particularly in Scotland, where he was awarded valuable plate by both his birth city of Dundee and the county of Forfarshire. A public subscription was taken up for the widows and wounded and raised £52,609 10s and 10d (the equivalent of £ as of 2025), When Duncan travelled to a reception at The Guildhall on 10 November, a mob surrounded his carriage in the street, unhitched the horses and dragged it themselves up Ludgate Hill as a mark of respect. On 23 December, the King led a thanksgiving procession and ceremony in St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral in London at which Duncan carried De Winter&#x27;s flag from &quot;Vrijheid&quot; and Onslow carried Reijntjes&#x27; flag from &quot;Jupiter&quot;, followed by Fairfax, Essington, Mitchell, Bligh, Walker, Trollope, Drury, O&#x27;Bryen, Gregory and Hotham as well as numerous seamen from the fleet. Five decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal, awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847.

Not all of the reactions were positive: several of Duncan&#x27;s captains were criticised for their failure to rapidly and decisively engage the enemy, including Captain Wells of &quot;Lancaster&quot;. The worst criticism fell on Captain John Williamson of &quot;Agincourt&quot;. &quot;Agincourt&quot; had been barely engaged in the battle and had suffered not one single casualty. As a result, Williamson was accused of failing to do his duty by Captain Hopper of &quot;Agincourt&quot;&#x27;s Royal Marines and court-martialled on 4 December 1797, at Sheerness aboard &quot;Circe&quot;, on the charges of &quot;disobedience to signals and not going into action&quot; and &quot;cowardice and disaffection&quot;. Williamson had a history of indecisiveness: in 1779, while a junior officer on Captain James Cook&#x27;s voyage to the Pacific Ocean, Williamson had prevaricated about bringing boats to evacuate Cook from Kealakekua Bay while under attack by Hawaiians. As a result, Cook was trapped on the beach and stabbed to death. At the conclusion of the trial on 1 January 1798, Williamson was found guilty of the first charge and not guilty of the latter, resulting in demotion to the bottom of the post captains list and prohibition from further naval service. Williamson was reported to have died in 1799, shortly after his dismissal from the service, but Edward Pelham Brenton later claimed that he had instead gone into hiding under an assumed name and continued to draw his pension for many years. In the Batavian Republic, there were also recriminations against those officers who were deemed to have failed in their duty: De Winter&#x27;s despatch from London after the battle placed much of the blame with six ships that had failed to follow his orders and had withdrawn early from the battle. Several officers were brought up on charges, including Admiral Bloys van Treslong who was convicted at court-martial and dismissed the service although later reinstated, and Commander Souter of &quot;Batavier&quot; who was convicted and imprisoned. Admiral Story was also criticised, particularly by De Winter, and was only permitted to keep his command once he had satisfied the Batavian government that he had had no option but to retreat.

All of the captured Dutch ships were bought into the Royal Navy, &quot;Gelijkheid&quot;, &quot;Vrijheid&quot;, &quot;Wassenaar&quot;, &quot;Haarlem&quot; and &quot;Alkmaar&quot; under their own names (although in most cases they were anglicised) and &quot;Admiraal Tjerk Hiddes De Vries&quot; as the simpler &quot;Devries&quot;. Two were completely renamed, due to the prior existence of ships with their names in the Royal Navy; &quot;Jupiter&quot; became HMS &quot;Camperdown&quot; and &quot;Hercules&quot; became HMS &quot;Delft&quot;. None of these ships was ever in sufficient condition for service in open waters: the damage suffered at Camperdown proved too severe for them to be fully repaired. In addition, ships of Dutch construction had lighter hulls and flatter bottoms than ships of other nations as they were designed to operate off the shallow waters of the Dutch coast, and as a result they were of little use to the ocean-going Royal Navy. All the prizes were immediately relegated to harbour duty, and none were used for front-line service. Although the prize court took several years to determine the prize money that would be awarded for the battle, the initial estimates of £60,000 (the equivalent of £ as of 2025) proved pessimistic: Duncan and his men were eventually awarded £150,000 (the equivalent of £ as of 2025), although they were forced to defend a claim from the Russian Navy on behalf of the squadron that had reinforced Duncan in May. Since this force had played no part in the battle and had been considered a liability rather than a benefit by the British commanders, the claim was rejected, but legal fees and other claims reduced the eventual payment. Following the award of the first £10,000 instalment, Duncan was given the unique honour of permission to buy shares on the London Stock Exchange at market price.

==Legacy==
Although Camperdown was considered the greatest ever victory for a British fleet over an equal enemy force to that date, historian Noel Mostert has noted that it &quot;was a battle that, with posterity, somehow lost rank and significance against the greater and more romantically glorious events that followed&quot;. Nevertheless, the effects of the action on the wider war were hugely important. The losses suffered by the Dutch Navy in ships, men and morale gave the Royal Navy superiority in the North Sea, a position enhanced by the disruption the battle caused to French negotiations for an alliance with what historian Edward Pelham Brenton describes as the &quot;Northern Powers&quot; of Scandinavia. The destruction of the Dutch fleet at Camperdown was also a serious blow to French ambitions to invade Ireland, and denied their Atlantic fleet of essential reinforcements; it may even have played a part in Napoleon Bonaparte&#x27;s decision to abandon efforts to attack Britain directly early in 1798. In 1799, a significant British and Russian expeditionary force landed in the Netherlands supported by a large fleet under Lord Duncan. Assailed from both sea and land, the remainder of the Dutch Navy under Admiral Story capitulated without a fight: in what became known as the Vlieter Incident, the political divisions between the officers and seamen resulted in a mutiny during which the Dutch sailors threw their ammunition overboard. In Britain, the public relief at the restoration of the Navy&#x27;s authority in the aftermath of the spring mutinies was enormous and helped steady the wavering British government in their pursuit of the war by restoring confidence in British naval supremacy in home waters. Christopher Lloyd notes that the events of 1797 led to &quot;a new and blatant patriotism ... [which] was centred on the achievements of &#x27;our gallant tars&#x27;.&quot; A popular rhyme of the time reflected public feeling:

&lt;poem&gt;St Vincent drubbed the Dons, Earl Howe he drubbed Monsieur,
And gallant Duncan now has soundly drubbed Mynheer;
The Spanish, French and Dutch, tho&#x27; all united by,
Fear not Britannia cries, My Tars can beat all three.

Monsieurs, Mynheers and Dons, your country&#x27;s empty boast,
Our tars can beat all three, each on his native coast.

:— Quoted in Christopher Lloyd, &quot;St Vincent and Camperdown&quot;, 1963&lt;/poem&gt;

Although Duncan&#x27;s initial tactics at the battle were reminiscent of those of Howe at the Glorious First of June, and his eventual attack has been compared to Nelson&#x27;s tactics at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805, Duncan credited the tactical work &quot;Essay on Naval Tactics&quot; by John Clerk of Eldin for inspiring his decisions on the day. Duncan was subsequently indirectly criticised some years after the battle by his colleague Earl St Vincent, who had won the Battle of Cape St Vincent over a Spanish fleet nine months before Camperdown. In a letter complaining of Clerk&#x27;s assertion that he had been responsible for all of the major naval victories of the war, St Vincent wrote that Duncan &quot;was a brave officer, little versed in the subtleties of naval tactics, and who would have been quickly embarrassed by them. When he saw the enemy, he rushed upon him without thinking of such and such and order of battle. To conquer he calculated upon the brave example he set his captains, and the event justified his expectation.&quot; This assessment was refuted by Captain Hotham, who publicly responded that &quot;the advanced season of the year and the close proximity of the enemy&#x27;s coast all made what, upon another occasion, might have appeared haste imperatively necessary, for it was the prompt decision of the Admiral that occasioned the result&quot;. Some modern historians, such as Peter Padfield, have agreed with Hotham&#x27;s assertion, with the added suggestion that Duncan&#x27;s tactics during the battle might have had an influence on the newly promoted Rear-Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson, who was in England recovering from the loss of his right arm at the Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife at the time of Camperdown. Duncan himself felt that he could have done more, noting that &quot;We were obliged ... to be rather rash in our attack. Had we been ten leagues at sea none would have escaped.&quot; but some of the highest praise came from his erstwhile opponent, De Winter, who wrote that &quot;Your not waiting to form line ruined me: if I had got nearer the shore and you had attacked, I should probably have drawn both fleets on it, and it would have been a victory for me, being on my own coast.&quot; Duncan&#x27;s health deteriorated after the battle, forcing his retirement from the Navy in 1799 and contributing to his death at Cornhill-on-Tweed in 1804.

De Winter&#x27;s actions during the battle have been commended: Edward Pelham Brenton wrote in 1836 that &quot;The Dutch admiral displayed, in his own person, the most undaunted valour ... but was compelled at length to yield to superior &quot;skill&quot;, it would be untrue to say superior bravery.&quot; while William James noted in 1827 that after the battle &quot;&quot;Batavian prowess&quot; still claimed the respect of an enemy and the applause of the world&quot;. De Winter was released from captivity in 1798 after news reached Britain that his wife had suffered a stroke, and he subsequently became the Batavian ambassador to France, before resuming command of the Dutch fleet at the start of the Napoleonic Wars. He was a trusted subordinate of Louis Bonaparte, King of Holland between 1806 and 1810, and was honoured by Emperor Napoleon in 1811 before his sudden death in Paris the following year.

The battle became a popular theme for contemporary artists and many paintings depicting it are held in national collections in the United Kingdom, including paintings by Thomas Whitcombe and Philip de Loutherbourg in the Tate Gallery, Whitcombe, Samuel Drummond and Daniel Orme at the National Maritime Museum, and George Chambers, Sr. and John Singleton Copley at the National Gallery of Scotland. In literature, the battle has played a central role in the 1968 novel &quot;Sea Road to Camperdown&quot; by Showell Styles, and the 1975 novel &quot;The Fireship&quot; by C. Northcote Parkinson. The battle also inspired composers, such as Daniel Steibelt, whose composition &quot;Britannia: An Allegorical Overture&quot; was created in honour of the victory and Jan Ladislav Dussek, who created a composition entitled &quot;The Naval Battle and Total Defeat of the Dutch by Admiral Duncan&quot; in 1797.

The Royal Navy has commemorated the battle through the four ships that bore the name and seven named , which have maintained close links with Duncan&#x27;s hometown of Dundee. In Dundee, the Battle of Camperdown is commemorated at Camperdown House, originally the Dundee seat of the Viscounts Camperdown, which was completed in 1828 and later became a public park and tourist attraction. The bicentennial of the battle was celebrated in Dundee in 1997 with the &quot;Glorious Victory&quot; exhibition at the city&#x27;s McManus Galleries in conjunction with Camperdown House and the National Museum of Scotland. The exhibition became a popular tourist attraction and was viewed by more than 50,000 visitors. On 11 October a memorial service was held to remember the dead and a new statue of Admiral Duncan unveiled in the town.

== In popular culture ==
* Captain &quot;Lucky&quot; Jack Aubrey, one of the two main protagonists of the Aubrey-Maturin cycle of books written by Patrick O&#x27;Brian and set in the naval world of the Napoleonic wars, was said to have been present at the battle of Camperdown. In the novel &quot;Desolation Island&quot; (1978), he recalls that he had been &quot;[...] a midshipman stationed on the lower deck of the &quot;Ardent&quot;, 64 [guns], when the &quot;Vrijheid&quot; killed or wounded one hundred and forty-nine of his shipmates out of four hundred and twenty-one and reduced the &quot;Ardent&quot; to something very nearly a wreck: this, and all that he had heard of the Dutch, filled him with respect for their seamanship and their fighting qualities.&quot;
* In William Kinsolving&#x27;s 1996 novel &quot;Mister Christian&quot;, Fletcher Christian returns from the South Seas and is wounded in the Battle of Camperdown.
* Julian Stockwin&#x27;s character &quot;Thomas Kydd&quot; is placed at Camperdown in the novel &quot;Mutiny&quot;.

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Ships named after the battle==

4 ships and a stone frigate were named HMS &quot;Camperdown&quot;

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q577081" start="4" end="24" title="Battle of Camperdown" label="Battle of Camperdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="26" end="31" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="119" end="129" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026774" start="137" end="152" title="Commander-in-Chief, North Sea" label="North Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q335334" start="167" end="178" title="Adam Duncan, 1st Viscount Duncan" label="Adam Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48769359" start="185" end="198" title="Batavian Navy" label="Batavian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376953" start="225" end="245" title="Jan Willem de Winter" label="Jan Willem de Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="403" end="428" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="500" end="514" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="531" end="537" title="French First Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="563" end="580" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q472538" start="591" end="606" title="sister republic" label="sister republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="623" end="634" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="702" end="707" title="Brest, France" label="Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443167" start="808" end="834" title="Spithead and Nore mutinies" label="Spithead and Nore mutinies"/>
<link wikidata="Q744224" start="862" end="869" title="Channel Fleet" label="Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="951" end="959" title="blockade" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q430043" start="964" end="973" title="Marsdiep" label="the Texel"/>
<link wikidata="Q237253" start="1055" end="1063" title="Great Yarmouth" label="Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="1156" end="1165" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616197" start="1258" end="1268" title="Camperduin" label="Camperduin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471117" start="1295" end="1309" title="line of battle" label="line of battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="1411" end="1418" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="1445" end="1452" title="Windward and leeward" label="leeward"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="1527" end="1535" title="Windward and leeward" label="windward"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="1590" end="1598" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164255" start="1776" end="1796" title="Dutch ship Vrijheid" label="&amp;quot;Vrijheid&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116086" start="1820" end="1840" title="Striking the colors" label="strike their colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144546" start="2023" end="2027" title="gale" label="gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="2361" end="2376" title="First French Republic" label="French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="2402" end="2416" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="2428" end="2453" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="2500" end="2512" title="client state" label="client state"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="2523" end="2540" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18817" start="2589" end="2615" title="War of the First Coalition" label="War of the First Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q931281" start="2699" end="2709" title="Dutch Navy" label="Dutch Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="2846" end="2851" title="Brest, France" label="Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="2859" end="2873" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2906" end="2916" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q744224" start="2924" end="2937" title="Channel Fleet" label="Channel Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="3158" end="3167" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="3377" end="3388" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q237253" start="3414" end="3422" title="Great Yarmouth" label="Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q335334" start="3453" end="3464" title="Adam Duncan, 1st Viscount Duncan" label="Adam Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="3522" end="3552" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="3570" end="3591" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3612" end="3638" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="3875" end="3886" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083872" start="3993" end="4015" title="Glorious First of June" label="Glorious First of June"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935403" start="4045" end="4069" title="Croisière du Grand Hiver" label="Croisière du Grand Hiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q535030" start="4157" end="4172" title="United Irishmen" label="United Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="4224" end="4242" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="4312" end="4319" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113036" start="4340" end="4365" title="Expédition d&amp;#x27;Irlande" label="Expédition d&amp;#x27;Irlande"/>
<link wikidata="Q437962" start="4556" end="4566" title="Wolfe Tone" label="Wolfe Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376953" start="4845" end="4865" title="Jan Willem de Winter" label="Jan Willem de Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164255" start="4882" end="4902" title="Dutch ship Vrijheid" label="&amp;quot;Vrijheid&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9966" start="4910" end="4915" title="Texel" label="Texel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="5116" end="5131" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566803" start="5542" end="5561" title="Impressment" label="impressment service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783560" start="5934" end="5942" title="Spithead" label="Spithead"/>
<link wikidata="Q332616" start="5983" end="5992" title="Richard Howe, 1st Earl Howe" label="Lord Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="6105" end="6132" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q332521" start="6133" end="6145" title="George Spencer, 2nd Earl Spencer" label="Lord Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443167" start="6196" end="6211" title="Spithead Mutiny" label="Spithead Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="6232" end="6245" title="strike action" label="strike action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="7161" end="7174" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q892562" start="7961" end="7972" title="fourth rate" label="fourth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012539" start="7995" end="8009" title="William Hotham (1772–1848)" label="William Hotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320240" start="8593" end="8597" title="Nore" label="Nore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443167" start="8625" end="8636" title="Nore Mutiny" label="Nore Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328273" start="8660" end="8674" title="Richard Parker (mutineer)" label="Richard Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059075" start="8769" end="8783" title="Thames Estuary" label="Thames Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="9933" end="9942" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q430043" start="10450" end="10458" title="Marsdiep" label="Marsdiep"/>
<link wikidata="Q115691024" start="10607" end="10615" title="Depth sounding" label="sounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="11110" end="11126" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="11219" end="11227" title="blockade" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q517327" start="11653" end="11661" title="Red flag (politics)" label="red flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="12795" end="12806" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="12870" end="12885" title="House of Orange-Nassau" label="House of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133115" start="13371" end="13385" title="Henry Trollope" label="Henry Trollope"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969546" start="13506" end="13517" title="hired armed vessels" label="hired armed"/>
<link wikidata="Q683363" start="13518" end="13524" title="Cutter (ship)" label="cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707271" start="13525" end="13547" title="Hired armed cutter Black Joke" label="&amp;quot;Black Joke&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q207452" start="14304" end="14321" title="ships of the line" label="ships of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="14381" end="14390" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="14807" end="14817" title="Meuse (river)" label="River Maas"/>
<link wikidata="Q986007" start="16324" end="16333" title="Lowestoft" label="Lowestoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="16337" end="16344" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="16647" end="16659" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528461" start="17129" end="17142" title="Sir Peter Halkett, 6th Baronet" label="Peter Halkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q701" start="17299" end="17312" title="North Holland" label="North Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616197" start="17338" end="17348" title="Camperduin" label="Camperduin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471117" start="17690" end="17704" title="line of battle" label="line of battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089489" start="17779" end="17783" title="port (nautical)" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083872" start="17969" end="17991" title="Glorious First of June" label="Glorious First of June"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18751" end="18754" title=":wikt:vanguard" label="van"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089489" start="18980" end="18989" title="starboard" label="starboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q56726520" start="19747" end="19758" title="John Inglis (Royal Navy officer)" label="John Inglis"/>
<link wikidata="Q892492" start="20138" end="20148" title="third rate" label="third rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q892562" start="20172" end="20183" title="fourth rate" label="fourth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528640" start="20580" end="20594" title="Sir Richard Onslow, 1st Baronet" label="Richard Onslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q202539" start="22025" end="22030" title="brigs" label="brigs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22470" end="22489" title="Dutch ship Jupiter" label="&amp;quot;Jupiter&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22956" end="22975" title="Dutch ship Haarlem" label="&amp;quot;Haarlem&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344660" start="23018" end="23037" title="Edward O&amp;#x27;Bryen" label="Edward O&amp;#x27;Bryen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10382692" start="23293" end="23299" title="raking fire" label="raking"/>
<link wikidata="Q629252" start="23300" end="23309" title="Broadside (naval)" label="broadside"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23425" end="23449" title="Dutch ship Monnikkendam" label="&amp;quot;Monnikkendam&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980202" start="23718" end="23723" title="ship&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016227" start="23893" end="23919" title="William O&amp;#x27;Bryen Drury" label="William O&amp;#x27;Bryen Drury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24096" end="24103" title="Dutch ship Alkmaar" label="Alkmaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q612905" start="24246" end="24251" title="Dutch ship Delft (1783)" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q294147" start="24407" end="24420" title="William Bligh" label="William Bligh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167276" start="25605" end="25611" title="Dutch ship Brutus" label="Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25625" end="25632" title="Dutch ship Leijden" label="Leijden"/>
<link wikidata="Q892554" start="25647" end="25657" title="fifth rate" label="fifth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459896" start="25658" end="25663" title="razee" label="razee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25670" end="25674" title="Dutch ship Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318067" start="25745" end="25769" title="Johan Bloys van Treslong" label="Johan Bloys van Treslong"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167043" start="26590" end="26606" title="Dutch ship Staaten Generaal" label="Staaten Generaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269322" start="26632" end="26644" title="Samuel Story" label="Samuel Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q64668408" start="27153" end="27174" title="Richard Rundle Burges" label="Richard Rundle Burges"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985408" start="27359" end="27389" title="Dutch ship Admiraal Tjerk Hiddes De Vries" label="Admiraal Tjerk Hiddes De Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q359477" start="28127" end="28140" title="Jack Crawford (sailor)" label="Jack Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008668" start="28256" end="28273" title="William Essington" label="William Essington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788099" start="28313" end="28329" title="Sir Thomas Byard" label="Sir Thomas Byard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164283" start="28423" end="28432" title="Dutch ship Wassenaar" label="Wassenaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18111663" start="28552" end="28560" title="Dutch ship Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279961" start="28598" end="28608" title="Dutch ship Beschermer (1784)" label="Beschermer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089489" start="28657" end="28666" title="starboard" label="starboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125063" start="28805" end="28827" title="Dutch ship Gelijkheid" label="&amp;quot;Gelijkheid&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17598717" start="29534" end="29554" title="Dooitze Eelkes Hinxt" label="Dooitze Eelkes Hinxt"/>
<link wikidata="Q108673216" start="31101" end="31111" title="John Wells (Royal Navy officer)" label="John Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116086" start="31729" end="31749" title="striking the colours" label="struck their colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q46585" start="32186" end="32193" title="Flag of the Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q294147" start="32239" end="32252" title="William Bligh" label="William Bligh"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="32938" end="32953" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33569" end="33590" title="Dutch frigate Ambuscade" label="&amp;quot;Ambuscade&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q486490" start="33793" end="33799" title="Egmond (municipality)" label="Egmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502423" start="33838" end="33845" title="fathoms" label="fathoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013421" start="34346" end="34359" title="William James (naval historian)" label="William James"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040022" start="34834" end="34856" title="HMS Belliqueux (1780)" label="&amp;quot;Belliqueux&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q56726520" start="34863" end="34878" title="John Inglis (Royal Navy officer)" label="Cpt John Inglis"/>
<link wikidata="Q767979" start="37300" end="37305" title="whist" label="whist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009784" start="37571" end="37593" title="William George Fairfax" label="William George Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q683363" start="37601" end="37607" title="cutter (ship)" label="cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075872" start="39055" end="39069" title="Charles Bullen" label="Charles Bullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315486" start="40742" end="40752" title="jury masts" label="jury masts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352711" start="40957" end="40968" title="Westkapelle, Netherlands" label="West Cappel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498196" start="41077" end="41088" title="prison hulk" label="prison hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10084" start="41092" end="41100" title="Flushing, Netherlands" label="Flushing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41576" end="41582" title="Hinder, Netherlands" label="Hinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795188" start="41664" end="41683" title="Thomas Williams (Royal Navy officer)" label="Sir Thomas Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q629252" start="41828" end="41837" title="Broadside (naval)" label="broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q933459" start="42272" end="42278" title="Goeree-Overflakkee" label="Goeree"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="42407" end="42412" title="Meuse (river)" label="Maese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326219" start="42895" end="42924" title="Viscount Duncan of Camperdown" label="Viscount Duncan of Camperdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q55868770" start="42979" end="42986" title="Onslow baronets" label="baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="43047" end="43055" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="43057" end="43072" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003196" start="43142" end="43151" title="Sheerness" label="Sheerness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601071" start="43159" end="43170" title="royal yacht" label="royal yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635098" start="43171" end="43202" title="HMY Royal Charlotte" label="HMY &amp;quot;Royal Charlotte&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498196" start="43444" end="43455" title="prison hulk" label="prison hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434222" start="43463" end="43475" title="River Medway" label="River Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393299" start="43522" end="43535" title="Peter Rainier (Royal Navy officer, born 1741)" label="Peter Rainier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="43642" end="43662" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="44138" end="44144" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="44163" end="44174" title="Forfarshire" label="Forfarshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="44259" end="44260" title="shilling" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593203" start="44267" end="44268" title="old pence" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q81279" start="44343" end="44356" title="Guildhall, London" label="The Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339242" start="44468" end="44480" title="Ludgate Hill" label="Ludgate Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="44574" end="44598" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="44602" end="44608" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070304" start="44987" end="45014" title="Naval General Service Medal (1847)" label="Naval General Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="45586" end="45599" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="45891" end="45901" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="45923" end="45936" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879655" start="46009" end="46023" title="Kealakekua Bay" label="Kealakekua Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="46046" end="46055" title="Hawaiian people" label="Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399716" start="46293" end="46305" title="post captain" label="post captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048642" start="46452" end="46473" title="Edward Pelham Brenton" label="Edward Pelham Brenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124839" start="48459" end="48470" title="prize money" label="prize money"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="48734" end="48746" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692" start="49138" end="49144" title="Share (finance)" label="shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="49152" end="49173" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="49898" end="49909" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="50118" end="50136" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141642" start="50277" end="50302" title="Anglo-Russian invasion of Holland" label="landed in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297380" start="50491" end="50507" title="Vlieter Incident" label="Vlieter Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112751" start="50927" end="50944" title="Christopher Lloyd (naval historian)" label="Christopher Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q373401" start="51178" end="51185" title="Battle of Cape St Vincent (1797)" label="drubbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083872" start="51209" end="51216" title="Glorious First of June" label="drubbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="51791" end="51810" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Battle of Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226356" start="51892" end="51911" title="John Clerk of Eldin" label="John Clerk of Eldin"/>
<link wikidata="Q335254" start="52043" end="52058" title="John Jervis, 1st Earl of St Vincent" label="Earl St Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q373401" start="52076" end="52101" title="Battle of Cape St Vincent (1797)" label="Battle of Cape St Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167066" start="52521" end="52536" title="order of battle" label="order of battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="53209" end="53227" title="Sir Horatio Nelson" label="Sir Horatio Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q543154" start="53297" end="53329" title="Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife (1797)" label="Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916410" start="53978" end="53995" title="Cornhill-on-Tweed" label="Cornhill-on-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="54581" end="54587" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="54714" end="54729" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729" start="54763" end="54778" title="Louis Bonaparte" label="Louis Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="54780" end="54795" title="King of Holland" label="King of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="54891" end="54896" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676635" start="55088" end="55104" title="Thomas Whitcombe" label="Thomas Whitcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970087" start="55109" end="55131" title="Philip de Loutherbourg" label="Philip de Loutherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q430682" start="55139" end="55151" title="Tate Gallery" label="Tate Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411279" start="55164" end="55179" title="Samuel Drummond" label="Samuel Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218343" start="55184" end="55195" title="Daniel Orme" label="Daniel Orme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199924" start="55203" end="55227" title="National Maritime Museum" label="National Maritime Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951062" start="55233" end="55253" title="George Chambers (painter)" label="George Chambers, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q316016" start="55258" end="55279" title="John Singleton Copley" label="John Singleton Copley"/>
<link wikidata="Q942713" start="55287" end="55315" title="National Gallery of Scotland" label="National Gallery of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13519075" start="55425" end="55439" title="Showell Styles" label="Showell Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734051" start="55466" end="55478" title="The Fireship (novel)" label="The Fireship"/>
<link wikidata="Q352729" start="55488" end="55510" title="C. Northcote Parkinson" label="C. Northcote Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q657464" start="55556" end="55571" title="Daniel Steibelt" label="Daniel Steibelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q357172" start="55679" end="55698" title="Jan Ladislav Dussek" label="Jan Ladislav Dussek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028316" start="56053" end="56069" title="Camperdown Country Park" label="Camperdown House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303706" start="56342" end="56359" title="McManus Galleries" label="McManus Galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633842" start="56405" end="56432" title="National Museum of Scotland" label="National Museum of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519212" start="56686" end="56715" title="Jack Aubrey" label="&amp;quot;Lucky&amp;quot; Jack Aubrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10376289" start="56757" end="56771" title="Aubrey–Maturin series" label="Aubrey-Maturin"/>
<link wikidata="Q355438" start="56798" end="56818" title="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Brian" label="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Brian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819481" start="56948" end="56965" title="Desolation Island (novel)" label="Desolation Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="57022" end="57032" title="midshipman" label="midshipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q316070" start="57494" end="57512" title="Fletcher Christian" label="Fletcher Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q382360" start="57587" end="57602" title="Julian Stockwin" label="Julian Stockwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619063" start="57817" end="57830" title="stone frigate" label="stone frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631772" start="57842" end="57868" title="HMS Camperdown" label="HMS &amp;quot;Camperdown&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803716" wikidata="Q1257398" url="?curid=803716" title="Photoemission electron microscopy">
<text>Photoemission electron microscopy (PEEM, also called photoelectron microscopy, PEM) is a type of electron microscopy that utilizes local variations in electron emission to generate image contrast. The excitation is usually produced by ultraviolet light, synchrotron radiation or X-ray sources. PEEM measures the coefficient indirectly by collecting the emitted secondary electrons generated in the electron cascade that follows the creation of the primary core hole in the absorption process. PEEM is a surface sensitive technique because the emitted electrons originate from a shallow layer. In physics, this technique is referred to as PEEM, which goes together naturally with low-energy electron diffraction (LEED), and low-energy electron microscopy (LEEM). In biology, it is called photoelectron microscopy (PEM), which fits with photoelectron spectroscopy (PES), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM).

== History ==
=== Initial development ===

In 1933, Ernst Brüche reported images of cathodes illuminated by UV light. This work was extended by two of his colleagues, H. Mahl and J. Pohl. Brüche made a sketch of his photoelectron emission microscope in his 1933 paper (Figure 1). This is evidently the first photoelectron emission microscope (PEEM).

=== Improved techniques ===
In 1963, Gertrude F. Rempfer designed the electron optics for an early ultrahigh-vacuum (UHV) PEEM. In 1965, G. Burroughs at the Night Vision Laboratory, Fort Belvoir, Virginia built the bakeable electrostatic lenses and metal-sealed valves for PEEM. During the 1960s, in the PEEM, as well as TEM, the specimens were grounded and could be transferred in the UHV environment to several positions for photocathode formation, processing and observation. These electron microscopes were used for only a brief period of time, but the components live on. The first commercially available PEEM was designed and tested by Engel during the 1960s for his thesis work under E. Ruska and developed it into a marketable product, called the &quot;Metioskop KE3&quot;, by Balzers in 1971. The electron lenses and voltage divider of the PEEM were incorporated into one version of a PEEM for biological studies in Eugene, Oregon around 1970.

=== Further research ===
During the 1970s and 1980s the second generation (PEEM-2) and third generation (PEEM-3) microscopes were constructed. PEEM-2 is a conventional not aberration-corrected instrument employing electrostatic lenses. It uses a cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) fiber-coupled to a phosphor to detect the electron-optical image. The aberration corrected microscope PEEM-3 employs a curved electron mirror to counter the lowest order aberrations of the electron lenses and the accelerating field.

== Background ==

=== Photoelectric effect ===
The photoemission or photoelectric effect is a quantum electronic phenomenon in which electrons (photoelectrons) are emitted from matter after the absorption of energy from electromagnetic radiation such as UV light or X-ray.

When UV light or X-ray is absorbed by matter, electrons are excited from core levels into unoccupied states, leaving empty core states. Secondary electrons are generated by the decay of the core hole. Auger processes and inelastic electron scattering create a cascade of low-energy electrons. Some electrons penetrate the sample surface and escape into vacuum. A wide spectrum of electrons is emitted with energies between the energy of the illumination and the work function of the sample. This wide electron distribution is the principal source of image aberration in the microscope.

=== Quantitative analysis ===
Using Einstein&#x27;s method, the following equations are used:
energy of photon = energy needed to remove an electron + kinetic energy of the emitted electron
: formula_1
where
: &quot;h&quot; is the Planck constant;
: &quot;f&quot; is the frequency of the incident photon;
: formula_2 is the work function;
: formula_3 is the maximum kinetic energy of ejected electrons;
: &quot;f&quot;0 is the threshold frequency for the photoelectric effect to occur;
: &quot;m&quot; is the rest mass of the ejected electron;
: &quot;v&quot;m is the speed of the ejected electron.

=== Electron emission microscopy ===
Electron emission microscopy is a type of electron microscopy in which the information carrying beam of electrons originates from the specimen. The source of energy causing the electron emission can be heat (thermionic emission), light (photoelectron emission), ions, or neutral particles, but normally excludes field emission and other methods involving a point source or tip microscopy.

=== Photoelectron imaging ===
Photoelectron imaging includes any form of imaging in which the source of information is the distribution of points from which electrons are ejected from the specimen by the action of photons. The technique with the highest resolution photoelectron imaging is presently photoelectron emission microscopy using UV light.

== Photoemission electron microscope ==
A photoemission electron microscope is a parallel imaging instrument. It creates at any given moment a complete picture of the photoelectron distribution emitted from the imaged surface region.

=== Light sources ===
The viewed area of the specimen must be illuminated homogeneously with appropriate radiation (ranging from UV to hard x-rays). UV light is the most common radiation used in PEEM because very bright sources are available, such as mercury lamps. However, other wavelengths (like soft x-rays) are preferred where analytical information is required.

=== Electron optical column and resolution ===

The electron optical column contains two or more electrostatic or magnetic electron lenses, corrector elements such as a stigmator and deflector, an angle-limiting aperture in the plane of one of the lenses.

As in any emission electron microscope, the objective or cathode lens determines the resolution. The latter is dependent on the electron-optical qualities, such as spherical aberrations, and the energy spread of the photoemitted electrons. The electrons are emitted into the vacuum with an angular distribution close to a cosine square function. A significant velocity component parallel to the surface will decrease the lateral resolution. The faster electrons, leaving the surface exactly along the center line of the PEEM, will also negatively influence the resolution due to the chromatic aberration of the cathode lens. The resolution is inversely proportional to the accelerating field strength at the surface but proportional to the energy spread of the electrons. So resolution r is approximately:
: formula_4

In the equation, d is the distance between the specimen and the objective, ΔE is the distribution width of the initial electron energies and U is the accelerating voltage.

Besides the cathode or objective lens, situated on the left hand side of Figure 4, two more lenses are utilized to create an image of the specimen: an intermediate three-electrode lens is used to vary the total magnification between 100× if the lens is deactivated, and up to 1000× when needed. On the right-hand side of Figure 4 is the projector, a three electrode lens combined with a two-element deceleration lens. The main task of this lens combination is the deceleration of the fast 20 keV electrons to energies for which the has its highest sensitivity. Such an image intensifier has its best performance for impinging electrons with kinetic energies roughly about 1 keV.

=== Energy filter ===
An energy filter can be added to the instrument in order to select the electrons that will contribute to the image. This option is particularly used for analytical applications of the PEEM. By using an energy filter, a PEEM microscope can be seen as imaging Ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) or X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). By using this method, spatially resolved photoemission spectra can be acquired with spatial resolutions on the 100 nm scale and with sub-eV resolution. Using such instrument, one can acquire elemental images with chemical state sensibility or work function maps. Also, since the photoelectron are emitted only at the very surface of the material, surface termination maps can be acquired.

=== Detector ===
A detector is placed at the end of electron optical column. Usually, a phosphor screen is used to convert the electron image to a photon image. The choice of phosphor type is governed by resolution considerations. A multichannel plate detector that is imaged by a CCD camera can substitute phosphor screen.

== Time-resolved PEEM ==
Compared to many other electron microscopy techniques, time-resolved PEEM offers a very high temporal resolution of only a few femtoseconds with prospects of advancing it to the attosecond regime. The reason is that temporal electron pulse broadening does not deteriorate the temporal resolution because electrons are only used to achieve a high spatial resolution. The temporal resolution is reached by using very short light pulses in a pump-probe setup. A first pulse optically excites dynamics like surface plasmons on a sample surface and a second pulse probes the dynamics after a certain waiting time by photoemitting electrons. The photoemission rate is influenced by the local excitation level of the sample. Hence, spatial information about the dynamics on the sample can be gained. By repeating this experiment with a series of waiting times between pump and probe pulse, a movie of the dynamics on a sample can be recorded.

Laser pulses in the visible spectral range are typically used in combination with a PEEM. They offer a temporal resolution of a few to 100 fs. In recent years, pulses with shorter wavelengths have been used to achieve a more direct access to the instantaneous electron excitation in the material. Here, a first pulse in the visible excites dynamics near the sample surface and a second pulse with a photon energy significantly above the work function of the material emits the electrons. By employing additional time-of-flight or high-pass energy recording in the PEEM, information about the instantaneous electronic distribution in a nanostructure can be extracted with high spatial and temporal resolution.

Efforts to achieve attosecond temporal resolution and with that directly record optical fields around nanostructures with so far unreached spatio-temporal resolution, are still ongoing.

== Limitations ==
The general limitation of PEEM, which is common with most surface science methods, is that the PEEM operates only under fairly restricted vacuum conditions. Whenever electrons are used to excite a specimen or carry information from its surface there has to be a vacuum with an appropriate mean free path for the electrons. With &quot;in-situ&quot; PEEM techniques, water and aqueous solution can be observed by PEEM.

The resolution of PEEM is limited to about 10 nm, which results from a spread of the photoelectron emission angle. Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is a powerful tool for structure analysis. However, it may be difficult to make angle-resolved and energy-selective PEEM measurements because of a lack of intensity. The availability of synchrotron-radiation light sources can offer exciting possibilities in this regard.

== Comparison with other techniques ==
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM): PEEM differs from these two microscopies by using an electric accelerating field at the surface of specimen. The specimen is part of the electron-optical system.

Low-energy electron microscopy (LEEM) and mirror electron microscopy (MEM): these two electron emission microscopy use electron gun supply beams which are directed toward the specimen, decelerated and backscattered from the specimen or reflected just before reaching the specimen. In photoemission electron microscopy (PEEM) the same specimen geometry and immersion lens are used, but the electron guns are omitted.

== New PEEM technologies ==
Time resolved photoemission electron microscopy (TR-PEEM) is well suited for real-time observation of fast processes on surfaces equipped with pulsed synchrotron radiation for illumination.
* Time-of-flight Photoemission electron microscopy (TOF-PEEM): TOF-PEEM is PEEM using an ultrafast gated CCD camera or a time-and space-resolving counting detector for observing fast processes on surfaces.
* Multiphoton Photoemission electron microscopy: Multiphoton PEEM can be employed for the study of localized surface plasmon excitations in nanoclusters or for direct spatial observation of the hot-electron lifetime in structured films using femtosecond lasers.
* PEEM in liquids and dense gases: The development of microfabricated thin liquid cells in late 1990s enabled wide field-of-view transmission X-ray microscopy of liquid and gaseous samples confined between two SiN membranes. In such a configuration, the vacuum side of the second membrane was coated with the photoemitting material and PEEM was used to record the spatial variations of the transmitted light. True PEEM imaging of liquid interfaces in photoelectrons has been realized through ultrathin electron transparent membranes such as graphene. Further development of the UHV compatible graphene liquid cells enabled studies of electrochemical and electrified liquid–solid interfaces with standard PEEM setups without the use of the differential pumping.

== Notes ==
== References ==
* James A. Samson, David L. Ederer (1998). Vacuum Ultraviolet Spectroscopy. Academic Press 
* Andrzej Wieckowski, Elena R. Savinova, Constantinos G. Vayenas (2003). Catalysis and Electrocatalysis at Nanoparticle Surfaces. CRC Press 
* Harm Hinrich Rotermund. Imaging of Dynamic Processes on Surface by Light. Surface Science Reports, 29 (1997) 265-364
* E. Bauer, M. Mundschau, W. Sweich, W. Telieps. Surface Studies by Low-energy Electron Microscopy (LEEM) and Conventional UV Photoemission Electron Microscopy (PEEM). Ultramicroscopy, 31 (1989) 49-57
* W. Engel, M. Kordesch, H.H. Rotermund, S. Kubala, A. von Oertzen. A UHV-compatible photoelectron emission microscope for applications in surface science. Ultramicroscopy, 36 (1991) 148-153
* H.H. Rotermund, W. Engel, M. Kordesch, G. Ertl. Imaging of spatio-temporal pattern evolution during carbon monoxide oxidation on platinum. &quot;Nature&quot;, 343 (1990) 355-357
* H.H. Rotermund, W. Engel, S. Jakubith, A. von Oertzen, G. Ertl. Methods and application of UV photoelectron microscopy in heterogeneous catalysis. Ultramicroscopy, 36 (1991) 164-172
* O. Renault, N. Barrett, A. Bailly, L.F. Zagonel, D. Mariolle, J.C. Cezar, N.B. Brookes, K. Winkler, B. Krömker and D. Funnemann, Energy-filtered XPEEM with NanoESCA using synchrotron and laboratory X-ray sources: Principles and first demonstrated results; Surface Science, Volume 601, Issue 20, 15 October 2007, Pages 4727–4732. 
== External links ==
* http://xraysweb.lbl.gov/peem2/webpage/Project/TutorialPEEM.shtml</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1257398" start="0" end="33" title="Photoemission electron microscopy" label="Photoemission electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257398" start="35" end="39" title="Photoemission electron microscopy" label="PEEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257398" start="53" end="77" title="Photoemission electron microscopy" label="photoelectron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257398" start="79" end="82" title="Photoemission electron microscopy" label="PEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="97" end="116" title="electron microscopy" label="electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="151" end="159" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="235" end="252" title="ultraviolet light" label="ultraviolet light"/>
<link wikidata="Q212871" start="254" end="275" title="synchrotron radiation" label="synchrotron radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="279" end="284" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582911" start="361" end="379" title="secondary electron" label="secondary electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q905977" start="679" end="710" title="low-energy electron diffraction" label="low-energy electron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q908748" start="723" end="753" title="low-energy electron microscopy" label="low-energy electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q908748" start="755" end="759" title="LEEM" label="LEEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139350" start="835" end="861" title="photoelectron spectroscopy" label="photoelectron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q110779037" start="869" end="901" title="transmission electron microscopy" label="transmission electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q321095" start="913" end="941" title="scanning electron microscopy" label="scanning electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q72976" start="1002" end="1014" title="Ernst Brüche" label="Ernst Brüche"/>
<link wikidata="Q124615929" start="1338" end="1357" title="Gertrude F. Rempfer" label="Gertrude F. Rempfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q110779037" start="1622" end="1625" title="Transmission electron microscopy" label="TEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q71022" start="1992" end="2000" title="Ernst Ruska" label="E. Ruska"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="2508" end="2529" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q83213" start="2838" end="2858" title="photoelectric effect" label="photoelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q783800" start="3506" end="3519" title="work function" label="work function"/>
<link wikidata="Q783800" start="3955" end="3968" title="work function" label="work function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="5393" end="5401" title="Ultraviolet" label="UV light"/>
<link wikidata="Q370387" start="5495" end="5507" title="Mercury-vapor lamp" label="mercury lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571151" start="5782" end="5791" title="stigmator" label="stigmator"/>
<link wikidata="Q602144" start="7822" end="7861" title="Ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy" label="Ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q899559" start="7871" end="7903" title="X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy" label="X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="8582" end="8585" title="Charge-coupled device" label="CCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000635" start="11079" end="11084" title="ARPES" label="ARPES"/>
<link wikidata="Q110779037" start="11431" end="11434" title="Transmission electron microscopy" label="TEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q321095" start="11470" end="11473" title="Scanning electron microscope" label="SEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q908748" start="11671" end="11675" title="LEEM" label="LEEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983322" start="12326" end="12329" title="Time-of-flight" label="TOF"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="13732" end="13744" title="Nanoparticle" label="Nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60066" start="14318" end="14325" title="Gerhard Ertl" label="G. Ertl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803726" wikidata="Q16170281" url="?curid=803726" title="Adam Duncan">
<text>Adam Duncan may refer to:

*Adam Duncan, 1st Viscount Duncan (1731–1804), British admiral
*Adam Duncan (sailor) (1833–?), sailor in the Union Navy in the American Civil War, recipient of the Medal of Honor
*Adam Duncan (cricketer) (1852–1940), English lawyer and cricketer
*Scott Duncan (footballer) (1888–1975), Scottish footballer and manager
*Adam M. Duncan (1927–2000), member of the Utah state legislature</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q335334" start="28" end="60" title="Adam Duncan, 1st Viscount Duncan" label="Adam Duncan, 1st Viscount Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678998" start="91" end="111" title="Adam Duncan (sailor)" label="Adam Duncan (sailor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889411" start="207" end="230" title="Adam Duncan (cricketer)" label="Adam Duncan (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370355" start="274" end="299" title="Scott Duncan (footballer)" label="Scott Duncan (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305143" start="346" end="360" title="Adam M. Duncan" label="Adam M. Duncan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803731" wikidata="Q1619348" url="?curid=803731" title="International Latitude Service">
<text>The International Latitude Service was created by the International Geodetic Association in 1899 to study variations in latitude caused by polar motion, precession, or &quot;wobble&quot; of the Earth&#x27;s axis.

In 1891, at the meeting of the Permanent Commission of the International Geodetic Association in Florence, Wilhelm Foerster referred to the discovery by Seth Carlo Chandler of the polar motion predicted by Leonhard Euler in 1765 and his impact on the determination latitudes. He proposed that the International Geodetic Association implement a systematic study of this important phenomenon. In 1895, the creation of the International Latitude Service was decided by the International Geodesic Association. Its central office was based in Potsdam and headed by Friedrich Robert Helmert. Regular observations began in 1899. After 1916, the operations of the International Latitudes Service continued under the aegis of the Reduced Geodetic Association among Neutral States presided by Raoul Gautier director of Geneva Observatory.

The original &quot;International Latitude Observatories&quot; were a system of six observatories located near the parallel of 39° 08&#x27; north latitude. The alignment of all six stations along the parallel helped the observatories to perform uniform data analysis. The original six observatories were located in:
* Gaithersburg, Maryland, United States
* Cincinnati, Ohio, United States
* Ukiah, California, United States
* Mizusawa, Iwate, Japan
* Charjui, Turkmenistan
* Carloforte, Italy

Twelve groups of stars were studied in the program, each group containing six pairs of stars. Each night, each station observed two of the star groups along a preset schedule and later compared the data against the measurements taken by the sister stations.
Economic difficulties and war caused the closings of some of the original stations, though a newer station was created in Uzbekistan after World War I. The data collected by the observatories over the years still has use to scientists, and has been applied to studies of polar motion, the physical properties of the Earth, climatology and satellite tracking and navigation.

The final six observatories were located, in order of Longitude (E to W), in:
*Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA, Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory: 
*Cincinnati, Ohio, USA: 
*Ukiah, California, USA: 
*Mizusawa, Japan, National Institutes of Natural Sciences National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, Mizusawa VERA Observatory: 
*Kitab, in Uzbekistan: 
*Carloforte, Italy: 

The ILS was renamed International Polar Motion Service (IPMS) in 1962. 
It was replaced when the International Earth Rotation Service (IERS) was established in 1987.

==See also==
* List of astronomical observatories

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* National Park Service - &quot;The history of the Gaithersburg Observatory in Maryland, and the overall project&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1619348" start="4" end="34" title="International Latitude Service" label="International Latitude Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639820" start="54" end="88" title="International Association of Geodesy" label="International Geodetic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="120" end="128" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167025" start="139" end="151" title="polar motion" label="polar motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q104225" start="153" end="163" title="Precession (astronomy)" label="precession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732048" start="168" end="186" title="Chandler wobble" label="&amp;quot;wobble&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q77029" start="321" end="337" title="Wilhelm Julius Foerster" label="Wilhelm Foerster"/>
<link wikidata="Q548985" start="367" end="386" title="Seth Carlo Chandler" label="Seth Carlo Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167025" start="394" end="406" title="polar motion" label="polar motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="420" end="434" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="479" end="487" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639820" start="511" end="545" title="International Association of Geodesy" label="International Geodetic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q45161" start="774" end="798" title="Friedrich Robert Helmert" label="Friedrich Robert Helmert"/>
<link wikidata="Q679176" start="1023" end="1041" title="Geneva Observatory" label="Geneva Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="1127" end="1140" title="Observatory" label="observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q146591" start="1158" end="1166" title="Parallel (latitude)" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q752719" start="1361" end="1383" title="Gaithersburg, Maryland" label="Gaithersburg, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1385" end="1398" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="1401" end="1417" title="Cincinnati, Ohio" label="Cincinnati, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q837105" start="1435" end="1452" title="Ukiah, California" label="Ukiah, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133151" start="1470" end="1485" title="Mizusawa, Iwate" label="Mizusawa, Iwate"/>
<link wikidata="Q487684" start="1495" end="1516" title="Türkmenabat" label="Charjui, Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q120399" start="1519" end="1529" title="Carloforte" label="Carloforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1935" end="1946" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q253677" start="2135" end="2153" title="GPS tracking unit" label="satellite tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="2158" end="2168" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517395" start="2279" end="2312" title="Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory" label="Gaithersburg Latitude Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327713" start="2424" end="2466" title="National Astronomical Observatory of Japan" label="National Astronomical Observatory of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="2507" end="2517" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619348" start="2562" end="2596" title="International Latitude Service" label="International Polar Motion Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q530278" start="2639" end="2675" title="International Earth Rotation Service" label="International Earth Rotation Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344875" start="2724" end="2758" title="List of astronomical observatories" label="List of astronomical observatories"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803735" wikidata="Q1650798" url="?curid=803735" title="Kargil district">
<text>Kargil district is a district in Indian-administered Ladakh in the disputed Kashmir-region, which is administered as a union territory of Ladakh. It is named after the city of Kargil, where the district headquarters lies. The district is bounded by the Indian-administered union territory of Jammu and Kashmir to the west, the Pakistani-administered administrative territory of Gilgit–Baltistan to the north, Ladakh&#x27;s Leh district to the east, and the Indian state of Himachal Pradesh to the south. Encompassing the historical regions known as Purig, the district lies to the northeast of the Great Himalayas and encompasses part of the Zanskar Range. Its population inhabits the river valleys of Suru, Wakha Rong (not to be confused with the Rong Valley in Leh district), and Sod Valley.

Kargil district was originally created in 1979, when Ladakh was part of the state of Jammu and Kashmir. In 2003, Kargil was granted a Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council (LAHDC). In 2019, Ladakh became a union territory, with Kargil and Leh being its joint capitals. In 2024, the Drass and Zanskar districts were separated out from Kargil district.

Shia Muslims comprise the majority of the population of the district.

== Geography ==

The pre-2024 Kargil district lies between the crest of the Great Himalaya Range and the Indus River of Ladakh. It consists of two river valleys: the Suru River and its tributaries in the north, and the Zanskar River and its tributaries in the south. The Penzi La pass separates the two. The Suru flows north into Baltistan and joins the Indus River near Marol. The Zanskar River flows east and debouches into the Indus River in Leh district near a location called &quot;Sangam&quot;.

The Suru River has two significant tributaries: Wakha Rong, which flows northwest from Namika La to join the Suru River near Kargil, and the Dras River, which originates near the Zoji La pass and joins the Suru River a short distance north of Kargil. Wakha Rong, also called the &quot;Purik river&quot;, contains the main travel route between Kargil and Leh, and lent its name to the Kargil region itself as &quot;Purig&quot;. The Dras River valley has historically been a subdivision called Drass.

Zanskar was a traditional Buddhist kingdom formed in the 10th century, which became subject to the Ladakhi kings.

Per the 2011 census, the Kargil tehsil, which includes the Drass and Wakha Rong valleys, contains 61% of the population of the district. The Sankoo tehsil, representing the upper Suru valley, contains 10% of the population and the Zanskar tehsil contains 29% of the population.

=== Vulnerability of natural disasters ===
The Kargil district is particularly vulnerable to landslides, cloudbursts, and flash floods. The main highways connecting Kargil with adjacent regions (NH-1D and NH-301) are prone to landslides. Recurring flash floods were observed in the surroundings of the Kargil town in 2006, 2010, 2013, 2014, 2016 and 2018. These flash floods caused massive damages to roads, buildings, and agricultural area. 

==History==
=== Buddhist dynasties ===

Purig is believed to have been conquered, along with Ladakh proper (modern Leh district), by Lhachen Palgyigon, the son of the West Tibetan King Kyide Nyimagon, in AD. After his father&#x27;s death, Palgyigon controlled the vast territory called Maryul, which stretched from the Zoji La pass to the basin of the Sengge Zangbo river (upper Indus river in Tibet). The third son, Detsukgon, inherited Zanskar along with Lahul and Spiti. From this time onwards, Purig was attached to Ladakh. Zanskar had an independent existencence even though it was occasionally conquered and made a tributary to Ladakh.

The Suru Valley was historically ruled from Kartse (), a fort in a branch valley near Sankoo. An inscription names its ruler as Tri-gyal (). Tibetologist A. H. Francke believes that the dynasty of Tri-gyals might have been in existence prior to the formation of the Maryul kingdom. However, there is no mention of it in &quot;Ladakh Chronicles&quot;.

The principality of Kartse apparently controlled the entire western Ladakh, from Mulbekh and Wanla in the east to Dras in the west, even though the extent of territory would have varied with time. The Tri-gyals were Buddhist and adopted the religion from Kashmir in ancient times. They commissioned a giant Maitreya rock carving in the vicinity of Kartse, and others at Mulbekh and possibly Apati.

=== Medieval period ===
Islam arrived in the Kashmir Valley around 1320, a new force to be reckoned with. During the rule of Sultan Sikandar (), his general Rai Madari crossed the Zoji La pass and conquered Purig and Baltistan. This paved the way for the conversion of the two regions to Islam. Sultan Zain-ul-Abidin ran an expedition to Tibet, conquering Ladakh along the way. The Tri-gyal of Kartse is said to have become his vassal and assisted in the invasions. The first dynasty of Ladakh did not last much longer after this. A second &quot;Namgyal&quot; dynasty was established around 1460 AD.

Some time after this, a Muslim chieftaincy connected to Skardu appeared in Purig, first at Sod northeast of Kargil, then with a branch at Chiktan northeast of Namika La.
During the invasion of Ladakh by Mirza Haidar Dughlat in 1532, Sod and Chiktan appear to have submitted, but not Kartse. Joint raids were conducted on Kartse but they failed. The chief or commander of Suru, named &quot;Baghan&quot;, is also said to have been killed during one of the raids.

Tashi Namgyal () reestablished the old borders by conquering Purig as well as west Tibet. His successors Tsewang Namgyal I and Jamyang Namgyal were equally energetic. However, Jamyang Namgal suffered a reverse, having been captured by the chief of Skardu, Ali Mir, better known as Ali Sher Khan Anchan (). Jamyang Namgyal married Ali Mir&#x27;s daughter Gyal Khatun and got reinstated as the ruler. Their son Sengge Namgyal again rejuvenated Ladakh to old glory and in fact went further by annexing the kingdom of Guge in west Tibet.

In 1586, Kashmir became a Mughal province. Purig and Baltistan were Islamic, and Mughal involvement in the affairs of the region became endemic. In 1638, emperor Shah Jahan sent a force to intervene in Baltistan and installed Ali Mir&#x27;s son Adam Khan as the ruler. The joint forces of Mughal Kashmir and Adam Khan blocked Sengge Namgyal&#x27;s efforts to regain Purig, forcing him to sue for peace. When Sengge Namgyal reneged on his tribute, the emperor imposed economic sanctions against Ladakh barring all trade, which impoverished Ladakh.

Under his son Deldan Namgyal (&quot;Bde-ldan-rnam-rgyal&quot;) between 1640 and 1675, Purig returned to the control of Ladakh. Zanskar and other parts of the modern Ladakh Division were also conquered.

===Princely State of Jammu and Kashmir===
In 1834, the Dogra ruler Gulab Singh of Jammu, acting under the suzeraity of the Sikh Empire, sent the governor of Kishtwar, general Zorawar Singh, to conquer the territory between Jammu and Tibet. Marching from Kishtwar, Zorawar Singh reached Purig and defeated the Bhotia leader Mangal at Sankoo in August 1834. Kartse, the then capital of Purig, fell into Zorawar Singh&#x27;s hands. He built a fort there before advancing towards Leh. Tshed-Pal, the Gyalpo of Leh, was defeated and reinstalled as a subsidiary of the Dogras. Meanwhile, the chief of Sod rebelled and Zorawar Singh returned to reassert his authority. Zanskar subsequently offered submission.

The Purigis rebelled repeatedly, instigated by Sikh governor Mihan Singh of Kashmir. They also received support from Ahmed Shah of Baltistan. Zorawar Singh returned in 1839 to quell the rebellion and conquered Baltistan as well.

After the conquest, the region of the present Kargil district was organised into three &quot;ilaqas&quot; of the Kishtwar &quot;wazarat&quot;, based at Kargil, Dras and Zanskar respectively. They were headed by civil officers called &quot;Thanadars&quot;. Later, Suru was made into a separate &quot;ilaqa&quot;.

Following the First Anglo-Sikh War and the Treaty of Amritsar (1846), Gulab Singh was made the Maharaja of the newly carved-out princely state of Jammu and Kashmir under British suzerainty. The princely state was organised into two large provinces, Jammu and Kashmir. Ladakh and Skardu were set up as districts in the Jammu province, called &quot;wazarats&quot;. The three Purig &quot;ilaqas&quot; were included in the Skardu &quot;wazarat&quot;. Zanskar continued to be attached to Kishtwar.

In 1901, a major reorganisation of the frontier districts took place. A new Ladakh &quot;wazarat&quot; was created, being one of the two &quot;wazarats&quot; of the Frontier Districts province. Kargil was made a new tehsil under the Ladakh &quot;wazarat&quot;, with the three Purig &quot;ilaqas&quot; (Drass, Kargil and Suru), the Zanskar &quot;ilaqa&quot; from the Kishtwar district, and the Kharmang &quot;ilaqa&quot; from the erstwhile Skardu district. Kargil, Leh and Skardu became the three tehsils of the Ladakh &quot;wazarat&quot;. Initially, the administration of the &quot;wazarat&quot; used to spend four months each at Leh, Kargil and Skardu. But shifting the entire staff so often proved onerous, and so the shifting was eventually limited to Leh and Skardu.

===Post-1947===
During the Indo-Pakistani War of 1947, pitched battles were fought around Kargil, and the entire area including Drass and Zoji La Pass initially coming under the control of Gilgit Scouts. By November 1948, the Indian troops reclaimed all of Kargil and Leh tehsils and some portions of the Kharamang ilaqa bordering the Dras river. They remained with India after the ceasefire, forming the Ladakh district of the Jammu and Kashmir state of India.

During the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 the entire Kargil region including key posts was captured by Indian troops under leadership of Col. Chewang Rinchen. To straighten the line of control in the area, the Indian Army launched night attacks when the ground temperatures sank to below −17 °C and about 15 enemy posts located at height of 16,000 feet and more were captured. After Pakistan forces lost the war and agreed to the Shimla Agreement, the strategic areas near Kargil remained with India.

In 1979, Ladakh was divided into Kargil and Leh districts within the Jammu and Kashmir state.

=== Kargil War ===

In the spring of 1999, under a covert plan of then Pakistan Army chief Pervez Musharraf, armed infiltrators from Baltistan, aided by the Pakistani Army, occupied vacant high-altitude posts in the Kargil and Drass regions. The result was a limited-scale conflict (Kargil War) between the two nuclear-equipped nations, which ended with India regaining the Kargil region through military action and diplomatic pressure. However, there remains the controversy of the mountain peak, knows as Point 5353 or the Marpo La Peak, which is still believed to be under Pakistan&#x27;s control.

=== Ladakh union territory ===
In August 2019 the Parliament of India passed an act that separated Ladakh from Jammu and Kashmir into an independent union territory of India. Kargl and Leh continue to be the two districts of Ladakh, with the Kargil town designated as a joint capital of the union territory.

==Climate==
Kargil district is situated in the deep south-western part of the Himalayas, giving it a cool, temperate climate. Summers are warm with cool nights, while winters are long and cold with temperatures often dropping to with recorded temperatures of in the tiny town of Dras, situated from Kargil town. The Zanskar Valley is colder. Kargil district is spread over . The Suru River flows through the district.

The climate is cold and temperate. The average annual temperature in Kargil is 8.6 °C. About 318 mm of precipitation falls annually. The driest month is November with 6 mm. Most precipitation falls in March, with an average of 82 mm. The warmest month of the year is July with an average temperature of 23.3 °C. In January, the average temperature is −8.8 °C. It is the lowest average temperature of the whole year. The difference in precipitation between the driest month and the wettest month is 76 mm. The average temperatures vary during the year by 32.1 °C.

==Administration==

The Kargil district was formed in July 1979, by separating it from Leh. Kargil has 5 Sub-Divisions, 8 tehsils, and 14 Blocks.

Sub-Divisions (5): Drass, Kargil, Shakar-Chiktan, Sankoo, Zanskar (Padum)

Tehsils (8): Drass, Kargil, Shakar-Chiktan, Shargole, Sankoo, Trespone (Trespone), Taisuru, Zanskar (Padum)

Blocks (14): Drass, Kargil, Shakar, Chiktan, Shargole, Sankoo, Trespone, Saliskote, Gund Mangalpore, Taisuru, Padum, Lungnaq, Cha, Zangla

Each block consists of a number of panchayats.

===Politics===
Kargil district had two assembly constituencies, Zanskar and Kargil under Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly. It forms part of the Ladakh parliamentary constituency. Major political parties in the region include National Conference, Congress, PDP, BJP, LUTF (now merged with the BJP) and the erstwhile Kargil Alliance. The present Member of Parliament (MP) for Ladakh is Mohmad Haneefa.

Ladakh, a union territory without a legislature, does not have a legislative assembly but is represented in the Parliament.

Santosh Sukhadeve, (IAS) is the current District Development Commissioner Kargil.

===Autonomous Hill Council===
Kargil District is administered by an elected body known as the Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council, Kargil. The LAHDC-K was established in 2003.

==Demographics==

According to the 2011 census Kargil district has a population of 140,802. This gives it a ranking of 603rd in India (out of a total of 640). The district has a population density of . Its population growth rate over the decade 2001-2011 was 20.18%. Kargil has a sex ratio of 810 females per every 1000 males, and a literacy rate of 71.34%.

===Religion===
Of the total population, 77% are Muslims, of which 63% follow Shia Islam. Most of the district&#x27;s Muslims are found in the north (Kargil town, Drass, and the lower Suru valley). Of the remainder, 17% of the total population practises Tibetan Buddhism and Bön, mostly found in Zanskar with small populations in the upper Suru valley (Rangdum) and around Shergol, Mulbekh and Garkhone. The remaining 8% of the population follows Hinduism and Sikhism, though as many as 95% of them are male.

Much of Kargil population is inhabited by the Purigpa and Balti people of Tibetan origin. They converted from Buddhism to Islam in the 14th century and intermingled with other Aryan people. Muslims mainly inhabit the valley of Drass and speak Shina, a small number community, known as Brokpa, inhabit the Dha-Hanu region and Garkone village along the Indus River. Some Arghons and Shina have also settled in Kargil town.

===Languages===

The Purgi dialect of Balti is spoken by 65% while 10 per cent speak Shina language in regions like Drass and Batalikis. Urdu is also spoke and understood in Kargil.

Balti language has four variants/dialects and Purgi is the southern dialect of Balti language. Balti, is a branch of Archaic Western Tibetan language, is also spoken by the inhabitants of the four districts of (Baltistan) in Pakistan and Turtuk in the Nubra valley of the Leh district as well. The Buddhists of Zanskar speak Zanskari language of the Ladakhi-Balti language group.

==Culture==

Though earlier Tibetan contact has left a profound influence upon the people of both Kargil and Leh, after the spread of Shia Islam the people of Kargil were heavily influenced by Persian culture. This is apparent by the use of Persian words and phrases as well as in songs called &quot;marsias&quot; and &quot;qasidas&quot;. At least until recently, some Kargilis, especially those of the Agha families (descendants of Syed preachers who were in a direct line descent from the Islamic prophet, Muhammad) went to Iraq for their education. Native Ladakhis go for higher Islamic studies in seminaries in Najaf, Iraq and Qom in Iran. These non-Agah scholars are popularly called as &quot;Sheikh&quot;. Some among the most prominent religious scholars include Imam-e-Jummah, Sheikh Mussa Shariefi, Sheikh Ahmed Mohammadi, Sheikh Hussain Zakiri and Sheikh Anwar.

Social ceremonies such as marriages still carry many customs and rituals that are common to both the Muslims and Buddhists. Among the two districts of Ladakh, Kargil has a more mixed ethnic population and thus there are more regional dialects spoken in Kargil as compared to Leh. Local folk songs, which are called &quot;rgya-glu&quot; and &quot;balti ghazals&quot;, are still quite popular and are performed enthusiastically at social gatherings.

==Wildlife==

===Endangered species===
Kargil is home to many endangered wildlife species:
* Snow leopard (&quot;Panthera uncia&quot;)
* Tibetan wolf (&quot;Canis lupus langier&quot;)
* Himalayan brown bear (&quot;Ursus arctos isabellinus&quot;)
* Asiatic ibex (&quot;Capra ibex&quot;)
* Ladakh urial (&quot;Ovis vignei vignei&quot;)
* musk deer (&quot;Moschus&quot; spp.)
* pikas
* marmots and hares.

Some of the reptiles found in Kargil district are
* &quot;Platyceps ladacensis&quot; (Ladakh cliff racer) 
* &quot;Phrynocephalus theobaldi&quot; (toad head agama)
* &quot;Altiphylax stoliczkai&quot; (Balti gecko)
* &quot;Paralaudakia himalayana&quot; (Himalayan agama) 
* &quot;Asymblepharus ladacensis&quot; (Ladakh ground skink).

Aishwarya Maheshwari of the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) is quoted as saying, &quot;It is here in Kargil that one of world&#x27;s most elusive creatures, the snow leopard, roams wild and free. During my research I have learnt about the tremendous decline in wildlife sightings since the 1999 Kargil war, so much so that even the common resident birds had disappeared.&quot;

===Birds===
Besides the endangered species, various birds are commonly seen in summer: 
* Black-necked Eurasian magpie
* house sparrow
* hoopoe
* rosefinches
* red-billed choughs
* eastern chiffchaff
* common sandpiper
* European goldfinches.

===Gallery===
==Transportation==

National Highway 1D, connecting Srinagar to Leh, passes through Kargil. This highway is typically open for traffic only from May to December due to heavy snowfall at the Zoji La. Kargil is from the capital city of Srinagar. There is a partially paved road leading from Kargil south to Zanskar, which is also only open only from June to September. The total distance to Zanskar is nearly . India and Pakistan have both considered linking the Pakistani town of Skardu to Kargil with a bus route to reunite the Ladakh families separated by the line of control since 1972.

===Road===
Kargil is connected to the rest of India by high-altitude roads which are subject to landslides and are impassable in winter due to deep snows. The National Highway 1D connects Kargil to Srinagar. The NH 301 connects Kargil with the remote Zanskar region. Upgradation of this road is going on to reduce the time travel between Kargil and Padum, tehsil headquarters of Zanskar region.

The Nimmu–Padam–Darcha road is a major axis through Zanskar in Kargil district, connecting Lahaul in Himachal with Leh. The construction of this road was completed in March 2024.

===Air===
Kargil Airport is a non-operational airport used only for defence purposes by the Indian Air Force. Kargil Airport has been included under Central Govt.&#x27;s UDAN scheme for commercial operations. The nearest operational airport is Leh&#x27;s Kushok Bakula Rimpochee Airport which is located 215 kilometres from Kargil.

===Rail===
There is no railway service currently in Ladakh, however, 2 railway routes are proposed- the Bhanupli–Leh line and Srinagar–Kargil–Leh line.

==See also==

* List of districts of Ladakh
* List of villages in Kargil district
* Geography of Ladakh
* Tourism in Ladakh
* Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council, Kargil

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Ghulam Mohiuddin Dar. &quot;Kargil: Its social, culture, and economic history&quot;.
* Kargil : The Important Trade Transit of Yesteryears, People &amp; Society
*Shireen M. Mazari, &quot;The Kargil Conflict, 1999: Separating Fact from Fiction&quot;, The Institute of Strategic Studies, Islamabad (2003) 

==External links==
* Rivers of Kargil district on OpenStreetMap: Dras, Suru and Kartse, Wakha, Zanskar
*Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council, Kargil (archived 15 July 2010)
*Kargil Tehsil Map, MapsofIndia.com
*&quot;Pakistan&#x27;s Northern Areas dilemma&quot;, BBC
*Kargil War 1999, Rediff</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1650798" start="0" end="15" title="Kargil district" label="Kargil district"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="33" end="38" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q200667" start="53" end="59" title="Ladakh" label="Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67" end="75" title="Kashmir#Dispute" label="disputed"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="76" end="83" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q467745" start="119" end="134" title="union territory" label="union territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q200667" start="138" end="144" title="Ladakh" label="Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088176" start="176" end="182" title="Kargil" label="Kargil"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="292" end="309" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q270496" start="350" end="374" title="Administrative units of Pakistan" label="administrative territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q200697" start="378" end="394" title="Gilgit-Baltistan" label="Gilgit–Baltistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921210" start="423" end="435" title="Leh district" label="Leh district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="473" end="489" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650798" start="549" end="554" title="Kargil district" label="Purig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281536" start="598" end="613" title="Great Himalayas" label="Great Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="642" end="655" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093332" start="702" end="706" title="Suru River (Indus)" label="Suru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650798" start="708" end="718" title="Wakha Rong" label="Wakha Rong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="748" end="759" title="Rupshu#Rong" label="Rong Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088176" start="782" end="792" title="Sod Valley" label="Sod Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180" start="871" end="897" title="Jammu and Kashmir (state)" label="state of Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q85775497" start="929" end="971" title="Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council, Kargil" label="Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q467745" start="1006" end="1021" title="union territory" label="union territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q130265763" start="1082" end="1087" title="Drass district" label="Drass"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="1092" end="1099" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="1152" end="1164" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281536" start="1299" end="1313" title="Great Himalaya" label="Great Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="1328" end="1339" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093332" start="1389" end="1399" title="Suru River (Indus)" label="Suru River"/>
<link wikidata="Q147014" start="1442" end="1455" title="Zanskar River" label="Zanskar River"/>
<link wikidata="Q805804" start="1553" end="1562" title="Baltistan" label="Baltistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116233294" start="1594" end="1599" title="Marol, Baltistan" label="Marol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921210" start="1668" end="1680" title="Leh district" label="Leh district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961848" start="1812" end="1821" title="Namika La" label="Namika La"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305886" start="1866" end="1876" title="Dras River" label="Dras River"/>
<link wikidata="Q867075" start="1904" end="1911" title="Zoji La" label="Zoji La"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167739" start="2217" end="2221" title="Dras" label="Dras"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="2225" end="2232" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="2571" end="2578" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921210" start="3178" end="3190" title="Leh district" label="Leh district"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863939" start="3196" end="3213" title="Lhachen Palgyigon" label="Lhachen Palgyigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104783529" start="3248" end="3262" title="Kyide Nyimagon" label="Kyide Nyimagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794098" start="3349" end="3355" title="Maryul" label="Maryul"/>
<link wikidata="Q867075" start="3382" end="3389" title="Zoji La" label="Zoji La"/>
<link wikidata="Q7666170" start="3415" end="3428" title="Sengge Zangbo" label="Sengge Zangbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="3501" end="3508" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q837595" start="3520" end="3535" title="Lahul and Spiti" label="Lahul and Spiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446644" start="3750" end="3756" title="Kartse" label="Kartse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407771" start="3792" end="3798" title="Sankoo" label="Sankoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58753" start="3860" end="3873" title="A. H. Francke" label="A. H. Francke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794098" start="3972" end="3978" title="Maryul" label="Maryul"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357509" start="4032" end="4049" title="Ladakh Chronicles" label="Ladakh Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306932" start="4139" end="4146" title="Mulbekh" label="Mulbekh"/>
<link wikidata="Q21050664" start="4151" end="4156" title="Wanla" label="Wanla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167739" start="4172" end="4176" title="Dras" label="Dras"/>
<link wikidata="Q193461" start="4365" end="4373" title="Maitreya" label="Maitreya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306932" start="4428" end="4435" title="Mulbekh" label="Mulbekh"/>
<link wikidata="Q116543126" start="4449" end="4454" title="Apati, Ladakh" label="Apati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361576" start="4502" end="4516" title="Kashmir Valley" label="Kashmir Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817955" start="4589" end="4597" title="Sikandar Shah Miri" label="Sikandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029922" start="4759" end="4773" title="Zayn al-Abidin the Great" label="Zain-ul-Abidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709041" start="5003" end="5010" title="Namgyal dynasty of Ladakh" label="Namgyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q976955" start="5114" end="5120" title="Skardu" label="Skardu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088176" start="5149" end="5152" title="Sod Valley" label="Sod"/>
<link wikidata="Q116843974" start="5196" end="5203" title="Chiktan" label="Chiktan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961848" start="5217" end="5226" title="Namika La" label="Namika La"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080648" start="5261" end="5281" title="Mirza Haidar Dughlat" label="Mirza Haidar Dughlat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709041" start="5520" end="5533" title="Tashi Namgyal (Ladakh)" label="Tashi Namgyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912328" start="5625" end="5642" title="Tsewang Namgyal I" label="Tsewang Namgyal I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260478" start="5647" end="5662" title="Jamyang Namgyal" label="Jamyang Namgyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q976955" start="5768" end="5774" title="Skardu" label="Skardu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288830" start="5801" end="5821" title="Ali Sher Khan Anchan" label="Ali Sher Khan Anchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223390" start="5929" end="5943" title="Sengge Namgyal" label="Sengge Namgyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193554" start="6034" end="6038" title="Guge" label="Guge"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="6081" end="6087" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83672" start="6217" end="6227" title="Shah Jahan" label="Shah Jahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="6730" end="6737" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200667" start="6768" end="6783" title="Ladakh" label="Ladakh Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374312" start="6861" end="6866" title="Dogra dynasty" label="Dogra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12446041" start="6873" end="6884" title="Gulab Singh" label="Gulab Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q255455" start="6888" end="6893" title="Jammu" label="Jammu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83572" start="6929" end="6940" title="Sikh Empire" label="Sikh Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815660" start="6963" end="6971" title="Kishtwar" label="Kishtwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532311" start="6981" end="6994" title="Zorawar Singh Kahluria" label="Zorawar Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815660" start="7060" end="7068" title="Kishtwar" label="Kishtwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637938" start="7115" end="7121" title="Bhotiya" label="Bhotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407771" start="7139" end="7145" title="Sankoo" label="Sankoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446644" start="7162" end="7168" title="Kartse" label="Kartse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088176" start="7401" end="7404" title="Sod Valley" label="Sod"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="7468" end="7475" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361576" start="7586" end="7593" title="Kashmir Valley" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q805804" start="7641" end="7650" title="Baltistan" label="Baltistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q582584" start="8067" end="8087" title="First Anglo-Sikh War" label="First Anglo-Sikh War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305294" start="8096" end="8121" title="Treaty of Amritsar (1846)" label="Treaty of Amritsar (1846)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="8181" end="8195" title="princely state" label="princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571484" start="8199" end="8216" title="Jammu and Kashmir (princely state)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="8223" end="8241" title="British Raj" label="British suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817363" start="8302" end="8307" title="Jammu Division" label="Jammu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712126" start="8312" end="8319" title="Kashmir Division" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q13958895" start="8940" end="8948" title="Kharmang" label="Kharmang"/>
<link wikidata="Q652285" start="9346" end="9372" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1947" label="Indo-Pakistani War of 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167739" start="9447" end="9451" title="Dras" label="Dras"/>
<link wikidata="Q867075" start="9457" end="9469" title="Zoji La" label="Zoji La Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561795" start="9508" end="9521" title="Gilgit Scouts" label="Gilgit Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180" start="9747" end="9764" title="Jammu and Kashmir (state)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="9793" end="9819" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1971" label="Indo-Pakistani War of 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094513" start="9920" end="9935" title="Chewang Rinchen" label="Chewang Rinchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470998" start="10208" end="10224" title="Shimla Agreement" label="Shimla Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078095" start="10446" end="10459" title="Pakistan Army" label="Pakistan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40495" start="10466" end="10482" title="Pervez Musharraf" label="Pervez Musharraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q805804" start="10508" end="10517" title="Baltistan" label="Baltistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q404517" start="10658" end="10668" title="Kargil War" label="Kargil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251708" start="10882" end="10892" title="Point 5353" label="Point 5353"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="11027" end="11046" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q66240948" start="11057" end="11060" title="Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019" label="act"/>
<link wikidata="Q467745" start="11126" end="11141" title="union territory" label="union territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="11364" end="11373" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="11393" end="11402" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="11412" end="11418" title="Summer" label="Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="11453" end="11459" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167739" start="11565" end="11569" title="Dras" label="Dras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093332" start="11665" end="11675" title="Suru River (Indus)" label="Suru River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921210" start="12356" end="12359" title="Leh district" label="Leh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167739" start="12435" end="12439" title="Dras" label="Dras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088176" start="12442" end="12448" title="Kargil" label="Kargil"/>
<link wikidata="Q116843974" start="12450" end="12464" title="Shakar-Chiktan" label="Shakar-Chiktan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407771" start="12466" end="12472" title="Sankoo" label="Sankoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="12474" end="12481" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297208" start="12483" end="12488" title="Padum" label="Padum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167739" start="12504" end="12508" title="Dras" label="Dras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088176" start="12511" end="12517" title="Kargil" label="Kargil"/>
<link wikidata="Q116843974" start="12519" end="12533" title="Shakar-Chiktan" label="Shakar-Chiktan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405464" start="12535" end="12543" title="Shargole" label="Shargole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407771" start="12545" end="12551" title="Sankoo" label="Sankoo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12553" end="12561" title="TSG Tehsil" label="Trespone"/>
<link wikidata="Q96410784" start="12563" end="12571" title="Trespone" label="Trespone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446644" start="12574" end="12581" title="Suru Valley" label="Taisuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="12583" end="12590" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297208" start="12592" end="12597" title="Padum" label="Padum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167739" start="12613" end="12617" title="Dras" label="Dras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088176" start="12620" end="12626" title="Kargil" label="Kargil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12628" end="12634" title="Shakar" label="Shakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q116843974" start="12636" end="12643" title="Chiktan" label="Chiktan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405464" start="12645" end="12653" title="Shargole" label="Shargole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407771" start="12655" end="12661" title="Sankoo" label="Sankoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q96410784" start="12663" end="12671" title="Trespone" label="Trespone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12673" end="12682" title="Saliskote" label="Saliskote"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12684" end="12699" title="Gund Mangalpore" label="Gund Mangalpore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446644" start="12701" end="12708" title="Suru Valley" label="Taisuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297208" start="12710" end="12715" title="Padum" label="Padum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12717" end="12724" title="Lungnaq" label="Lungnaq"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12726" end="12729" title="Cha, Ladakh" label="Cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186181" start="12731" end="12737" title="Zangla" label="Zangla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143900" start="12774" end="12783" title="Panchayati raj in India" label="panchayat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4252512" start="12937" end="12943" title="Ladakh (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626979" start="13018" end="13037" title="Jammu &amp;amp; Kashmir National Conference" label="National Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="13039" end="13047" title="Indian National Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781724" start="13049" end="13052" title="Jammu and Kashmir People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party" label="PDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="13054" end="13057" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="BJP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469247" start="13059" end="13063" title="Ladakh Union Territory Front" label="LUTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556694" start="13137" end="13157" title="Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q126363894" start="13177" end="13191" title="Mohmad Haneefa" label="Mohmad Haneefa"/>
<link wikidata="Q85775497" start="13496" end="13546" title="Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council, Kargil" label="Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council, Kargil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861882" start="13621" end="13632" title="2011 census of India" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q996189" start="13655" end="13665" title="Demographics of India" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726398" start="13739" end="13742" title="Districts of India" label="640"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433379" start="13792" end="13814" title="Family planning in India" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068155" start="13866" end="13875" title="sex ratio" label="sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q639712" start="13883" end="13890" title="Women in India" label="females"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345045" start="13919" end="13932" title="Literacy in India" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="14022" end="14026" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088176" start="14094" end="14105" title="Kargil town" label="Kargil town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167739" start="14107" end="14111" title="Dras" label="Dras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446644" start="14128" end="14139" title="Suru valley" label="Suru valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="14198" end="14214" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q815628" start="14219" end="14222" title="Bön" label="Bön"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="14240" end="14247" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612316" start="14338" end="14346" title="Garkon" label="Garkhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="14391" end="14399" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="14404" end="14411" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910611" start="14500" end="14507" title="Purigpa" label="Purigpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q805677" start="14512" end="14517" title="Balti (people)" label="Balti"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="14528" end="14535" title="Tibetan people" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353320" start="14697" end="14702" title="Shina language" label="Shina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561807" start="14739" end="14745" title="Brokpa" label="Brokpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155334" start="14759" end="14767" title="Dha-Hanu" label="Dha-Hanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789543" start="14823" end="14830" title="Arghons" label="Arghons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4524034" start="14835" end="14840" title="Shina people" label="Shina"/>
<link wikidata="Q567905" start="14897" end="14902" title="Purgi language" label="Purgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33086" start="14914" end="14919" title="Balti language" label="Balti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353320" start="14961" end="14975" title="Shina language" label="Shina language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167739" start="14992" end="14996" title="Dras" label="Dras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4079276" start="15002" end="15009" title="Batalik" label="Batalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="15013" end="15017" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q805804" start="15270" end="15279" title="Baltistan" label="Baltistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905777" start="15297" end="15303" title="Turtuk" label="Turtuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004108" start="15311" end="15323" title="Nubra valley" label="Nubra valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921210" start="15331" end="15343" title="Leh district" label="Leh district"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="15370" end="15377" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q771203" start="15384" end="15392" title="Zangskari language" label="Zanskari"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645577" start="15409" end="15422" title="Ladakhi–Balti languages" label="Ladakhi-Balti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671704" start="15740" end="15746" title="marsia" label="marsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q572371" start="15764" end="15770" title="qasida" label="qasida"/>
<link wikidata="Q393436" start="15843" end="15847" title="Agha (title)" label="Agha"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="15948" end="15956" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="15966" end="15970" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q168193" start="16055" end="16060" title="Najaf" label="Najaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q170573" start="16071" end="16074" title="Qom" label="Qom"/>
<link wikidata="Q924037" start="16216" end="16222" title="Jummah" label="Jummah"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993494" start="16224" end="16245" title="Sheikh Mussa Shariefi" label="Sheikh Mussa Shariefi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16633" end="16641" title="Balti dialect#Literature" label="rgya-glu"/>
<link wikidata="Q281111" start="16658" end="16671" title="Ghazal" label="balti ghazals"/>
<link wikidata="Q30197" start="16854" end="16866" title="Snow leopard" label="Snow leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q131567" start="17144" end="17150" title="marmot" label="marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="17526" end="17545" title="World Wildlife Fund" label="World Wildlife Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q25307" start="17973" end="17988" title="Eurasian magpie" label="Eurasian magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683" start="17991" end="18004" title="house sparrow" label="house sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977" start="18007" end="18013" title="hoopoe" label="hoopoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q843168" start="18016" end="18025" title="rosefinch" label="rosefinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q643836" start="18030" end="18047" title="red-billed chough" label="red-billed chough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729103" start="18051" end="18069" title="eastern chiffchaff" label="eastern chiffchaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q18850" start="18072" end="18088" title="common sandpiper" label="common sandpiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q25418" start="18091" end="18109" title="European goldfinch" label="European goldfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q642922" start="18148" end="18167" title="National Highway 1D (India)" label="National Highway 1D"/>
<link wikidata="Q170115" start="18180" end="18188" title="Srinagar" label="Srinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q230818" start="18192" end="18195" title="Leh" label="Leh"/>
<link wikidata="Q867075" start="18318" end="18325" title="Zoji La" label="Zoji La"/>
<link wikidata="Q170115" start="18362" end="18370" title="Srinagar" label="Srinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="18433" end="18440" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q976955" start="18607" end="18613" title="Skardu" label="Skardu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366583" start="18689" end="18704" title="line of control" label="line of control"/>
<link wikidata="Q642922" start="18877" end="18896" title="National Highway 1D (India)" label="National Highway 1D"/>
<link wikidata="Q170115" start="18916" end="18924" title="Srinagar" label="Srinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47009256" start="18930" end="18936" title="National Highway 301 (India)" label="NH 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297208" start="19067" end="19072" title="Padum" label="Padum"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="19097" end="19104" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902147" start="19118" end="19141" title="Nimmu–Padam–Darcha road" label="Nimmu–Padam–Darcha road"/>
<link wikidata="Q147011" start="19166" end="19173" title="Zanskar" label="Zanskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q837595" start="19205" end="19211" title="Lahaul and Spiti district" label="Lahaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629936" start="19304" end="19318" title="Kargil Airport" label="Kargil Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="19386" end="19402" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467518" start="19464" end="19475" title="UDAN" label="UDAN scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431870" start="19549" end="19580" title="Kushok Bakula Rimpochee Airport" label="Kushok Bakula Rimpochee Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907567" start="19731" end="19748" title="Bhanupli–Leh line" label="Bhanupli–Leh line"/>
<link wikidata="Q86751425" start="19796" end="19823" title="List of districts of Ladakh" label="List of districts of Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q128812368" start="19826" end="19861" title="List of villages in Kargil district" label="List of villages in Kargil district"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135625" start="19864" end="19883" title="Geography of Ladakh" label="Geography of Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465936" start="19886" end="19903" title="Tourism in Ladakh" label="Tourism in Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q85775497" start="19906" end="19956" title="Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council, Kargil" label="Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council, Kargil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803743" wikidata="Q4579100" url="?curid=803743" title="1979–80 United States network television schedule">
<text>The following is the 1979–80 network television schedule for the three major English language commercial broadcast networks in the United States. The schedule covers primetime hours from September 1979 through August 1980. The schedule is followed by a list per network of returning series, new series, and series cancelled after the 1978–79 season. All times are Eastern and Pacific, with certain exceptions, such as &quot;Monday Night Football&quot;.

New fall series are highlighted in bold.

Each of the 30 highest-rated shows is listed with its rank and rating as determined by Nielsen Media Research.

: Yellow indicates the programs in the top 10 for the season.
: Cyan indicates the programs in the top 20 for the season.
: Magenta indicates the programs in the top 30 for the season.

&quot;PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, was in operation but the schedule was set by each local station.&quot;

== Sunday ==
(*) Formerly known as &quot;All in the Family&quot;.

== Monday ==
== Tuesday ==
== Wednesday ==
== Thursday ==
(*) Formerly known as &quot;Mrs. Columbo&quot;

== Friday ==
== Saturday ==
Note: In November 1979, CBS took &quot;Paris&quot; off their Saturday night lineup before scheduling it in the 10:00-11:00 pm time slot on Tuesdays beginning December 4.

==By network==

===ABC===
Returning Series
*&quot;20/20&quot;
*&quot;The ABC Friday Night Movie&quot;
*&quot;The ABC Monday Night Movie&quot;
*&quot;ABC NFL Monday Night Football&quot;
*&quot;The ABC Sunday Night Movie&quot;
*&quot;Angie&quot;
*&quot;Barney Miller&quot;
*&quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot;
*&quot;Eight Is Enough&quot;
*&quot;Family&quot;
*&quot;Fantasy Island&quot;
*&quot;Happy Days&quot;
*&quot;Laverne &amp; Shirley&quot;
*&quot;The Love Boat&quot;
*&quot;Monday Night Baseball&quot;
*&quot;Mork &amp; Mindy&quot;
*&quot;The Ropers&quot;
*&quot;Salvage 1&quot;
*&quot;Soap&quot;
*&quot;Taxi&quot;
*&quot;Three&#x27;s Company&quot;
*&quot;Vega$&quot;
New Series
*240-Robert
*The Associates
*B.A.D. Cats *
*Benson
*Detective School
*Galactica 1980 *
*Goodtime Girls *
*Hart to Hart
*The Lazarus Syndrome
*A New Kind of Family
*Nobody&#x27;s Perfect *
*One in a Million *
*Out of the Blue *
*Stone *
*Tenspeed and Brown Shoe *
*That&#x27;s Incredible! *
*When the Whistle Blows *
Not returning from 1978–79:
*&quot;13 Queens Boulevard&quot;
*&quot;Apple Pie&quot;
*&quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot;
*&quot;Carol Burnett &amp; Company&quot;
*&quot;Carter Country&quot;
*&quot;Delta House&quot;
*&quot;Doctors&#x27; Private Lives&quot;
*&quot;Donny &amp; Marie&quot;
*&quot;Friends&quot;
*&quot;The Hardy Boys Mysteries&quot;
*&quot;How the West Was Won&quot;
*&quot;Lucan&quot;
*&quot;The MacKenzies of Paradise Cove&quot;
*&quot;Makin&#x27; It&quot;
*&quot;Operation Petticoat&quot;
*&quot;Starsky &amp; Hutch&quot;
*&quot;Welcome Back, Kotter&quot;
*&quot;What&#x27;s Happening!!&quot;
===CBS===
Returning Series
*&quot;60 Minutes&quot;
*&quot;Alice&quot;
*&quot;The Bad News Bears&quot;
*&quot;Barnaby Jones&quot;
*&quot;The Chisholms&quot;
*&quot;Dallas&quot;
*&quot;The Dukes of Hazzard&quot;
*&quot;Hawaii Five-O&quot;
*&quot;The Incredible Hulk&quot;
*&quot;The Jeffersons&quot;
*&quot;Lou Grant&quot;
*&quot;M*A*S*H&quot;
*&quot;One Day at a Time&quot;
*&quot;The Waltons&quot;
*&quot;The White Shadow&quot;
*&quot;WKRP in Cincinnati&quot;
New Series
*Archie Bunker&#x27;s Place 
*Beyond Westworld *
*Big Shamus, Little Shamus
*California Fever
*The Contender *
*Flo *
*Hagen *
*House Calls *
*Knots Landing
*The Last Resort
*Palmerstown, U.S.A. *
*Paris
*Phyl &amp; Mikhy *
*The Stockard Channing Show *
*Struck by Lightning
*That&#x27;s My Line *
*The Tim Conway Show *
*Trapper John, M.D.
*Universe *
*Walter Cronkite&#x27;s Universe *
*Working Stiffs
*Young Maverick
Not returning from 1978–79:
*&quot;All in the Family&quot;
*&quot;The Amazing Spider-Man&quot;
*&quot;The American Girls&quot;
*&quot;Billy&quot;
*&quot;Dorothy&quot;
*&quot;Flatbush&quot;
*&quot;Flying High&quot;
*&quot;Good Times&quot;
*&quot;Hanging In&quot;
*&quot;In the Beginning&quot;
*&quot;Just Friends&quot;
*&quot;Kaz&quot;
*&quot;Married: The First Year&quot;
*&quot;Mary&quot;
*&quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Hour&quot;
*&quot;Miss Winslow and Son&quot;
*&quot;Moses the Lawgiver&quot;
*&quot;The New Adventures of Wonder Woman&quot;
*&quot;The Paper Chase&quot;
*&quot;Rhoda&quot;
*&quot;Time Express&quot;
===NBC===
Returning Series
*&quot;B.J. and the Bear&quot;
*&quot;The Big Event&quot;
*&quot;CHiPs&quot;
*&quot;Diff&#x27;rent Strokes&quot;
*&quot;Disney&#x27;s Wonderful World&quot;
*&quot;Hello, Larry&quot;
*&quot;Kate Loves a Mystery&quot;
*&quot;Little House on the Prairie&quot;
*&quot;NBC Monday Night at the Movies&quot;
*&quot;Quincy, M.E.&quot;
*&quot;Real People&quot;
*&quot;The Rockford Files&quot;
New Series
*The Big Show *
*Buck Rogers in the 25th Century
*Eischied
*The Facts of Life *
*From Here to Eternity *
*Good Time Harry *
*Here&#x27;s Boomer *
*Joe&#x27;s World *
*A Man Called Sloane
*Me and Maxx *
*The Misadventures of Sheriff Lobo
*Pink Lady
*Sanford *
*The Six O&#x27;Clock Follies *
*Skag *
*Shirley
*United States *
Not returning from 1978–79:
*&quot;Brothers and Sisters&quot;
*&quot;Cliffhangers&quot;
*&quot;Comedy Theatre&quot;
*&quot;David Cassidy: Man Undercover&quot;
*&quot;Dick Clark&#x27;s Live Wednesday&quot;
*&quot;The Eddie Capra Mysteries&quot;
*&quot;Grandpa Goes to Washington&quot;
*&quot;Harris and Company&quot;
*&quot;Highcliffe Manor&quot;
*&quot;Hizzonner&quot;
*&quot;Joe &amp; Valerie&quot;
*&quot;Laugh-In&quot;
*&quot;Lifeline&quot;
*&quot;Presenting Susan Anton&quot;
*&quot;Project U.F.O.&quot;
*&quot;The Runaways&quot;
*&quot;Supertrain&quot;
*&quot;$weepstake$&quot;
*&quot;Sword of Justice&quot;
*&quot;Turnabout&quot;
*&quot;W.E.B.&quot;
*&quot;The Waverly Wonders&quot;
*&quot;Weekend&quot;
*&quot;Who&#x27;s Watching the Kids&quot;
*&quot;Whodunnit?&quot;
*&quot;The Wonderful World of Disney&quot;

Note: The * indicates that the program was introduced in midseason.

==References==
==Additional sources==
* Castleman, H. &amp; Podrazik, W. (1982). &quot;Watching TV: Four Decades of American Television&quot;. New York: McGraw-Hill. 314 pp.
* McNeil, Alex. &quot;Total Television&quot;. Fourth edition. New York: Penguin Books. .
* Brooks, Tim &amp; Marsh, Earle (1985). &quot;The Complete Directory to Prime Time Network TV Shows&quot; (3rd ed.). New York: Ballantine. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4579100" start="21" end="56" title="1979–80 United States network television schedule" label="1979–80 network television schedule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414913" start="105" end="144" title="List of United States over-the-air television networks" label="broadcast networks in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q745818" start="166" end="175" title="primetime" label="primetime"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="253" end="269" title="#By network" label="list per network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578557" start="334" end="348" title="1978-79 United States network television schedule" label="1978–79 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="424" end="445" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579100" start="489" end="493" title="1979–80 United States network television schedule" label="bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="583" end="605" title="Nielsen Media Research" label="Nielsen Media Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="800" end="803" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048856" start="951" end="968" title="All in the Family" label="All in the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q868399" start="1063" end="1075" title="Mrs. Columbo" label="Mrs. Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="1301" end="1304" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q197867" start="1332" end="1337" title="20/20 (American TV program)" label="20/20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="1431" end="1460" title="ABC NFL Monday Night Football" label="ABC NFL Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712049" start="1474" end="1500" title="The ABC Sunday Night Movie" label="The ABC Sunday Night Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617327" start="1514" end="1519" title="Angie (TV series)" label="Angie"/>
<link wikidata="Q808487" start="1533" end="1546" title="Barney Miller" label="Barney Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q617274" start="1560" end="1581" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093154" start="1595" end="1610" title="Eight Is Enough" label="Eight Is Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277124" start="1624" end="1630" title="Family (1976 TV series)" label="Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395913" start="1644" end="1658" title="Fantasy Island" label="Fantasy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q518589" start="1672" end="1682" title="Happy Days" label="Happy Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247693" start="1696" end="1717" title="Laverne &amp;amp; Shirley" label="Laverne &amp;amp; Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q181998" start="1731" end="1744" title="The Love Boat" label="The Love Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898640" start="1758" end="1779" title="Monday Night Baseball" label="Monday Night Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q988037" start="1793" end="1809" title="Mork &amp;amp; Mindy" label="Mork &amp;amp; Mindy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790434" start="1823" end="1833" title="The Ropers" label="The Ropers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897973" start="1847" end="1856" title="Salvage 1" label="Salvage 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247292" start="1870" end="1874" title="Soap (TV series)" label="Soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q427529" start="1888" end="1892" title="Taxi (TV series)" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q245996" start="1906" end="1926" title="Three&amp;#x27;s Company" label="Three&amp;#x27;s Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q932929" start="1940" end="1945" title="Vegas (1978 TV series)" label="Vega$"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598220" start="1964" end="1974" title="240-Robert" label="240-Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791087" start="1976" end="1990" title="The Associates (American TV series)" label="The Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631673" start="1992" end="2003" title="B.A.D. Cats" label="B.A.D. Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q818181" start="2007" end="2013" title="Benson (TV series)" label="Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265634" start="2015" end="2031" title="Detective School" label="Detective School"/>
<link wikidata="Q604202" start="2033" end="2047" title="Galactica 1980" label="Galactica 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583635" start="2051" end="2065" title="Goodtime Girls" label="Goodtime Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541739" start="2069" end="2081" title="Hart to Hart" label="Hart to Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746476" start="2083" end="2103" title="The Lazarus Syndrome" label="The Lazarus Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658514" start="2105" end="2125" title="A New Kind of Family" label="A New Kind of Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045911" start="2127" end="2148" title="Nobody&amp;#x27;s Perfect (American TV series)" label="Nobody&amp;#x27;s Perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093515" start="2152" end="2168" title="One in a Million (American TV series)" label="One in a Million"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887527" start="2172" end="2187" title="Out of the Blue (1979 TV series)" label="Out of the Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973821" start="2191" end="2196" title="Stone (TV series)" label="Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216066" start="2200" end="2223" title="Tenspeed and Brown Shoe" label="Tenspeed and Brown Shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710934" start="2227" end="2250" title="That&amp;#x27;s Incredible!" label="That&amp;#x27;s Incredible!"/>
<link wikidata="Q13471874" start="2254" end="2276" title="When the Whistle Blows (TV series)" label="When the Whistle Blows"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578557" start="2298" end="2305" title="1978–79 United States network television schedule" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549364" start="2314" end="2333" title="13 Queens Boulevard" label="13 Queens Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781212" start="2347" end="2356" title="Apple Pie (TV series)" label="Apple Pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367132" start="2370" end="2390" title="Battlestar Galactica (1978 TV series)" label="Battlestar Galactica"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188159" start="2404" end="2431" title="Carol Burnett &amp;amp; Company" label="Carol Burnett &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047144" start="2445" end="2459" title="Carter Country" label="Carter Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254664" start="2473" end="2484" title="Delta House" label="Delta House"/>
<link wikidata="Q18914945" start="2498" end="2525" title="Doctors&amp;#x27; Private Lives" label="Doctors&amp;#x27; Private Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296720" start="2539" end="2556" title="Donny &amp;amp; Marie (1976 TV series)" label="Donny &amp;amp; Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504128" start="2570" end="2577" title="Friends (1979 TV series)" label="Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319749" start="2591" end="2615" title="The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries" label="The Hardy Boys Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q527569" start="2629" end="2649" title="How the West Was Won (TV series)" label="How the West Was Won"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421510" start="2663" end="2668" title="Lucan (American TV series)" label="Lucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28126693" start="2682" end="2713" title="The MacKenzies of Paradise Cove" label="The MacKenzies of Paradise Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739524" start="2727" end="2741" title="Makin&amp;#x27; It (TV series)" label="Makin&amp;#x27; It"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743121" start="2755" end="2774" title="Operation Petticoat (TV series)" label="Operation Petticoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q196226" start="2788" end="2807" title="Starsky &amp;amp; Hutch" label="Starsky &amp;amp; Hutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421950" start="2821" end="2841" title="Welcome Back, Kotter" label="Welcome Back, Kotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990769" start="2855" end="2878" title="What&amp;#x27;s Happening!!" label="What&amp;#x27;s Happening!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="2888" end="2891" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="2919" end="2929" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248019" start="2943" end="2948" title="Alice (American TV series)" label="Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211831" start="2962" end="2980" title="The Bad News Bears (TV series)" label="The Bad News Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q808420" start="2994" end="3007" title="Barnaby Jones" label="Barnaby Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199326" start="3021" end="3034" title="The Chisholms" label="The Chisholms"/>
<link wikidata="Q168708" start="3048" end="3054" title="Dallas (1978 TV series)" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304408" start="3068" end="3088" title="The Dukes of Hazzard" label="The Dukes of Hazzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q697407" start="3102" end="3115" title="Hawaii Five-O (1968 TV series)" label="Hawaii Five-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q670579" start="3129" end="3148" title="The Incredible Hulk (1978 TV series)" label="The Incredible Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q153227" start="3162" end="3176" title="The Jeffersons" label="The Jeffersons"/>
<link wikidata="Q421733" start="3190" end="3199" title="Lou Grant (TV series)" label="Lou Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q494244" start="3213" end="3220" title="M*A*S*H (TV series)" label="M*A*S*H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248669" start="3234" end="3251" title="One Day at a Time (1975 TV series)" label="One Day at a Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q48777" start="3265" end="3276" title="The Waltons" label="The Waltons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991427" start="3290" end="3306" title="The White Shadow (TV series)" label="The White Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056641" start="3320" end="3338" title="WKRP in Cincinnati" label="WKRP in Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698050" start="3357" end="3383" title="Archie Bunker&amp;#x27;s Place" label="Archie Bunker&amp;#x27;s Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q853301" start="3386" end="3402" title="Beyond Westworld" label="Beyond Westworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888803" start="3406" end="3431" title="Big Shamus, Little Shamus" label="Big Shamus, Little Shamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650739" start="3433" end="3449" title="California Fever (TV series)" label="California Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746632" start="3468" end="3471" title="Flo (TV series)" label="Flo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782397" start="3475" end="3480" title="Hagen (TV series)" label="Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4014812" start="3484" end="3495" title="House Calls (TV series)" label="House Calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q640535" start="3499" end="3512" title="Knots Landing" label="Knots Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745969" start="3514" end="3529" title="The Last Resort (American TV series)" label="The Last Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q27860343" start="3531" end="3550" title="Palmerstown, U.S.A." label="Palmerstown, U.S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q930765" start="3554" end="3559" title="Paris (1979 TV series)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856000" start="3561" end="3577" title="Phyl &amp;amp; Mikhy" label="Phyl &amp;amp; Mikhy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766557" start="3581" end="3607" title="The Stockard Channing Show" label="The Stockard Channing Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624974" start="3611" end="3630" title="Struck by Lightning (TV series)" label="Struck by Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710974" start="3632" end="3651" title="That&amp;#x27;s My Line" label="That&amp;#x27;s My Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110385" start="3655" end="3674" title="The Tim Conway Show (1980 TV series)" label="The Tim Conway Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q256208" start="3678" end="3696" title="Trapper John, M.D." label="Trapper John, M.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q8034951" start="3745" end="3759" title="Working Stiffs (TV series)" label="Working Stiffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794236" start="3761" end="3775" title="Young Maverick" label="Young Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578557" start="3795" end="3802" title="1978–79 United States network television schedule" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048856" start="3811" end="3828" title="All in the Family" label="All in the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462394" start="3842" end="3864" title="The Amazing Spider-Man (TV series)" label="The Amazing Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713484" start="3878" end="3896" title="The American Girls (TV series)" label="The American Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912081" start="3910" end="3915" title="Billy (1979 TV series)" label="Billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714371" start="3929" end="3936" title="Dorothy (TV series)" label="Dorothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457867" start="3950" end="3958" title="Flatbush (TV series)" label="Flatbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463445" start="3972" end="3983" title="Flying High (TV series)" label="Flying High"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248045" start="3997" end="4007" title="Good Times" label="Good Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647996" start="4021" end="4031" title="Hanging In" label="Hanging In"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996766" start="4045" end="4061" title="In the Beginning (TV series)" label="In the Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617936" start="4075" end="4087" title="Stockard Channing in Just Friends" label="Just Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248157" start="4101" end="4104" title="Kaz (TV series)" label="Kaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778747" start="4155" end="4159" title="Mary (1978 TV series)" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750494" start="4173" end="4198" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Hour" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672088" start="4246" end="4264" title="Moses the Lawgiver" label="Moses the Lawgiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247495" start="4278" end="4312" title="Wonder Woman (TV series)" label="The New Adventures of Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756018" start="4326" end="4341" title="The Paper Chase (TV series)" label="The Paper Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247556" start="4355" end="4360" title="Rhoda" label="Rhoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991415" start="4374" end="4386" title="Time Express" label="Time Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="4396" end="4399" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987517" start="4427" end="4444" title="B.J. and the Bear" label="B.J. and the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023688" start="4485" end="4490" title="CHiPs" label="CHiPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478848" start="4504" end="4526" title="Diff&amp;#x27;rent Strokes" label="Diff&amp;#x27;rent Strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247718" start="4540" end="4569" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s Wonderful World" label="Disney&amp;#x27;s Wonderful World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708520" start="4583" end="4595" title="Hello, Larry" label="Hello, Larry"/>
<link wikidata="Q868399" start="4609" end="4629" title="Mrs. Columbo" label="Kate Loves a Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q839869" start="4643" end="4670" title="Little House on the Prairie (TV series)" label="Little House on the Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752977" start="4684" end="4714" title="NBC Monday Night at the Movies" label="NBC Monday Night at the Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247732" start="4728" end="4740" title="Quincy, M.E." label="Quincy, M.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q7301013" start="4754" end="4765" title="Real People (TV program)" label="Real People"/>
<link wikidata="Q283660" start="4779" end="4797" title="The Rockford Files" label="The Rockford Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717785" start="4816" end="4828" title="The Big Show (TV series)" label="The Big Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q999370" start="4832" end="4863" title="Buck Rogers in the 25th Century (TV series)" label="Buck Rogers in the 25th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349898" start="4865" end="4873" title="Eischied" label="Eischied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517403" start="4875" end="4892" title="The Facts of Life (TV series)" label="The Facts of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700715" start="4896" end="4917" title="From Here to Eternity (TV series)" label="From Here to Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426944" start="4921" end="4936" title="Good Time Harry" label="Good Time Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q446428" start="4940" end="4958" title="Here&amp;#x27;s Boomer" label="Here&amp;#x27;s Boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208242" start="4962" end="4978" title="Joe&amp;#x27;s World" label="Joe&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486738" start="4982" end="5001" title="A Man Called Sloane" label="A Man Called Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853414" start="5003" end="5014" title="Me and Maxx" label="Me and Maxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631663" start="5018" end="5051" title="The Misadventures of Sheriff Lobo" label="The Misadventures of Sheriff Lobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196034" start="5053" end="5062" title="Pink Lady (TV series)" label="Pink Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283385" start="5064" end="5071" title="Sanford (TV series)" label="Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962445" start="5107" end="5111" title="Skag" label="Skag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498678" start="5115" end="5122" title="Shirley (TV series)" label="Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965121" start="5124" end="5137" title="United States (TV series)" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578557" start="5159" end="5166" title="1978–79 United States network television schedule" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975686" start="5175" end="5195" title="Brothers and Sisters (1979 TV series)" label="Brothers and Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132837" start="5209" end="5221" title="Cliffhangers (TV series)" label="Cliffhangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q126888576" start="5235" end="5249" title="Comedy Theatre (TV series)" label="Comedy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5263" end="5292" title="David Cassidy: Man Undercover" label="David Cassidy: Man Undercover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272764" start="5306" end="5338" title="Dick Clark&amp;#x27;s Live Wednesday" label="Dick Clark&amp;#x27;s Live Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q14752495" start="5352" end="5377" title="The Eddie Capra Mysteries" label="The Eddie Capra Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878254" start="5391" end="5417" title="Grandpa Goes to Washington" label="Grandpa Goes to Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665142" start="5431" end="5449" title="Harris and Company" label="Harris and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785555" start="5463" end="5479" title="Highcliffe Manor" label="Highcliffe Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873048" start="5493" end="5502" title="Hizzonner" label="Hizzonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858013" start="5516" end="5533" title="Joe &amp;amp; Valerie" label="Joe &amp;amp; Valerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235088" start="5547" end="5555" title="Laugh-In" label="Laugh-In"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545401" start="5569" end="5577" title="Lifeline (1978 TV series)" label="Lifeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q274204" start="5591" end="5613" title="Susan Anton" label="Presenting Susan Anton"/>
<link wikidata="Q666919" start="5627" end="5641" title="Project U.F.O." label="Project U.F.O."/>
<link wikidata="Q28229102" start="5655" end="5667" title="The Runaways (TV series)" label="The Runaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q367772" start="5681" end="5691" title="Supertrain" label="Supertrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q111963088" start="5705" end="5716" title="Sweepstakes (TV series)" label="$weepstake$"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227167" start="5730" end="5746" title="Sword of Justice (TV series)" label="Sword of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855793" start="5760" end="5769" title="Turnabout (TV series)" label="Turnabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945185" start="5783" end="5789" title="W.E.B." label="W.E.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q7773769" start="5803" end="5822" title="The Waverly Wonders" label="The Waverly Wonders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979415" start="5836" end="5843" title="Weekend (1973 TV series)" label="Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629131" start="5857" end="5885" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Watching the Kids" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Watching the Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963258" start="5899" end="5909" title="Whodunnit? (1979 U.S. TV series)" label="Whodunnit?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247718" start="5923" end="5952" title="Walt Disney anthology television series" label="The Wonderful World of Disney"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803745" wikidata="Q3126467" url="?curid=803745" title="Haminoeidae">
<text>Haminoeidae, commonly known as the haminoeid bubble snail family, is a taxonomic family of sea snails, marine opisthobranch gastropod mollusks in the superfamily Haminoeoidea.

The name of this family has long been controversial, and used to be Atyidae or Atydidae. Another, but incorrect, spelling was Haminaeidae (See (ICZN) 2000. Opinion 1942).

A number of genera have been proposed for this family, but the species are hard to identify (or sometimes impossible to identify) by looking only at the external characteristics. Until the internal anatomy of &#x27;wet&#x27; specimens has been fully described, the status of many of the genera listed here is uncertain.

==Distribution==
These bubble snails occur in all warm or temperate seas.

==Habitat==
These are sand dwellers or they live on muddy bottoms, in bays, estuaries, and close to the shore in tidepools.

==Description of the live animal==
These are colorful snails, that can partially take the color of the sea floor.

Their large cephalic shield is rounded at the front, but deeply lobed behind. The mantle protrudes behind the shell. The shell is partially or completely enfolded by lateral parapodial (=fleshy winglike outgrowths) lobes.

==Shell description==
Their shell varies in size according to the species, from 3 mm to 30 mm.

The shell is ovoid, thin and translucent. It may be smooth or have spiral grooves (striae). The umbilical apex is sunken or enclosed and no longer visible. Large body whorl with fine spiral striations. Smooth columella. The thin outer lip of the aperture extends beyond the apex of the shell and is thus longer than the body whorl. The aperture narrows posteriorly and is wider anteriorly.
==Ecology==
These snails are herbivorous. Their diet consists of various kinds of green algae. They can survive in brackish water.

They are hermaphrodites. Their eggs are deposited in round or oval jellylike strings, attached to eelgrass or sand.

&quot;Atys naucum&quot; and &quot;Atys cylindricum&quot; are known to show biological fluorescence.

==Genera and species==
Genera within the family Haminoeidae include:
* &quot;Aliculastrum&quot; 
* &quot;Atys&quot; 
* &quot;Bakawan&quot; 
* &quot;Bullacta&quot; - with the only species: &quot;Bullacta exarata&quot; (Philippi, 1849)
* &quot;Confettiella&quot; 
* &quot;Cylichnatys&quot; 
* &quot;Diniatys&quot; 
* &quot;Haloa&quot; 
* &quot;Haminella&quot; 
* &quot;Haminoea&quot;
* &quot;Lamprohaminoea&quot; 
* &quot;Liloa&quot; 
* &quot;Papawera&quot; 
* &quot;Phanerophthalmus&quot; 
* &quot;Roxaniella&quot; 
* &quot;Sericohaminoea&quot; : synonym of &quot;Haloa&quot; 
* &quot;Smaragdinella&quot; 
* &quot;Vellicolla&quot; 
* &quot;Weinkauffia&quot; 

;Genera brought into synonymy:
* &quot;Alicula&quot; : synonym of &quot;Aliculastrum&quot; (invalid: junior homonym of &quot;Alicula&quot; ; &quot;Aliculastrum&quot; is a replacement name)
* &quot;Atyscaphander&quot; : synonym of &quot;Bullacta&quot; 
* &quot;Austrocylichna&quot; : synonym of &quot;Roxaniella&quot; 
* &quot;Cryptophthalmus&quot; : synonym of &quot;Phanerophthalmus&quot; (invalid: junior homonym of &quot;Cryptophthalmus&quot; [Crustacea]; &quot;Lathophthalmus&quot; is a replacement name)
* &quot;Dinia&quot; : synonym of &quot;Diniatys&quot; 
* &quot;Glauconella&quot; : synonym of &quot;Smaragdinella&quot; 
* &quot;Haminaea&quot; : synonym of &quot;Haminoea&quot; 
* &quot;Haminoeatys&quot; : synonym of &quot;Liloa&quot; (unavailable name: nomen nudum)
* &quot;Lathophthalmus&quot; : synonym of &quot;Phanerophthalmus&quot; 
* &quot;Limulatys&quot; : synonym of &quot;Weinkauffia&quot; 
* &quot;Linteria&quot; : synonym of &quot;Smaragdinella&quot; 
* &quot;Micraenigma&quot; : synonym of &quot;Diniatys&quot; 
* &quot;Naucum&quot; : synonym of &quot;Atys&quot; (objective synonym)
* &quot;Nipponatys&quot; ; synonym of &quot;Aliculastrum&quot; 
* &quot;Parahaminoea&quot; : synonym of &quot;Haloa&quot; (unavailable name: no diagnosis)
* &quot;Penthominea&quot; : synonym of &quot;Haloa&quot; 
* &quot;Sao&quot; : synonym of &quot;Pyrunculus&quot; 
* &quot;Sinohaminea&quot; : synonym of &quot;Bullacta&quot; 
* &quot;Tepidatys&quot; : synonym of &quot;Weinkauffia&quot; 
* &quot;Sphaeratys&quot; : synonym of &quot;Oxygyrus&quot; 
* &quot;Vitreohaminoea&quot; : synonym of &quot;Haloa&quot; (junior subjective synonym)
* &quot;Xanthonella&quot; : synonym of &quot;Phanerophthalmus&quot; 

;Brought to another family:
* &quot;Micratys&quot; : belongs to the family [unassigned] Cephalaspidea 
* &quot;Mimatys&quot; : belongs to the family Alacuppidae.
* &quot;Mnestia&quot; ; belongs to the family Mnestiidae
*Genus &quot;Diniatys&quot;
**&quot;Diniatys dentifer&quot; A. Adams, 1850 - Distribution: Indo-Pacific, Length : 10 mm, Description : this herbivore is found on the bluegreen algae &quot;Lyngbya majuscula&quot;, &quot;Schizothrix&quot; and &quot;Hormothamnion&quot;. There is a pointed projection on the columella. The color varies between green and various shades of brown. The two black eyes are on the back of the cephalic shield.
**&quot;Diniatys monodonta&quot; 
***Distribution: Japan
*Genus &quot;Haloa&quot;
**&quot;Haloa binotata&quot; 
***Distribution : Indo Pacific
**&quot;Haloa constricta&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
**&quot;Haloa crocata&quot; 
***Distribution : Hawaii
**&quot;Haloa flavescens&quot; 
***Distribution : Indo Pacific
**&quot;Haloa fusca&quot; 
***Distribution : Indo Pacific
**&quot;Haloa japonica&quot; Japanese paper-bubble
***Distribution : Indo Pacific, Japan
***Length : 10 mm
***Description : species with beautiful colors : glassy white background with tiny white spots and dark patches with orange dots.
**&quot;Haloa kawamurai&quot; 
***Distribution : Indo Pacific
**&quot;Haloa margaritoides&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
***Length : 7 mm
***Description : intertidal among seaweeds
**&quot;Haloa nigripunctata&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
**&quot;Haloa rotundata&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
**&quot;Haloa vitrea&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
**&quot;Haloa yamaguchii&quot; 
***Distribution : Indo Pacific
*Genus &quot;Hamineobulla&quot; (&quot;incertae sedis&quot;; may be belong to the family Bullidae)
**&quot;Hamineobulla kawamurai&quot; 
***Distribution : Okinawa
***Length : 6 mm
***Description : brown animal with short cephalic shield; on the shell there are a few transverse rows with brighter dots
*Genus &quot;Liloa&quot; 
Since most of these bubble snails were named on the basis of the shell alone, the occurrence of synonyms among the following species is quite possible.
**&quot;Liloa brevis&quot; 
***Distribution : Australia
***Description : elongate body; parapodial flaps cover only the front of the thin, fragile shell
**&quot;Liloa curta&quot; 
***Distribution : Western Pacific
***Description : elongate body; the color can vary from a few dark spots on a translucent body, to almost completely dark.
**&quot;Liloa incisula&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
**&quot;Liloa laeta&quot; 
***Distribution : Indo Pacific
**&quot;Liloa nipponensis&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
**&quot;Liloa porcellana&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
**&quot;Liloa tomaculum&quot; 
***Distribution : Hawaiian Islands
**&quot;Liloa translucens&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
*Genus &quot;Limulatys&quot; 
**&quot;Limulatys constrictus&quot; 
***Distribution : Indo Pacific
***Length : 16 mm
**&quot;Limulatys crassilabris&quot; 
***Distribution : S.E. Asia, Thailand
***Length : 8 mm
**&quot;Limulatys fusiformis&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
**&quot;Limulatys muscarius&quot; 
***Distribution : Indo Pacific, Philippines
**&quot;Limulatys okamotoi&quot; 
***Distribution : Indo Pacific
**&quot;Limulatys ooformis&quot; Egg-shaped Bubble
***Distribution : Indo Pacific, Philippines, Thailand
***Length : 20 mm
**&quot;Limulatys okamotoi&quot; 
***Distribution : Philippines
***Length : 9 mm
**&quot;Limulatys reliquus&quot; 
***Distribution : New Zealand
**&quot;Limulatys scobriculatus&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
**&quot;Limulatys tortuosus&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
*Genus &quot;Micratys&quot; 
**&quot;Micratys ovum&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan, Philippines
***Length : 2 mm
*Genus &quot;Mimatys&quot; 
**&quot;Mimatys fukuokaensis&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan, Philippines
***Length : 2.5 mm
*Genus &quot;Nipponatys&quot; 
**&quot;Nipponatys amakusaensis&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
**&quot;Nipponatys oshimai&quot; 
**&quot;Nipponatys volvulina&quot; 
***Distribution : Japan
*Genus &quot;Sericohaminoea&quot; 
*Genus &quot;Sphaeratys&quot; (?)
*Genus &quot;Ventomnestia&quot;
**&quot;Ventomnestia bizona&quot; 
**&quot;Ventomnestia colorata&quot; 
**&quot;Ventomnestia villica&quot; (may be a synonym of &quot;Ventomnestia bizona&quot;)
***Distribution : Guam
***Length : 5.5 mm
***Description : a bubble snail with a great variation in color, from white to brown, but always with a characteristic pattern; heavy shell; radula formula : 2.1.2; 
*Genus &quot;Weinkauffia&quot; 
**&quot;Weinkauffia diaphana&quot; 
***Distribution : West Africa
***Description : has similar gizzard plates as Atys multistriatus
**&quot;Weinkauffia turgidula&quot; 
***Distribution : Adriatic Sea, Malta, Turkey
***Length : 5 mm
***Description : fossils of this species have been found in sediments of Pliocene age in Italy.


==References==
* Vaught, K.C. (1989). &quot;A classification of the living Mollusca&quot;. American Malacologists: Melbourne, FL (USA). . XII, 195 pp</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3126467" start="0" end="11" title="Haminoeidae" label="Haminoeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126467" start="35" end="64" title="Haminoeidae" label="haminoeid bubble snail family"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="71" end="80" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="81" end="87" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="103" end="109" title="marine (ocean)" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q752186" start="110" end="123" title="opisthobranch" label="opisthobranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="124" end="133" title="gastropod" label="gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="134" end="141" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645311" start="162" end="174" title="Haminoeoidea" label="Haminoeoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="547" end="554" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380786" start="1067" end="1073" title="Mantle (mollusc)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003497" start="1236" end="1241" title="gastropod shell" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1400" end="1409" title="Umbilicum" label="umbilical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779412" start="1410" end="1414" title="Apex (mollusc)" label="apex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936977" start="1466" end="1476" title="body whorl" label="body whorl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346768" start="1550" end="1558" title="Aperture (mollusc)" label="aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779412" start="1578" end="1582" title="Apex (mollusc)" label="apex"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="1723" end="1734" title="Herbivore" label="herbivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q271844" start="1776" end="1786" title="green alga" label="green alga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="1835" end="1849" title="Intersex" label="hermaphrodites"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="1857" end="1860" title="Egg (biology)" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157371" start="1924" end="1932" title="Zostera" label="eelgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870193" start="1949" end="1960" title="Atys naucum" label="Atys naucum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1977" end="1993" title="Atys cylindricum" label="Atys cylindricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="2029" end="2041" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726360" start="2121" end="2133" title="Aliculastrum" label="Aliculastrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730527" start="2149" end="2153" title="Atys (gastropod)" label="Atys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2169" end="2176" title="Bakawan (gastropod)" label="Bakawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q851889" start="2192" end="2200" title="Bullacta" label="Bullacta"/>
<link wikidata="Q851889" start="2238" end="2254" title="Bullacta exarata" label="Bullacta exarata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2286" end="2298" title="Confettiella" label="Confettiella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2314" end="2325" title="Cylichnatys" label="Cylichnatys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2341" end="2349" title="Diniatys" label="Diniatys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2365" end="2370" title="Haloa (gastropod)" label="Haloa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2386" end="2395" title="Haminella" label="Haminella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033382" start="2411" end="2419" title="Haminoea" label="Haminoea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2434" end="2448" title="Lamprohaminoea" label="Lamprohaminoea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2464" end="2469" title="Liloa (gastropod)" label="Liloa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2485" end="2493" title="Papawera" label="Papawera"/>
<link wikidata="Q18588823" start="2509" end="2525" title="Phanerophthalmus" label="Phanerophthalmus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2541" end="2551" title="Roxaniella" label="Roxaniella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2607" end="2612" title="Haloa (gastropod)" label="Haloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581433" start="2628" end="2641" title="Smaragdinella" label="Smaragdinella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2657" end="2667" title="Vellicolla" label="Vellicolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q18596626" start="2683" end="2694" title="Weinkauffia" label="Weinkauffia"/>
<link wikidata="Q851889" start="2939" end="2947" title="Bullacta" label="Bullacta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3003" end="3013" title="Roxaniella" label="Roxaniella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3251" end="3259" title="Diniatys" label="Diniatys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033382" start="3375" end="3383" title="Haminoea" label="Haminoea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18596626" start="3595" end="3606" title="Weinkauffia" label="Weinkauffia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726360" start="3853" end="3865" title="Aliculastrum" label="Aliculastrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q851889" start="4122" end="4130" title="Bullacta" label="Bullacta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18580270" start="4244" end="4252" title="Oxygyrus" label="Oxygyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18607095" start="4454" end="4462" title="Micratys" label="Micratys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4529" end="4536" title="Mimatys" label="Mimatys"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837332" start="4567" end="4578" title="Alacuppidae" label="Alacuppidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18587639" start="4588" end="4595" title="Mnestia" label="Mnestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26832565" start="4626" end="4636" title="Mnestiidae" label="Mnestiidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4650" end="4658" title="Diniatys" label="Diniatys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4673" end="4690" title="Diniatys dentifer" label="Diniatys dentifer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5080" end="5098" title="Diniatys monodonta" label="Diniatys monodonta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5142" end="5147" title="Haloa (gastropod)" label="Haloa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5162" end="5176" title="Haloa binotata" label="Haloa binotata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5223" end="5239" title="Haloa constricta" label="Haloa constricta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5279" end="5292" title="Haloa crocata" label="Haloa crocata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5333" end="5349" title="Haloa flavescens" label="Haloa flavescens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5396" end="5407" title="Haloa fusca" label="Haloa fusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3172656" start="5454" end="5468" title="Haloa japonica" label="Haloa japonica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5691" end="5706" title="Haloa kawamurai" label="Haloa kawamurai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5753" end="5772" title="Haloa margaritoides" label="Haloa margaritoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5872" end="5891" title="Haloa nigripunctata" label="Haloa nigripunctata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5931" end="5946" title="Haloa rotundata" label="Haloa rotundata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5986" end="5998" title="Haloa vitrea" label="Haloa vitrea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6038" end="6054" title="Haloa yamaguchii" label="Haloa yamaguchii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6106" end="6118" title="Hamineobulla" label="Hamineobulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q578492" start="6182" end="6190" title="Bullidae" label="Bullidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6200" end="6222" title="Hamineobulla kawamurai" label="Hamineobulla kawamurai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6408" end="6413" title="Liloa (gastropod)" label="Liloa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6581" end="6593" title="Liloa brevis" label="Liloa brevis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6734" end="6745" title="Liloa curta" label="Liloa curta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6918" end="6932" title="Liloa incisula" label="Liloa incisula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6972" end="6983" title="Liloa laeta" label="Liloa laeta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7030" end="7047" title="Liloa nipponensis" label="Liloa nipponensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7087" end="7103" title="Liloa porcellana" label="Liloa porcellana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7143" end="7158" title="Liloa tomaculum" label="Liloa tomaculum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7209" end="7226" title="Liloa translucens" label="Liloa translucens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7271" end="7280" title="Limulatys" label="Limulatys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7296" end="7317" title="Limulatys constrictus" label="Limulatys constrictus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7382" end="7404" title="Limulatys crassilabris" label="Limulatys crassilabris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7475" end="7495" title="Limulatys fusiformis" label="Limulatys fusiformis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7535" end="7554" title="Limulatys muscarius" label="Limulatys muscarius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7614" end="7632" title="Limulatys okamotoi" label="Limulatys okamotoi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7679" end="7697" title="Limulatys ooformis" label="Limulatys ooformis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7802" end="7820" title="Limulatys okamotoi" label="Limulatys okamotoi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7883" end="7901" title="Limulatys reliquus" label="Limulatys reliquus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7947" end="7970" title="Limulatys scobriculatus" label="Limulatys scobriculatus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8010" end="8029" title="Limulatys tortuosus" label="Limulatys tortuosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18607095" start="8074" end="8082" title="Micratys" label="Micratys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8098" end="8111" title="Micratys ovum" label="Micratys ovum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8209" end="8229" title="Mimatys fukuokaensis" label="Mimatys fukuokaensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8306" end="8316" title="Nipponatys" label="Nipponatys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8332" end="8355" title="Nipponatys amakusaensis" label="Nipponatys amakusaensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8395" end="8413" title="Nipponatys oshimai" label="Nipponatys oshimai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8429" end="8449" title="Nipponatys volvulina" label="Nipponatys volvulina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8494" end="8508" title="Sericohaminoea" label="Sericohaminoea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8529" end="8539" title="Sphaeratys" label="Sphaeratys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8563" end="8575" title="Ventomnestia" label="Ventomnestia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8590" end="8609" title="Ventomnestia bizona" label="Ventomnestia bizona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8625" end="8646" title="Ventomnestia colorata" label="Ventomnestia colorata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8662" end="8682" title="Ventomnestia villica" label="Ventomnestia villica"/>
<link wikidata="Q592940" start="8926" end="8932" title="radula" label="radula"/>
<link wikidata="Q18596626" start="8964" end="8975" title="Weinkauffia" label="Weinkauffia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8991" end="9011" title="Weinkauffia diaphana" label="Weinkauffia diaphana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9123" end="9144" title="Weinkauffia turgidula" label="Weinkauffia turgidula"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="9288" end="9296" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="803746" wikidata="Q1194967" url="?curid=803746" title="Atman">
<text>Atman or Ātman may refer to:
==Religion==
* &quot;Ātman&quot; (Hinduism), meaning &quot;Self&quot;, a philosophical concept common to all schools of Hindu philosophy
* &quot;Ātman&quot; (Buddhism), &quot;attā&quot; or &quot;attan&quot;, a reference to the essential self
** &quot;Anattā&quot; or &quot;anātman&quot; — &quot;not-self&quot;, central concept in Buddhism
* &quot;Ātman&quot; (Jainism), or &quot;Jīva&quot;, a philosophical term used within Jainism to identify the soul
* &quot;Atman jnana&quot; — &quot;knowledge&quot; in the context of Indian philosophy and religions

==Film==
* &quot;Ātman&quot; (1975 film), a Japanese experimental short film directed by Toshio Matsumoto
* &quot;Atman&quot; (1997 film), a documentary film directed by Pirjo Honkasalo

==People==
* Cynthia Atman, American engineer
* Pavel Atman (born 1987), Russian handball player

==See also==
* Ataman, a title of Cossack and haidamak leaders of various kinds
* Atma (disambiguation)
* Atta (disambiguation)
* Divine soul (disambiguation)
* World Soul (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1194967" start="0" end="5" title="Atman" label="Atman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194967" start="9" end="14" title="Atman" label="Ātman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052811" start="44" end="72" title="Ātman (Hinduism)" label="&amp;quot;Ātman&amp;quot; (Hinduism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370415" start="168" end="196" title="Ātman (Buddhism)" label="&amp;quot;Ātman&amp;quot; (Buddhism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q488506" start="280" end="286" title="Anattā" label="Anattā"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079607" start="370" end="397" title="Ātman (Jainism)" label="&amp;quot;Ātman&amp;quot; (Jainism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191096" start="490" end="501" title="Atman jnana" label="Atman jnana"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388981" start="594" end="623" title="Ātman (1975 film)" label="&amp;quot;Ātman&amp;quot; (1975 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15734080" start="691" end="720" title="Atman (1997 film)" label="&amp;quot;Atman&amp;quot; (1997 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107022540" start="783" end="796" title="Cynthia Atman" label="Cynthia Atman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622175" start="818" end="829" title="Pavel Atman" label="Pavel Atman"/>
<link wikidata="Q727229" start="883" end="889" title="Ataman" label="Ataman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628981" start="950" end="971" title="Atma (disambiguation)" label="Atma (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q406362" start="974" end="995" title="Atta (disambiguation)" label="Atta (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284176" start="998" end="1026" title="Divine soul (disambiguation)" label="Divine soul (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036234" start="1029" end="1056" title="World Soul (disambiguation)" label="World Soul (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
