<doc id="258890" wikidata="Q634805" url="?curid=258890" title="Unionism in Ireland">
<text>Unionism in Ireland is a political tradition that professes loyalty to the crown of the United Kingdom and to the union it represents with England, Scotland and Wales. The overwhelming sentiment of Ireland&#x27;s Protestant minority, unionism mobilised in the decades following Catholic Emancipation in 1829 to oppose restoration of a separate Irish parliament. Since Partition in 1921, as Ulster unionism its goal has been to retain Northern Ireland as a devolved region within the United Kingdom and to resist the prospect of an all-Ireland republic. Within the framework of the 1998 Belfast Agreement, which concluded three decades of political violence, unionists have shared office with Irish nationalists in a reformed Northern Ireland Assembly. As of February 2024, they no longer do so as the larger faction: they serve in an executive with an Irish republican (Sinn Féin) First Minister.

Unionism became an overarching partisan affiliation in Ireland late in the nineteenth century. Typically Presbyterian agrarian-reform Liberals coalesced with traditionally Anglican Orange Order Conservatives against the Irish Home Rule Bills of 1886 and 1893. Joined by loyalist labour, on the eve of World War I this broad opposition to Irish self-government concentrated in Belfast and its hinterlands as Ulster unionism and prepared an armed resistance—the Ulster Volunteers.

Within the partition settlement of 1921 by which the rest of Ireland attained separate statehood, Ulster unionists accepted a home-rule dispensation for the six north-east counties remaining in the United Kingdom. For the next 50 years, the Ulster Unionist Party exercised the devolved powers of the Northern Ireland Parliament with little domestic opposition and outside of the governing party-political system at Westminster.

In 1972, the British government suspended this arrangement. Against a background of growing political violence, and citing the need to consider how Catholics in Northern Ireland could be integrated into its civic and political life, it prorogued the parliament in Belfast.

Over the ensuing three decades of The Troubles, unionists divided in their responses to power-sharing proposals presented, in consultation with the Republic of Ireland, by successive British governments. Following the 1998 Belfast Agreement, under which both republican and loyalist paramilitaries committed to permanent ceasefires, unionists accepted principles of joint office and parallel consent in a new Northern Ireland legislature and executive.

Renegotiated in 2006, relations within this consociational arrangement remained fraught. Unionists, with diminishing electoral strength, charged their nationalist partners in government with pursuing an anti-British cultural agenda and, post-Brexit, with supporting a trade regime, the Northern Ireland Protocol, that advances an all-Ireland agenda. In February 2024, two years after their withdrawal collapsed the devolved institutions, on the basis of new British government assurances they returned to the Assembly to form the first Northern Ireland government in which unionists are a minority.

==Irish Unionism 1800–1904==
===The Act of Union 1800===

In the last decades of the Kingdom of Ireland (1542–1800), Protestants in public life advanced themselves as Irish Patriots.The focus of their patriotism was the Parliament in Dublin. Confined on a narrow franchise to landed members of the established Anglican communion (the Anglo-Irish &quot;Protestant Ascendancy&quot;), the parliament denied equal protection and public office to Dissenters (non-Anglican Protestants) and to the Kingdom&#x27;s dispossessed Roman Catholic majority. The high point of this parliamentary patriotism was the formation during the American War of Independence, of the Irish Volunteers and, as that militia paraded in Dublin, the securing in 1782 of the parliament&#x27;s legislative independence from the British government in London.

In the north-east, combinations of Presbyterian tradesmen, merchants, and tenant farmers protested against the unrepresentative parliament and against an executive in Dublin Castle still appointed, through the office of the Lord Lieutenant, by English ministers. Seeing little prospect of further reform and in the hope that they might be assisted by republican France, these United Irishmen sought a revolutionary union of &quot;Catholic, Protestant and Dissenter&quot; (i.e. of Catholics and Protestants of all persuasions). Their resolve was broken with the defeat of their uprising in 1798, and by reports of rebel outrages against Protestant Loyalists in the South.

The British government, which had had to deploy its own forces to suppress the rebellion in Ireland and to turn back and defeat French intervention, decided on a union with Great Britain. Provision for Catholic emancipation was dropped from the Act of Union pushed with difficulty through the parliament in Dublin. While a separate Irish executive in Dublin was retained, representation, still wholly Protestant, was transferred to Westminster.

In the Presbyterian north east the Irish parliament was unlamented. Having refused calls for reform—to broaden representation and curb corruption—few saw cause to regret its passing.

===Catholic emancipation and &quot;Protestant unity&quot;===

It took the Union thirty years to deliver on the promise of Catholic emancipation (1829)—to admit Catholics to Parliament—and permit an erosion of the Protestant monopoly on position and influence. An opportunity to integrate Catholics through their re-emerging propertied and professional classes as a minority within the United Kingdom may have passed. In 1830, the leader of the Catholic Association, Daniel O&#x27;Connell, invited Protestants to join in a campaign to repeal the Union and restore the Kingdom of Ireland under the Constitution of 1782.

At the same time, the security in Ireland for emancipation was a fivefold increase in the threshold for the property franchise. O&#x27;Connell&#x27;s Protestant ally in the north, George Ensor, observed that this broke the link between Catholic inclusion and democratic reform.

In Ulster, resistance to O&#x27;Connell&#x27;s appeal was stiffened by a religious revival. With its emphasis upon &quot;personal witness&quot;, the New Reformation appeared to transcend the ecclesiastical differences between the Protestant denominations. while launching them into &quot;a far more conscious sense of separateness from the Church of Rome&quot;, then undergoing its own devotional revolution. The leading Presbyterian evangelist, Henry Cooke took the occasion to preach Protestant Unity. In 1834, at a Conservative demonstration called by Lord Roden at Hillsborough, Cooke proposed a &quot;Christian marriage&quot; between the two main Protestant denominations (Anglican and Presbyterian). Setting their remaining differences aside, they would cooperate on all &quot;matters of common safety&quot;.

Presbyterian voters tended to favour reform-minded Whigs or, as they later emerged, tenant-right and free-trade Liberals, over the Conservative and Orange-Order candidates of the landed Ascendancy. But as the Irish party-political successors to O&#x27;Connell&#x27;s Repeal movement gained representation and influence in Westminster, Cooke&#x27;s call for unity was to be heeded in the progressive emergence of a pan-Protestant unionism.

===The Irish party challenge at Westminster and the Land War===

Up to, and through, the Great Famine of the 1840s, successive governments, Whig and Tory, had refused political responsibility for agrarian conditions in Ireland. The issues of a low-level tenant-landlord war came to Westminster in 1852 when the all-Ireland Tenant Right League helped return 48 MPs to Westminster where they sat as the Independent Irish Party. What the Young Irelander Gavan Duffy called the League of North and South soon fell apart. In the South the Church approved the Catholic MPs breaking their pledge of independent opposition and accepting government positions. In the North, the Protestant tenant-righters, William Sharman Crawford and James MacKnight had their election meetings broken up by Orangemen.

For unionism the more momentous challenge lay in the wake of the Reform Act 1867. In England and Wales it produced an electorate that no longer identified instinctively with the conservative interest in Ireland and was more open to the &quot;home-rule&quot; compromise that nationalists now presented. Ireland would remain within the United Kingdom but with a parliament in Dublin exercising powers &quot;devolved&quot; from Westminster. Meanwhile, in Ireland, a combination of the secret ballot and increased representation for the towns, reduced the electoral influence of land owners and their agents, and contributed to the triumph, in 1874, of the Home Rule League. Fifty-nine members were returned to Westminster where they sat as the Irish Parliamentary Party (IPP).

In his first ministry (1868-1874), the Liberal premier William Ewart Gladstone had attempted conciliation. In 1869, he disestablished the Church of Ireland, and in 1870 introduced the Landlord and Tenant (Ireland) Act. In both measures conservative jurists identified threats to the integrity of the union. Disestablishment reneged on the promise of &quot;one Protestant Episcopal Church&quot; for both Britain and Ireland under Article V of the Act of Union (the Ulster Protestant Defence Association claimed breach of contract), and weak as they were, provisions for tenant compensation and purchase created a separate agrarian regime for Ireland at odds with the prevailing English conception of property rights.

In the Long Depression of the 1870s the Land War intensified. From 1879 it was organised by the direct-action Irish National Land League, led by the southern Protestant Charles Stewart Parnell. In 1881, in a further Land Act, Gladstone conceded the three F&#x27;s—fair rent, free sale, and fixity of tenure. Recognising that &quot;the land grievance had been a bond of discontent between Ulster and the rest of Ireland and in that sense a danger to the union&quot;, Irish Conservatives did not oppose the measure. Protestants in the eastern counties had admitted to the leadership of the tenant-right movement men, like the Rev. James Armour of Ballymoney, who were at best agnostic on the union, while in the west of the province (in counties Armagh, Cavan, Fermanagh and Tyrone) even Orangemen had started joining the Land League.

The final and decisive shift in favour of &quot;constitutional&quot; concessions came in the wake of the Third Reform Act of 1884. The near-universal admission to the suffrage of male heads of household tripled the electorate in Ireland. The 1885 election returned an IPP, now under the leadership of Parnell, of 85 Members (including 17 from Ulster where Conservatives and Liberals split the unionist vote).Gladstone, whose Liberals lost all 15 of their Irish seats, was able to form his second ministry only with their Commons support.

===Reaction to Gladstone&#x27;s Home Rule Bills===

In June 1886, Gladstone tabled a The Government of Ireland Bill that was largely of his own drafting. Unionists were not persuaded by his inclusion of measures to limit the remit of a Dublin legislature and to reduce the weight of the popular vote (the 200 or so popularly elected members were to sit in session with 28 Irish Peers and a further 75 Members elected on a highly restrictive property franchise). Regardless of how it was constituted, they believed that an Irish parliament would (egged on by the &quot;American Irish&quot;) enter into conflicts with the &quot;imperial parliament&quot; in London that could only be resolved through &quot;complete separation&quot;.

The upper and middle classes found in Britain and the Empire &quot;a wide range of profitable careers--in the army, in the public services, in commerce--from which they might be shut out if the link between Ireland and Great Britain were weakened or severed&quot;. That same link was critical for all those employed in the great export industries of the North—textiles, engineering, shipbuilding. For these the Irish hinterland was less important than the industrial triangle that linked Belfast and region with Clydeside and the north of England. Yet the most popular summary of case against Irish self-government remained the message broadcast in a &quot;great revival&quot; of the Orange Order — &quot;Home Rule means Rome Rule&quot;.

In the north, the competition represented by the growing numbers of Catholics arriving at mill and factory gates had already given the once largely rural (and Anglican) Orange Order a new lease among Protestant workers. The pattern, in itself, was not unique to Belfast and its satellites. Glasgow, Manchester, Liverpool and other British centres experiencing large-scale Irish immigration developed similar Orange and nativist ward and workplace politics with which unionists—organised in the Loyalist Anti-Repeal Union—sought to connect. With Gladstone&#x27;s conversion to home rule, politicians who had held aloof from the Order now embraced its militancy. Colonel Edward Saunderson, who had represented Cavan as a Liberal, donned an Orange sash &quot;because&quot;, he said &quot;the Orange society is alone capable of dealing with the condition of anarchy and rebellion which prevail in Ireland&quot;.

In February 1886, playing, in his own words, the &quot;Orange card&quot;, Lord Randolph Churchill assured a &quot;monster meeting&quot; of the Anti-Repeal Union in Belfast, that English Conservatives would &quot;cast in their lot&quot; with loyalists in resisting Home Rule, and he later coined the phrase that was to become the watchword of northern unionism: &quot;Ulster will fight, and Ulster will be right&quot;.

Gladstone&#x27;s own party was split on Home Rule and the House divided against the measure. In 1891 Ulster&#x27;s Liberal Unionists, part of a larger Liberal break with Gladstone, entered Saunderson&#x27;s Irish Unionist Alliance, and at Westminster took the Conservative whip.

In 1892, despite bitter division over the personally compromised leadership of Parnell, the Nationalists were able to help Gladstone to a third ministry. The result was a second Home Rule bill. It was greeted by an Ulster opposition more highly developed and better organised. A great Ulster Unionist Convention was held in Belfast organised by the Liberal Unionist Thomas Sinclair, whom the press noted had been a critic of Orangeism. Speakers and observers dwelt on the diversity of creed, class and party represented among the 12,300 delegates attending. As reported by the &quot;Northern Whig&quot; there were &quot;the old tenant-righters of the &#x27;sixties&#x27; ... the sturdy reformers of Antrim ... the Unitarians of Down, always progressive in their politics ... the old-fashioned Tories of the Counties ... modern Conservatives ... Orangemen ... All these various elements—Whig, Liberal, Radical, Presbyterian, Episcopalian, Unitarian and Methodist ... united as one man.&quot;

While references to Catholics were conciliatory the Convention resolved: to retain unchanged our present position as an integral portion of the United Kingdom, and protest in the most unequivocal manner against the passage of any measure that would rob us of our inheritance in the Imperial Parliament, under the protection of which our capital has been invested and our home and rights safeguarded; that we record our determination to have nothing to do with a Parliament certain to be controlled by men responsible for the crime and outrage of the Land League . . . many of whom have shown themselves the ready instrument of clerical domination. 

After mammoth parliamentary sessions the bill, which did allow for Irish MPs, was passed by a narrow majority in the Commons but went down to defeat in the overwhelmingly Conservative House of Lords. The Conservatives formed a new ministry.

===Constructive Unionism===

Gladstone&#x27;s Tory successor in 1886, Lord Salisbury, believed his government should &quot;leave Home Rule sleeping the sleep of the unjust&quot;. In 1887 Dublin Castle was given standing power to suspend &quot;habeas corpus.&quot; However, as Chief Secretary for Ireland, Salisbury&#x27;s nephew Arthur Balfour determined upon a constructive course. He pursued reforms intended, as some saw it, to &quot;kill home rule with kindness&quot;.

For the express purpose of relieving poverty and reducing emigration, in the Congested Districts of the west Balfour initiated a programme not only of public works, but of subsidy for local craft industries. Headed by the former Unionist MP for South Dublin, Horace Plunkett, a new Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction broke with the traditions of Irish Boards by announcing that its aim was to &quot;be in touch with public opinion of the classes whom its work concerns, and to rely largely for its success upon their active assistance and cooperation&quot;. It supported and encouraged dairy cooperatives, the Creameries, that were to be an important institution in the emergence of a new class of independent smallholders.

Greater reform followed when, with the support of the splinter Liberal Unionist Party, Salisbury returned to office in 1895. The Land Act of 1896 introduced for the first time the principle of compulsory sale to tenants, through its application was limited to bankrupt estates. &quot;You would suppose&quot;, said Sir Edward Carson, Dublin barrister and the leading spokesman for Irish Conservatives, &quot;that the Government were revolutionists verging on Socialism&quot;. Having been first obliged to surrender their hold on local government (transferred at a stroke in 1898 to democratically elected councils), the old landlord class had the terms of their retirement fixed by the Wyndham Land Act of 1903.

This reduced, but did not in itself resolve, agrarian tensions, even in the north. In 1906, Thomas Russell, MP, the son of an evicted Scottish crofter, broke with the Conservatives in the Irish Unionist Alliance to be returned to Westminster from South Tyrone as the champion of the Ulster Farmers and Labourers Union. With the Cork City MP, William O&#x27;Brien, Russell helped initiate a programme that built some 40,000 one-acre labourer-owned cottages.

During the constructivist 1890s, and before a Liberal government revived the prospects for home rule, unionists appeared more at ease with interest in Irish culture. The first Ulster branch of the Gaelic League was formed in 1895 in east Belfast under the patronage of the Rev. John Baptiste Crozier and Dr. John St Clair Boyd, both avowed unionists, and of the Orange Order Grand Master, the Rev. Richard Rutledge Kane.

ut for many Irish unionists the chief-secretaryship of George Wyndham was &quot;a last straw&quot;. In February 1905, they learned that his undersecretary, Sir Anthony MacDonnell, a Catholic, had helped devise a scheme for administrative devolution involving an Irish council of both elected and nominated members. Balfour, now prime minister, was obliged to disavow the scheme and Wyndham, pressed to deny his complicity, resigned. The uproar assisted the Liberal return to office in December.

=== Catholic unionists ===

The road to Catholicism&#x27;s identification with constitutional Irish nationalism was &quot;far from smooth and immediate&quot;, and a Catholic tradition of support for the union, focused on the value of stability and of empire, survived the first home-rule crisis. But it did not share the majority unionist conviction that any measure of devolution within the United Kingdom must lead to separation. Nor did it supply unionism with the equivalent of the Protestants who, individually, played a prominent role in home-rule and separatist politics.

A handful of Irish Conservatives, drawn from the Catholic gentry (and referred to pejoratively by nationalists as &quot;West Britons&quot;), were returned to the Commons before the 1884 Reform Act. A &quot;unique place&quot; was occupied by Sir Denis Henry (1864-1925). When he won his native South Londonderry seat in a 1916 by-election, he was the first Catholic to represent a unionist constituency in Ulster, and when he retained the seat in 1918, the future Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland was the last.

== &quot;The Ulster Option&quot; 1905–1920 ==

===Unionist labour===

In 1905, the Ulster Unionist Council was established to bring together unionists in the north including, with 50 of 200 seats, the Orange Order. Until then, unionism had largely placed itself behind Anglo-Irish aristocrats valued for their high-level connections in Great Britain. The UUC still accorded them a degree of precedence. Castlereagh&#x27;s descendant and former Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, The 6th Marquess of Londonderry, presided over its executive. The Council also retained the services of Carson, from 1892 MP for Dublin University and supported him from 1910 as leader of the Irish Unionist parliamentary party. But marshalled by Captain James Craig, a millionaire director of Belfast&#x27;s Dunville Whiskey, it was northern employers who undertook the real political and organisational work.

Unlike the southern landowners who were politically opposed by their Catholic tenants, the manufacturers and merchants of Belfast and neighbouring industrial districts could generally count on voting with the majority of their own workforce. But the loyalty of the Protestant worker was not unconditional. In the mind of many working-class unionists there was no contradiction between the defence of Protestant principle and political radicalism, &quot;indeed, these were often seen as one and the same because it was the wealthy who were most prone to conciliation and treachery&quot;.

Exercising the new workingman&#x27;s vote, in 1868 loyalists in Belfast had chosen their own &quot;Conservative&quot;, rejecting a millowner and returning an evangelical Orangeman, William Johnston, to Westminster. Johnston proceeded to propose and vote for labour protection, tenant right, the secret ballot and woman&#x27;s suffrage In 1902, Johnston&#x27;s successor as MP for South Belfast, Thomas Sloan, again was not the choice of employers. The campaign of the Belfast Protestant Association candidate was marked by what his opponents considered a classic piece of bigotry. Sloan protested the exemption of Catholic convents from inspection by the Hygiene Commission (the Catholic Church should not be &quot;a state within a state&quot;). But it was as a trade unionist that he criticised the &quot;fur-coat brigade&quot; in the leadership of unionism. Together with R. Lindsay Crawford and their Independent Orange Order, Sloan supported dock and linen-mill workers, led by the syndicalist James Larkin, in the great Belfast Lockout of 1907.

In July 1912, loyalists forced some 3,000 workers out of the shipyards and engineering plants in Belfast. Unlike previous incidents, the expellees included not only Catholics but also some 600 Protestants, targeted mainly because they were seen to support labour organising across sectarian lines. The unionist press depicted any connection with either British Labour (who had held their first party conference in Belfast in 1907) or with the Irish Trades Union Congress as tantamount to support for Home Rule. Yet loyalist workers resented the idea that they were the retainers of &quot;big-house unionists&quot;. A manifesto signed in the spring of 1914 by two thousand labour men, rejected the suggestion of the radical and socialist press that Ulster was being manipulated by &quot;an aristocratic plot&quot;. If Sir Edward Carson led in the battle for the Union it was &quot;because we, the workers, the people, the democracy of Ulster, have chosen him&quot;. The majority of the signatories would have been organised in British-based unions, and could point to the growing political weight of British labour in reform measures such as the Trade Disputes Act 1906, the People&#x27;s Budget 1910, and the National Insurance Act 1911. Nationalists did not seek to persuade them that collective bargaining, progressive taxation and social security were principles for which majorities could be as readily found in an Irish parliament.

===Unionism and women&#x27;s suffrage===

At what was to be the high point of mobilisation in Ulster against Home Rule, the Covenant Campaign of September 1912, the unionist leadership decided that men alone could not speak for the determination of the unionist people to defend &quot;their equal citizenship in the United Kingdom&quot;. Women were asked to sign, not the Covenant whose commitment to &quot;all means which may be found necessary&quot; implied a readiness to bear arms, but their own Associate Declaration. A total of 234,046 women signed the Ulster Women&#x27;s Declaration; 237,368 men signed the Solemn League and Covenant.

Unionist women had been involved in political campaigning from the time of the first Home Rule Bill in 1886. Some were active suffragettes. Isabella Tod, an anti-Home Rule Liberal and campaigner for girls education, was an early pioneer. Determined lobbying by her North of Ireland Women&#x27;s Suffrage Society ensured the 1887 Act creating a new city-status municipal franchise for Belfast (piloted through the Commons by William Johnston) conferred the vote on persons rather than men. This was eleven years before women elsewhere Ireland gained the vote in local government elections.

The WSS had not been impressed by the women&#x27;s Ulster Declaration or by the Ulster Women&#x27;s Unionist Council (UWUC)—with over 100,000 members the largest women&#x27;s political organisation in Ireland. Elizabeth McCracken noted the failure of unionist women to formulate &quot;any demand on their own behalf or that of their own sex&quot;. Yet in September 1913 McCracken was celebrating a &quot;marriage of unionism and women&#x27;s suffrage&quot;. Following reports that the militant Women&#x27;s Social and Political Union (WPSU) would begin organising in Ulster, the secretary of Ulster Unionist Council had informed the UWUC that draft articles for an Ulster Provisional Government included votes for women. The nationalists would make no such undertaking with regard to a Dublin parliament.

The marriage was short lived. In March 1914, Carson, after being door-stepped for fours days by the WSPU, ruled women&#x27;s suffrage too divisive an issue for unionists. There followed a series of arson-attacks on unionist-owned and associated property that culminated in Lillian Metge&#x27;s bombing of Lisburn Cathedral. In a subsequent trial, WPSU organiser Dorothy Evans created an uproar by demanding to know why James Craig, then arming Ulster Volunteers with German rifles, was not appearing on the same weapons and explosives charges.

In August 1914, suffragists in Ulster suspended their agitation for the duration of the European war. Their reward was a women&#x27;s franchise in 1918 and (six years after it was granted in the Irish Free State) equal voting rights in 1928. (In 1949, Dehra Parker was to be the first and only woman appointed to the Northern Ireland cabinet).

===1912 Home Rule Crisis===

In 1911 a Liberal administration was once again dependent on Irish nationalist MPs. In 1912 the Prime Minister, H. H. Asquith, introduced the Third Home Rule Bill. A more generous dispensation than the earlier bills, it would, for the first time, have given an Irish parliament an accountable executive. It was carried in the Commons by a majority of ten. As expected, it was defeated in the Lords, but as result of the crisis engendered by the opposition of the peers to the 1910 People&#x27;s Budget the Lords now only had the power of delay. Home Rule would become law in 1914.

There had long been discussion of giving &quot;an option to Ulster&quot;. As early as 1843, The &quot;Northern Whig&quot; reasoned that if differences in ethnicity (&quot;race&quot;) and interests argue for Ireland&#x27;s separation from Great Britain, they could as easily argue for a separation of north and south, with Belfast as the capital of its own &quot;distinct kingdom&quot;. In response to the First Home rule Bill in 1886, Radical Unionists (Liberals who proposed federalising the relationship between all countries of the United Kingdom) likewise argued that &quot;the Protestant part of Ulster should receive special treatment . . . on grounds identical with those that support the general contention for Home Rule&quot; Ulster Protestants expressed no interest in a Belfast parliament (they did not develop an express nationalism of their own), but in summarising &quot;The Case Against Home Rule&quot; (1912), Leo Amery did insist that &quot;if Irish Nationalism constitutes a nation, then Ulster is a nation too&quot;.

Faced with the eventual enactment of Home Rule, Carson appeared to press this argument. On 28 September 1912, Ulster Day, he was the first to sign, in Belfast City Hall, Ulster&#x27;s Solemn League and Covenant. This bound signatories &quot;to stand by one another in defending for ourselves and our children our position of equal citizenship in the United Kingdom, and in using all means which may be found necessary to defeat the present conspiracy to set up a Home Rule Parliament in Ireland&quot;.

In January 1913, Carson declared for the exclusion of Ulster and called for the enlistment of up to 100,000 Covenanters as drilled and armed Ulster Volunteers. On 23 September, the second Ulster Day, he accepted Chairmanship of a Provisional Government organised by Craig. If Home Rule were imposed &quot;we will be governed as a conquered community and nothing else&quot;. By July 1914, the Ulster Covenant had been complemented by a British Covenant organised by Alfred Milner through the Union Defence League. Nearly two million signatories declared themselves willing to &quot;supporting any action that may be effective&quot; to prevent the people of Ulster being deprived &quot;of their rights as citizens of the United Kingdom&quot;.

===Partition===
On 4 August 1914, the United Kingdom declared war on Germany. A few weeks later the Home Rule bill received Royal Assent but with implementation suspended for the duration of European hostilities. With the issue of Ulster&#x27;s exclusion unresolved, leaders on both sides sought favour with the Government and the British public by committing themselves, and their volunteers, to the war effort.

The strategy was challenged on the nationalist side. As the militants saw it, contingents of republican Irish Volunteers and Connolly&#x27;s Citizen Army ensured that while Irishmen, at Redmond&#x27;s urging, were sacrificing themselves for the sake of Belgium, Britain could be seen on the streets of Dublin in Easter 1916 suppressing an Irish strike for freedom. In the aftermath of the Rising and in the course of a national campaign against military conscription, the IPP&#x27;s credibility was exhausted.

In the Coupon Election of December 1918, the first Westminster poll since 1910 and the first with all adult males, and women from age thirty, eligible to vote (the electorate tripled), the IPP was almost wholly replaced in nationalist constituencies by Sinn Féin. Acting on their mandate, Sinn Féin MPs met in Dublin in January 1919 as the Dáil Éireann, the national assembly of the Republic declared in 1916, and demanded that the &quot;English garrison&quot; evacuate. In the six north-east counties, unionists took 22 out of 29 seats.

Violence against Catholics in Belfast, driven out of workplaces and attacked in their districts, and a boycott of Belfast goods, accompanied by looting and destruction, in the South, helped consolidate &quot;real partition, spiritual and voluntary&quot; in advance of the constitutional partition. This otherwise uncompromising Republicans regarded as, at least for now, inevitable. In August 1920 Éamon de Valera, President of Dáil, declared in favour of &quot;giving each county power to vote itself out of the Republic if it so wished&quot;.

In the hope of brokering a compromise that might yet hold Ireland within Westminster&#x27;s jurisdiction, the Government proceeded with the Government of Ireland Act 1920. This provided for two subordinate parliaments. In Belfast a Northern Ireland parliament would convene for the six rather than nine Ulster counties (in three, Craig conceded, Sinn Féiners would make government &quot;absolutely impossible for us&quot;). The island&#x27;s remaining twenty-six counties, Southern Ireland, would be represented in Dublin. In a joint Council, the two parliaments would be free to enter into all-Ireland arrangements.

In 1921, elections for these parliaments were duly held. But in Southern Ireland this was for parliament which, by British agreement, would now constitute itself as the Dáil Éireann of the Irish Free State. Under the terms of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, the twenty-six counties were to have the &quot;same constitutional status in the Community of Nations known as the British Empire as the Dominion of Canada&quot;. It was not clear to all parties at the time—civil war ensued—but this was to be de facto independence.

Unionists in Northern Ireland thus found themselves in the unanticipated position of having to work a constitutional arrangement that was the by-product of an attempt by British statesmen to reconcile the determination of the Protestant population of the North to remain without qualification within the United Kingdom with the aspirations of the Nationalist majority in Ireland for Irish unity and independence.

Writing to Prime Minister David Lloyd George, Craig did insist that it was only as a sacrifice in the interest of peace that the North had accepted a home-rule arrangement its representatives had not asked for. No regret, however, was evident when addressing Belfast shipyard workers. Once unionists had their own parliament, Craig assured the workers, &quot;no power on earth would ever be able to touch them&quot;.

In debating the Government of Ireland Bill, Craig had conceded that, while unionists did not want a separate parliament, having in the six counties &quot;all the paraphernalia of Government&quot; might make it more difficult for future Liberal and/or Labour government to push Northern Ireland against the will of its majority into all-Ireland arrangements This was to become the prevailing attitude, summed up in a 1936 report of the Ulster Unionist Council: &quot;Northern Ireland without a Parliament of her own would be a standing temptation to certain British Politicians to make another bid for a final settlement with the Irish Republic&quot;.

Having become Ulster unionists and then six-county unionists, &quot;Irish Unionists had evolved into Northern Irish Home Rulers&quot;.

==Unionist majority rule: Northern Ireland 1921–1972==
===Exclusion from Westminster Politics===

Unionists have emphasised that their victory in the Home Rule struggle was partial. It was not only that twenty-six of thirty-two Irish counties were lost to the Union, but that within the six retained unionists were &quot;unable to make the British government in London fully acknowledge their full and unequivocal membership of the United Kingdom&quot;.

Although technically constituted by the decision of the six-county Parliament elected in 1920 to opt out of Irish Free State, the Government of Northern Ireland had some of the formal features of the Canada-style dominion status accorded to the new state in the South. Like Ottawa, Belfast had a two-chamber Parliament, a Cabinet and Prime Minister (Sir James Craig), and the Crown represented by a Governor and advised by a Privy Council. All this was suggestive, not of a devolved administration within the United Kingdom, but of a state constituted under the Crown outside the direct jurisdiction of the Westminster parliament.

The impression that Ireland as a whole was being removed from Westminster politics was reinforced by refusal of the parties of Government and Opposition to organise, or canvass for votes, in the six counties. The Conservatives were content that Ulster Unionist Party MPs took their party whip in the House of Commons where, by general agreement, matters within the competence of the Belfast Parliament could not be raised. The Labour Party formed its first (minority) government in 1924 led by a man who in 1905 had been the election agent in North Belfast for the trade-unionist William Walker, Ramsay MacDonald. In 1907 MacDonald&#x27;s party had held their first party conference in Belfast. Yet, at the height of the Home Rule Crisis in 1913, the British Labour Party had decided not stand against Irish Labour, and the policy of deferring to Irish parties was maintained after 1921.

There was little incentive for unionists in Northern Ireland to assume the risks of splitting ranks in order to reproduce the dynamic of Westminster politics. Despite its broad legislative powers, the Belfast Parliament did not, in any case, have the kinds of tax and spending powers that might have engendered that kind of party competition. The principal sources of government revenue, income and corporation taxes, customs and excise, were entirely beyond Belfast&#x27;s control.

===Stormont government===

Until the crisis of the late 1960s, unionism in Northern Ireland was effectively single-party politics. In his 28 years in Stormont (1925–1953) Tommy Henderson, a North Belfast independent, was a one-man unionist opposition. In the 1938 the Ulster Progressive Unionist Party of William John Stewart attempted to join him, averaging 30% of the vote in ten otherwise safe Government seats. After positively endorsing the Union, in 1953 the Northern Ireland Labour Party won three seats. But for the most part Government candidates were returned by unionist voters without contest. The Nationalist Party did not take their seats during the first Stormont parliament (1921–25), and did not accept the role of official Opposition for a further forty years.

Proclaimed by Craig a &quot;Protestant parliament&quot;, and with a &quot;substantial and assured&quot; Unionist Party majority the Stormont legislature could not, in any case, play a significant role. Real power &quot;lay with the regional government itself and its administration&quot;: a structure &quot;run by a very small number of individuals&quot;. Between 1921 and 1939 only twelve people served in cabinet, some continuously. It was in protest that the Progressive Unionists had proposed limited office in government to 8 years or two parliaments.

Although they had no positive political programme for a devolved parliament, the Unionist regime did attempt an early reform. Consistent with the obligation under the Government of Ireland Act to neither establish nor endow a religion, a 1923 Education Act provided that in schools religious instruction would only be permitted after school hours and with parental consent. Lord Londonderry, Minister of Education, acknowledged that his ambition was mixed Protestant-Catholic education. A coalition of Protestant clerics, school principals and Orangemen insisted on the imperative of bible teaching. Craig relented, amending the act in 1925. Meanwhile, the Catholic hierarchy refused to transfer any schools, and would not allow male Catholic student teachers to enrol in a common training college with Protestants or women. The school-age segregation of Protestants and Catholics was sustained.

At the end of World War II, the Unionist Government under Basil Brooke (Lord Brookeborough) did make two reform commitments. First, it promised a programme of &quot;slum clearance&quot; and public housing construction (in the wake of the Belfast Blitz the authorities acknowledged that much of the housing stock had been &quot;uninhabitable&quot; before the war). Second, the Government accepted an offer from London—understood as a reward for the province&#x27;s wartime service—to match the parity in taxation between Northern Ireland and Great Britain with parity in the services delivered. What Northern Ireland might loose in autonomy, it was going to gain in a closer, more equal, Union.

By the 1960s Unionism was administering something at odds with the general conservatism of those to whom leadership had been conceded in the resistance to Irish Home Rule. Under the impetus of the post-War Labour government in Britain, and thanks to the generosity of British exchequer, Northern Ireland had emerged with an advanced welfare state. The Education Act (NI), 1947, &quot;revolutionised access&quot; to secondary and further education. Health-care provision was expanded and re-organised on the model of the National Health Service in Great Britain to ensure universal access. The Victorian-era Poor Law, sustained after 1921, was replaced with a comprehensive system of social-security. Under the Housing Act (NI) 1945 the public subvention for new home construction was even greater, proportionately, than in England and Wales.

===1960s: reform and protest===
In the 1960s, under premiership of Terence O&#x27;Neill, the Stormont administration intensified its efforts to attract outside capital. Investment in new infrastructure, training schemes coordinated with trade unions, and direct grants succeeded in attracting American, British and continental firms. In its own terms, the strategy was a success. While the great Victorian industries continued to decline, the level of manufacturing employment marginally increased. Yet Protestant workers and local Unionist leadership were unsettled. Unlike the established family firms and skilled-trades apprenticeships that had been &quot;a backbone of unionism and protestant privilege&quot;, the new companies readily employed Catholics and women. But among Catholics too there was concern over the regional distribution of the new investment.

When Derry lost out to Coleraine for siting of the New University of Ulster, and to Lurgan and Portadown for a new urban-industrial development, some sensed a wider conspiracy. Speaking to Labour MPs in London, John Hume suggested that &quot;the plan&quot; was &quot;to develop the strongly Unionist-Belfast-Coleraine-Portadown triangle and to cause a migration from West to East Ulster, redistributing and scattering the minority to that the Unionist Party will not only maintain but strengthen its position&quot;.

Hume, a teacher from Derry, presented himself as a spokesman for an emerging &quot;third force&quot;: a &quot;generation of younger Catholics in the North&quot; who were frustrated with the nationalist policy of non-recognition and abstention. (O&#x27;Neill wrote of &quot;a new Catholic intelligentsia&quot;, the product, he imagined, of the 1947 Education Act, &quot;unwilling to put up with the deprived status their fathers and grandfathers had taken for granted&quot;). Determined to engage the great social problems of housing, unemployment and emigration, they were willing to accept &quot;the Protestant tradition in the North as legitimate&quot; and that Irish unity should be achieved only &quot;by the will of the Northern majority&quot;. Although they appeared to meet unionists half way, Hume and those who joined him in what he proposed would be &quot;the emergence of normal politics&quot; presented the Unionism with a new challenge. Drawing on the civil rights movements in the United States, they spoke a language of universal rights which had a broad appeal for British and international opinion.

Since 1964, the Campaign for Social Justice had been collating and publicising evidence of discrimination in employment and housing. From April 1967 the cause was taken up by the Belfast-based Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association, a broad labour and republican grouping with Communist Party veteran Betty Sinclair as chair. Seeking to &quot;challenge . . . by more vigorous action than Parliamentary questions and newspaper controversy&quot;, NICRA decided to carry out a programme of marches.

In October 1968 Derry Housing Action Committee proposed a march in Derry. When a sectarian confrontation threatened—the Apprentice Boys of Derry announced their intention to march the same route—the NICRA executive was in favour of calling it off. But DHAC pressed ahead with activist Eamon McCann conceding that the &quot;conscious, if unspoken strategy, was to provoke the police into overreaction and thus spark off mass reaction against the authorities&quot;. A later official inquiry suggests that all that had been required for police to begin &quot;using their batons indiscriminately&quot; was defiance of the initial order to disperse. The day ended with street battles in Derry&#x27;s Catholic Bogside area. With this, onset of what is referred to as &quot;The Troubles&quot;, Northern Ireland, for the first time in decades, was making British and international headlines, and television news.

===Opposition to O&#x27;Neill===

In January 1965, at O&#x27;Neill personal invitation, Taoiseach Seán Lemass (whose government was pursuing a similar modernising agenda in the South) made an unheralded visit to Stormont. After O&#x27;Neill reciprocated with a visit to Dublin, the Nationalists were persuaded, for the first time, to assume the role at Stormont of Her Majesty&#x27;s Opposition. With this and other conciliatory gestures (unprecedented visits to a Catholic hospitals and schools, flying the Union flag at half mast for the death of Pope John XXIII) O&#x27;Neill incurred the wrath of those he understood as &quot;self-styled &#x27;loyalists&#x27; who see moderation as treason, and decency as weakness&quot;,among these the Reverend Ian Paisley.

As Moderator of his own Free Presbyterian Church, and at a time when he believed mainline presbyteries were being led down a &quot;Roman road&quot; by the Irish Council of Churches, Paisley saw himself treading in the path of the &quot;greatest son&quot; of Irish Presbyterianism, Dr. Henry Cooke. Like Cooke, Paisley was alert to ecumenicism &quot;both political and ecclesiastical&quot;. After the Lemass meeting, Paisley announced that &quot;the Ecumenists . . . are selling us out&quot;, and called on Ulster Protestants to resist a &quot;policy of treachery&quot;.

Many within his own party were alarmed when in December 1968 O&#x27;Neill sacked his hard-line Minister of Home Affairs, William Craig and proceeded with a reform package that addressed many of NICRA&#x27;s demands. There was to be a needs-based points system for public housing; an ombudsman to investigate citizen grievances; the abolition of the rates-based franchise in council elections (One man, one vote); and The Londonderry Corporation (through which unionists had administered a predominately nationalist city) was replaced by an independent development commission. The broad security provisions of the Special Powers Act were to be reviewed.

At a Downing Street summit on 4 November, Prime Minister Harold Wilson warned O&#x27;Neill that if Stormont backtracked on reform, the British government would reconsider its financial support for Northern Ireland. In a television address, O&#x27;Neill cautioned Unionists that they could not choose to be part of the United Kingdom merely when it &quot;suits&quot; them, and that &quot;defiance&quot; of the British government would be reckless. Jobs in the shipyards and other major industries, subsidies for farmers, people&#x27;s pensions: &quot;all these aspects of our life, and many others depend on support from Britain. Is a freedom to pursue the un-Christian path of communal strife and sectarian bitterness really more important to you than all the benefits of the British Welfare state?&quot;

With members of his cabinet urging him to call Wilson&#x27;s &quot;bluff&quot;, and facing a Backbencher motion of no-confidence, in January 1969 O&#x27;Neill called a general election. The Ulster Unionist Party split. Pro-O&#x27;Neill candidates picked up Liberal and Labour votes but won only a plurality of seats. In his own constituency of Bannside, from which he had previously been returned unopposed, the Prime Minister was humiliated by achieving only a narrow victory over Paisley standing as a Protestant Unionist. On 28 April 1969, O&#x27;Neill resigned.

O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s position had been weakened when, focused on demands not conceded (redrawing of electoral boundaries, immediate repeal of the Special Power Act and disbandment of the Special Constabulary), republicans and left-wing students disregarded appeals from within NICRA and Hume&#x27;s Derry Citizens Action Committee to suspend protest. On 4 January 1969 People&#x27;s Democracy marchers en route from Belfast to Derry were ambushed and beaten by loyalists, including off-duty Specials, at Burntollet Bridge That night, there was renewed street fighting in the Bogside. From behind barricades, residents declared &quot;Free Derry&quot;, briefly Northern Ireland&#x27;s first security-force &quot;no-go area&quot;.

Tensions had been further heightened in the days before O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s resignation when a number of explosions at electricity and water installations were attributed to the IRA. The later Scarman Tribunal established that the &quot;outrages&quot; were &quot;the work of Protestant extremists . . . anxious to undermine confidence&quot; in O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s leadership. (The bombers, styling themselves &quot;the Ulster Volunteer Force&quot;, had announced their presence in 1966 with a series of sectarian killings). The IRA did go into action on the night of 20/21 April, bombing ten post offices in Belfast in an attempt to draw the RUC away from Derry where there was again serious violence.

===Imposition of direct rule===

To the extent they acknowledge inequities in Unionist rule from Stormont—Paisley was later to allow &quot;it wasn&#x27;t . . a fair government. It wasn&#x27;t justice for all&quot;—unionists argue these were a result of insecurity which successive British governments had themselves created by their own divided view on Northern Ireland&#x27;s place in the United Kingdom. When the tensions to which it had contributed to in Northern Ireland finally exploded, unionists believe British equivocation proved disastrous. Had they regarded Northern Ireland is an integral part of the United Kingdom, the Government&#x27;s response in 1969–69 would have been &quot;fundamentally different&quot;. If they had thought there were social and political grievances which were remediable by law, it would have been the business of Westminster to legislate. But acts of rebellion would have been suppressed and punished as such with the full authority and force of the state. At no point, according to this unionist analysis, would the policy have been one of containment and negotiation.

The example of Free Derry was replicated in other nationalist neighbourhoods both in Derry and in Belfast. Sealed off with barricades, the areas were openly policed by the IRA. In what was reported as the biggest British military operation since the Suez Crisis, Operation Motorman, on 31 July 1972, the British Army did eventually act to re-establish control. But this had been preceded in the weeks before by a ceasefire in the course of which Provisional IRA leaders, including Chief of Staff Seán Mac Stíofáin and his lieutenants Martin McGuinness and Gerry Adams, were flown to London for what proved to be unsuccessful negotiations with Northern Ireland Secretary William Whitelaw, acting on behalf of the UK Prime Minister, Edward Heath.  

The common unionist charge was that Westminster and Whitehall continued to classify Northern Ireland, as it had Ireland before partition, as &quot;something more akin to a colonial than a domestic problem&quot;. From the first street deployment of troops in 1969 the impression given was of &quot;a peace-keeping operation in which Her Majesty&#x27;s Forces are not defending their homeland, but holding at bay two sects and factions as in Imperial India, Mandated Palestine or in Cyprus&quot;. This played into the republican narrative that &quot;the insurgence in the housing estates and borderland of Ulster&quot; was something akin to the Third World wars of liberation, and that in Britain&#x27;s first and last colony &quot;decolonisation will be forced upon her as it was in Aden and elsewhere&quot;. Unionism as an expression of settler colonialism, indeed, was an analysis promoted in Britain by left-wing commentators and scholars.

With London, unionist credibility on security did not survive internment, introduced at the insistence of Stormont government under Brian Faulkner. In the early hours of 10 August 1971 342 persons suspected of IRA involvement were arrested without charge or warrant. Many appeared to have no connection with the IRA, and for those that did the link typically was to the left-leaning Officials. Beyond immediate defence of Catholics areas, the Officials had already committed to unarmed political strategy—and on that basis were to declare a ceasefire in May 1972. Leading Provisionals, some of whom were new to the IRA, entirely escaped the net. Unionists blamed the poor intelligence on London&#x27;s decision to tolerate no-go areas.

For the British Government internment proved a public relations disaster, both domestic and international. It was compounded by the interrogation of internees by methods (the so-called the five techniques) that were eventually deemed illegal by the UK Government&#x27;s own commission of inquiry (and subsequently, in a case brought by the Irish government, ruled &quot;inhuman and degrading&quot; by the European Court of Human Rights). Further national and international outrage followed the Army&#x27;s lethal use of live fire against unarmed anti-internment protesters, Bloody Sunday in Derry (20 January 1972) being the most notorious incident.

In March, Heath demanded that Faulkner surrender control of internal security. When, as might have been anticipated, Faulkner resigned rather than comply, Heath in an instant shattered, for unionists, &quot;the theory that the Army was simply in Northern Ireland for the purpose of offering aid to the civil power, of defending legally established institutions against terrorist attack&quot;. In what unionists viewed as a victory for violence, the Conservative government prorogued Stormont and imposed direct rule &quot;not merely to restore order but to reshape the Province&#x27;s system of government&quot;.

==Negotiating the Irish Dimension: 1973–2006==
===Sunningdale Agreement and the Ulster Workers strike===

In October 1972 the British government brought out a Green Paper, &quot;The Future of Northern Ireland&quot;. It articulated what were to be the enduring principles of the British approach to a settlement. It is a fact that an element of the minority in Northern Ireland has hitherto seen itself as simply part of the wider Irish community. The problem of accommodating that minority within the political of Northern Ireland has to some extent been an aspect of a wider problem within Ireland as a whole.

It is therefore clearly desirable that any new arrangements for Northern Ireland should, whilst meeting the wishes of Northern Ireland and Great Britain, be so far as possible acceptable to the Republic of Ireland.

Northern Ireland must and will remain part of the United Kingdom for as long as that is the wish of a majority of the people, but that status does not preclude the necessary taking into account of what has been described in this paper as the &#x27;Irish Dimension.&#x27;A Northern Ireland assembly or authority must be capable of involving all its members constructively in way which satisfy them and those they represent that the whole community has a part to pay in the government of the Province. ... [T]here are strong arguments that the objective of real participation should be achieved by giving minority interests a share in the exercise of executive power. Faulkner&#x27;s later successor as party leader, James Molyneaux, argued that the difficulty for most unionists was not an arrangement in which Protestants and Catholics must consent. It was that, despite a promise not to share power with parties whose &quot;primary&quot; aim is a united Ireland, Faulkner had committed them to agreement with &quot;Republican Catholics&quot;.

Having drawn on both the Republican and Northern Ireland, Labour parties, the SDLP had sought to accommodate &quot;progressive Protestants&quot;. But with PIRA continuing to draw on public outrage over internment and Bloody Sunday, the SDLP was under pressure to present Sunningdale as a means to achieving the goal of Irish unity. The new Health and Social Service Minister, Paddy Devlin, conceded that &quot;all other issues were governed&quot; by a drive to &quot;get all-Ireland institutions established&quot; that would &quot;produce the dynamic that would lead ultimately to an agreed united Ireland&quot;.

The Sunningdale Agreement envisaged a Council of Ireland comprising, with equal delegations from Dublin and Belfast, a Council of Ministers with &quot;executive and harmonising functions&quot; and a Consultative Assembly with advisory and review functions. Unionists feared these created the possibility of their being manoeuvred into a minority position. In retrospect, Devlin regretted the SDLP had not &quot;adopted a two stage approach, by allowing power sharing at Stormont to establish itself&quot;, but by the time he and his colleagues recognised the damage they had caused to Faulkner&#x27;s position by prioritising the Irish Dimension it was too late.

Within a week of taking office as First Minister, Faulkner was forced to resign as UUP leader. A surprise Westminster election at the end of February was a triumph for the United Ulster Unionist Coalition, in which the bulk of his old party stood as Official Unionists with William Craig&#x27;s Ulster Vanguard and Paisley&#x27;s new Democratic Unionists. Faulkner&#x27;s pro-Assembly grouping was left with just 13% of the unionist vote. Arguing that they had deprived Faulkner of any semblance of a mandate, the victors called for new Assembly elections.

When in May the Assembly affirmed the Sunningdale Agreement, a loyalist coalition, the Ulster Workers&#x27; Council (UWC), called a general strike. Within two weeks the UWC, supported by the Ulster Defence Association and UVF paramilitaries, had an effective stranglehold on energy supplies. Concessions sought by Faulkner were blocked by the SDLP. John Hume, then Minister of Commerce, pressed for a British Army enforced fuel-oil plan and for resistance to &quot;a fascist takeover&quot;. After Mervyn Rees, the Northern Ireland Secretary refused his final plea for negotiation, Faulkner resigned. Conceding that there was no longer any constitutional basis for the Executive, Rees dissolved the Assembly.

===Unionism and loyalist para-militarism===

In inaugurating a prolonged period of Direct Rule, the UWC strike weakened the representative role of the unionist parties. There were to be a number of consultative assemblies and forums in the years that followed, but the only elective offices with administrative responsibilities were in downsized district councils. At Westminster unionist MPs contended with governments that remained committed to the principles of the 1972 Green Paper. The initiative in protesting what unionists often perceived as inadequate political and security responses to republican violence passed to loyalists.

The loyalists principal mode of operation was not to be the work stoppage. With Paisley&#x27;s blessing, in 1977 the UDA and a number of other loyalists groups sought to replicate the UWC success. Stoppages in support of a &quot;unionist wish-list&quot;—essentially a return to Stormont-era majority rule—failed to secure the support of critical workers and broke up in face UUP condemnation and firm police action. Nor was it to be the ballot, although both the UVF and the UDA did establish party-political wings. It was assassination: in the course of the Troubles loyalists are credited with the murder of 1027 individuals (about half the number attributed to republican paramilitaries and 30% of the total killed).

Loyalism, of which the once largely rural Orange Order had been the archetypal expression, is generally understood as a strand of unionism. It has been characterised as partisan but not necessarily party-political, and in outlook as more ethnic than consciously British—the perspective of those who are Ulster Protestants first and British second. Loyalism can embrace evangelicals, but the term is consistently associated with the paramilitaries and, on that basis, frequently used as if it were synonymous with working-class unionism. The paramilitaries are &quot;thoroughly working class&quot;. Their hold, typically, has been upon working-class Protestant neighbourhoods and housing estates where they have compensated for the loss of the confidence they enjoyed as district defenders in early years of the Troubles with racketeering and intimidation.

Paisley combined his radically anti-Catholic evangelism early in his career with a foray into physical force loyalism: his formation in 1956 of Ulster Protestant Action (UPA). Ulster Protestant Volunteers implicated Paisley, albeit via supposed intermediaries, in the bombings intended to &quot;blow O&#x27;Neill out of office&quot; early in 1969. Leaders of the UVF, however, are adamant that Paisley had nothing to do with them. His rhetoric may have been inspirational, but theirs was a tightly guarded conspiracy. The motivation to kill came largely from secular forces within the Loyalist community. Through the DUP, Paisley ultimately was to lead the bulk of his following into party politics, emerging in the new century as unionism&#x27;s undisputed leader.

The relationship of other, at the time, more mainstream, unionist political figures to loyalist paramilitaries is also a subject of debate. Paramilitaries deny and resent any implication of political string pulling, They suggest, nonetheless, that they could rely on the politicians to deliver their message. The party leaders might condemn loyalist outrages, but inasmuch as they tried to account for them as reactive, as a response to the injury and frustration of the unionist people, they were effectively employing sectarian, frequently random, killings for a common purpose, to extract concessions from the Government: &quot;You know, &#x27;if you don&#x27;t talk to us, you will have to talk to these armed men&quot;. The relationship of unionists to loyalist violence, in this sense, remained &quot;ambiguous&quot;.

===Opposition to the 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement===

In 1985 Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher signed an agreement at Hillsborough with the Irish Taoiseach, Garret FitzGerald. For the first time this appeared to give the Republic a direct role in the government of Northern Ireland. An Anglo-Irish Intergovernmental Conference, with a locally based secretariat, would invite the Irish government to &quot;put forward views on proposals&quot; for major legislation concerning Northern Ireland. Proposals, however, would only be on matters that are &quot;not the responsibility of a devolved administration in Northern Ireland&quot;. The implication for unionists was that if they wished to limit Dublin&#x27;s influence, they would have to climb down from insistence on majority rule and think again as to how nationalists might be accommodated at Stormont.

The unionist reaction, Thatcher recalled in her memoirs, was &quot;worse than anyone had predicted to me&quot;. The Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) and Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) led an &quot;Ulster says No&quot; campaign against the Anglo-Irish or Hillsborough Agreement, that included strikes, civil disobedience and a mass resignation of unionist MPs from Westminster and suspensions of district council meetings. In the largest unionist protest since Ulster Day 1912, on 23 November 1985 upwards of a hundred thousand rallied outside Belfast City Hall. &quot;Where do the terrorists return to for sanctuary?&quot; Paisley asked the crowd: &quot;To the Irish Republic and yet Mrs. Thatcher tells us the Republic may have some say in our province. We say, Never! Never! Never! Never!&quot;.

Unionists, however, found themselves isolated, opposing a Conservative government and with a Westminster Opposition, Labour, that was sympathetic to Irish unity. With no obvious political leverage, and possibly to prevent initiative passing to the loyalist paramilitaries, in November 1986 Paisley announced his own &quot;third force&quot;: The Ulster Resistance Movement (URM) would &quot;take direct action as and when required&quot;. Recruitment rallies were held in towns across Northern Ireland and thousands were said to have joined. Despite importing arms, some of which were passed on to the UVF and UDA, for the URM the call for action never came. By the fourth anniversary of the accord, unionist protests against the Anglo-Irish Agreement were drawing only token support.

In March 1991, the two unionist parties agreed with the SDLP and Alliance arrangements for political talks on the future of Northern Ireland. In their submission to the inter-party talks in 1992, the Ulster Unionists said they could envisage a range of cross-border bodies so long as these were under the control of the Northern Assembly, did not involve an overarching all-Ireland Council, and were not designed to be developed in the direction of joint authority. While prepared to accommodate an Irish Dimension unionists, at a minimum, were looking for a settlement not an &quot;unsettlement&quot;.

===UK-party unionism===
As an alternative to devolution with an Irish Dimension, some unionists proposed that Northern Ireland reject special status within the United Kingdom, and return to what they conceived as the original unionist programme of complete legislative and political union. This had been the position of the British and Irish Communist Organisation (B&amp;ICO), a small contrarian left-wing grouping that had come to the attention of unionists through their Two-nations Theory of partition and their critical support for the UWC Strike.

The British Labour Party, they argued, had been persuaded that Irish unity was the only left option in Northern Ireland less on its merits than on the superficial appearance of unionism as the six-county Tory Party. Had Labour tested the coalition that was unionism as it began fracture in the late 1960s by itself canvassing for voters in Northern Ireland, the party might have proved the &quot;bridge between Catholics and the state&quot;. Disappointed in Labour&#x27;s response and contending with a unionist split (Democracy Now) led by the only Northern Irish Labour MP (sitting for a London constituency) Kate Hoey, the B&amp;ICO dissolved its Campaign for Labour Representation in 1993. A broader Campaign for Equal Citizenship, in which for a period the B&amp;ICO also participated, to draw all three Westminster parties to Northern Ireland similarly failed to convince. Its president, Robert McCartney did briefly hold together five anti-devolution UK Unionist Party MLAs in the 1998 Assembly.

The 2003 Labour Party Conference accepted legal advice that the party could not continue to exclude Northern Ireland residents from party membership. The National Executive Committee, however, maintains a ban on the Labour Party in Northern Ireland contesting elections. Support for the SDLP continues to be party policy.

In July 2008, under Reg Empey, the Ulster Unionist Party sought to restore the historic link to the Conservative Party, broken in the wake of Sunningdale. With the new Conservative leader David Cameron declaring that &quot;the semi-detached status of Northern Ireland politics needs to end&quot;, Empey announced that his party would be running candidates in upcoming Westminster elections as Ulster Conservatives and Unionists – New Force. The move triggered defections, and in 2010 election the party lost their only remaining MP, Sylvia Hermon who campaigned successfully as an independent. The episode confirmed the UUP&#x27;s eclipse by the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), a party that mixed social and economic populism with their uncompromising unionism.

Northern Ireland Conservatives have since contested elections on their own. They stood five candidates in the 2024 Westminster election, polling a total of 553 votes.

In the leadup to the 2024 general election, Jim Allister&#x27;s Traditional Unionist Voice (TUV) entered into an electoral pact with Reform UK. But while Allister was elected for the TUV in North Antrim, it was by beating the DUP&#x27;s sitting MP Ian Paisley Jr., whom Reform&#x27;s new leader Nigel Farage had personally endorsed. At Westminster Allister declined to take the Reform UK whip.

===1998 Good Friday Agreement===
SDLP leader Seamus Mallon quipped that the 1998 Belfast, or Good Friday, Agreement (GFA) was &quot;Sunningdale for slow learners&quot;. This was not the view of David Trimble, with whom Mallon, as joint head of the new power-sharing Executive, shared the Office of First Minister and Deputy First Minister (OFMDFM). Trimble believed that unionism had secured much that had been denied to Faulkner 25 years before.

The Council of Ireland, that Mallon&#x27;s party colleague, Hugh Logue, had referred to as &quot;the vehicle that would trundle Unionists into a united Ireland&quot; was replaced by a North-South Ministerial Council. &quot;Not a supra-national body&quot;, and with no &quot;pre-cooked&quot; agenda, the Council was accountable to the Assembly where procedural rules (the Petition of Concern) allowed for cross-community consent, and hence a &quot;unionist veto&quot;.

For the first time, Dublin formally recognised the border as the limit of its jurisdiction. The Republic agreed to do what the SDLP had refused to consider in 1974, to amend its Constitution to omit the territorial claim to the whole island of Ireland and concede that Irish unity could be achieved only by majority consent &quot;democratically expressed, in &quot;both jurisdictions in the island&quot;&quot;. The firm nationalist principle that unionists are a minority within the territory of the state was set aside.

In return, however, unionists had to accept that within new framework for power-sharing there could be no escaping the need to secure republican consent. The new Executive would be formed not, as in 1974, by voluntary coalition but by the allocation ministerial posts to the Assembly parties on a proportional basis. This d&#x27;Hondt method ensured that unionists would find themselves sitting at the Executive table with those they had persistently labelled IRA-Sinn Féin. In 1998 Sinn Féin, who had been gaining on the SDLP since the eighties, had 18 Assembly seats (to 26 for the SDLP) securing them two of the ten Executive departments.

Unionists were concerned that this sharing of office was based on a principle that &quot;rendered dangerously incoherent&quot; the UK government&#x27;s position in relation to the Union. The Agreement insists on a symmetry between unionism and nationalism, the two &quot;designations&quot; it privileges over &quot;others&quot; through the procedural rules of the new Assembly. Either can insist (through a Petition of Concern) on decision by parallel consent, and they nominate the First and Deputy First Ministers which, despite the distinction in title, are a joint office. &quot;Parity of esteem&quot; is accorded to two diametrically opposed aspirations: one to support and uphold the state, the other to renounce and subvert the state in favour of another. The UK government may have deflected the republican demand that it be a persuader for Irish unity, but at the cost, in the unionist view, of maintaining neutrality with regard to future of Northern Ireland.

In the UK&#x27;s acceptance of Irish unity by consent was not new. It had been there in 1973 at Sunningdale, in the Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985 and again in the 1993 Downing Street Declaration in which London had disclaimed any &quot;selfish strategic or economic interest&quot; in the matter. Unionists were nonetheless discomforted by the republican claim that the 1998 Agreement had, in the words of Gerry Adams, &quot;dealt the union a severe blow&quot;: &quot;there was now no absolute commitment, no raft of parliamentary acts to back up an absolute claim, only an agreement to stay until the majority decided otherwise&quot;.

In the May 1998 referendum on the Good Friday Agreement, on a turnout of 81%, 71.1% voted in favour. (A simultaneous referendum held in the Republic of Ireland on a 56% turnout produced a majority in favour of 94.4%). The best estimates indicated that all but 3 or 4% of Catholics/Nationalists voted Yes, but that almost half of Protestants/Unionists (between 47 and 49%) stood with the DUP and voted No.

Chief among the DUP&#x27;s objections was neither the North-South Ministerial Council, although that remained under suspicion, nor the principle of power-sharing as such. When the new Executive was formed, the DUP matched Sinn Féin in taking two ministerial seats. The issue was the continuation of the IRA as an armed and active organisation: the republicans were at the table while retaining, at readiness, the capacity for terrorist action further bolstered by the release of republican prisoners. In an agreement that called parties to use their influence with paramilitaries to achieve disarmament, there was no effective sanction. Martin McGuinness and Gerry Adams were free to insist that the IRA took their own counsel.

In October 2002, at a time the IRA had finally agreed but not yet complied with a process for decommissioning their arms, a police raid on Sinn Féin&#x27;s offices at Stormont suggested that the organisation was still active and collecting intelligence. Trimble led the UUP out of the Executive and the Assembly was suspended. (No charges were brought as a result of the raid at the centre of which was a Sinn Féin staffer, Denis Donaldson, later exposed as a government informer, and a public inquiry was ruled not in the public interest).

===Democratic Unionists enter government with Sinn Féin===
In October 2006 the DUP and Sinn Féin found an accommodation in the St Andrews Agreement, paving the way for Ian Paisley and Martin McGuinness to be nominated as First, and Deputy First, Ministers by a restored Assembly. For the UUP&#x27;s new leader Reg Empey the breakthrough was merely the GFA &quot;for slow learners&quot;. But while he acknowledged compromises, Paisley argued that Northern Ireland was &quot;turning a corner&quot;. The IRA had disarmed, and from Sinn Féin support had been won &quot;for all the institutions of policing&quot;. Northern Ireland had &quot;come to a time of peace&quot;.

After thirteen months in office Paisley was replaced as First Minister of Northern Ireland by his long-time DUP deputy Peter Robinson Robinson, and Arlene Foster who followed him in office from January 2016, had colder relationships than had Paisley with McGuinness and with his party colleagues and these eventually broke down. Citing &quot;DUP&#x27;s arrogance&quot; in relation to a range of issues, including management of a financial scandal, in January 2017 McGuinness resigned. Sinn Féin refused to nominate a successor, without whom the devolved institutions were unworkable. Assembly elections followed on 2 March 2017. For the first time in the history of Northern Ireland as a political entity, with 45 of 90 seats unionists failed to secure an overall majority in a parliament of the region.

It was not until January 2020 that a deal was brokered (New Decade, New Approach) to restore Assembly, and to persuade Sinn Féin to nominate their new leader in the North Michelle O&#x27;Neill as McGuinness&#x27;s successor.

The withdrawal of support within the DUP for Paisley&#x27;s newly conciliatory leadership was not marked by a lasting split over the DUP decision to go into an Executive with Sinn Féin. In the Assembly, Paisley&#x27;s former lieutenant, Jim Allister became the lone Traditional Unionist Voice MLA protesting an &quot;enforced coalition&quot; that &quot;holds at the heart of government&quot; those determined to subvert the state. In the 2024 general election, Allister was elected Member of Parliament for North Antrim, defeating incumbent Ian Paisley Jr. The seat had been held by a member of the Paisley family since 1970.

==Unionism as a minority bloc==
===Unionist demographics===

Asked to account for the 2019 loss to Sinn Féin&#x27;s John Finucane of North Belfast, a seat her deputy Nigel Dodds had held for nineteen years and which never previously returned a nationalist MP, Arlene Foster replied &quot;The demography just wasn&#x27;t there. We worked very hard to get the vote out... but the demography was against us&quot;. A Sinn Féin election flyer used in the previous 2015 run against Dodds advertised the changed ratio of Catholics to Protestants in the constituency (46.94 per cent to 45.67 per cent). It had a simple message for Catholic voters, &quot;Make the change&quot;.

Demography, in this sense, has been a long term concern for unionists. The proportion of people across Northern Ireland identifying as Protestant, or raised Protestant, has fallen from 60% in the 1960s to 48%, while those raised Catholic has increased from 35 to 45%. Only two of the six counties, Antrim and Down, now have &quot;significant Protestant majorities&quot;, and only one – Lisburn – of its five official cities. A majority Protestant Northern Ireland &quot;is now restricted to the suburban area surrounding Belfast&quot;. Unionist representation has declined. The combined unionist vote, trailing below 50% in elections since 2014, fell to a new low of just over 43% in the 2019 and 2024 Westminster polls.

Unionism losing, however, has not necessarily meant nationalism winning: overall there has been &quot;no comparable increase in the nationalist vote mirroring the decline in the unionist bloc&quot;. Despite symbolic triumphs over unionism—returning the larger number of Westminster MPs in 2019, and Sinn Féin as the largest party to Stormont in 2022—at 40% the combined nationalist vote remained below the 42% secured in 2005.

Surveys suggest that half the people in Northern Ireland consider themselves neither unionist nor nationalist. However, those eschewing such labels (upwards of 17% also refuse a religious designation) tend to be younger and less likely to turnout in Northern Ireland&#x27;s still largely polarised elections. It is still the case that few Protestants vote for nationalists, and few Catholics for unionists. But they will vote for others, for parties that decline to make an issue of Northern Ireland&#x27;s constitutional status.

The principal other party has been the Alliance Party of Northern Ireland. In 2019, Alliance more than doubled its vote from 7.1% to 18.5% in the Northern-Ireland wide May European elections and from 7.9% to 16.8% in the December Westminster election. Competing in the 2022 Assembly election with the full range of local parties, Alliance secured 13.5% of first-preference votes and, with vote transfers, close to a fifth of Assembly seats.

According to exit polling in the 2019 Westminster election, the Alliance surge drew both on past unionist and on past nationalist voters. In the Westminster election, 18% of Alliance&#x27;s new backers said they voted DUP at the previous contest and 3% for the UUP. 12% had voted for Sinn Féin, and 5% for the-SDLP. The party meanwhile gained a quarter of all non-voters from two years earlier. Alliance is neutral on the constitutional issue, but a January 2020 survey indicates that in a border poll, post-Brexit, twice as many of its voters (47%) would opt for Irish unity as for remaining in the United Kingdom (22%).

Since O&#x27;Neill, who in the last Stormont parliamentary election personally canvassed Catholic households, there have been calls within unionism for it to break out of its Protestant base. When he was DUP leader, Peter Robinson spoke of not being &quot;prepared to write off over 40 per cent of our population as being out of reach&quot;. Surveys had been suggesting that in a border poll between a quarter and a third of Catholics might vote for the Northern Ireland to remain in the UK. While anti-partition sentiment has strengthened post-Brexit, there may be a significant number of Catholics who meet the standard of &quot;functional unionists&quot;: voters whose &quot;rejection of the unionist label is more to do with the brand image of unionism than with their constitutional preferences&quot;. It remains the case that only one half of one percent of DUP and UUP members identify as Catholics: a handful of individuals.

===Defence of unionist culture===

In disclaiming any &quot;selfish or strategic&quot; British interest, the 1994 Downing Street Declaration had effectively ruled that &quot;there could no such thing as disloyalty within Northern Ireland&quot;. The conflicting ambitions of nationalism and unionism were of equal validity.

Unionists accused nationalists taking this new &quot;parity of esteem&quot; as a license for a policy of &quot;unrelenting harassment&quot;. Trimble spoke of having to reverse an &quot;insidious erosion of the culture and ethnic national identity of the British people of Ulster&quot; systematically pursued by &quot;the Provisional IRA and its fellow travellers&quot;; and Robinson of a &quot;fightback&quot; against the &quot;unrelenting Sinn Féin campaign to promote Irish culture and target British structures and symbols&quot;.

Unionists alleged a &quot;pan-nationalist [SDLP-Sinn Féin] front&quot; was manipulating public order powers to ban, re-route or otherwise regulate time-hallowed Orange marches. For Trimble the flashpoint was the conflict at Drumcree (1995–2001), for Robinson and Arlene Foster it was the similarly drawn-out Ardoyne shopfronts standoff (2013-2016) in north Belfast. A decision of the once firmly unionist Belfast City Council in 2012 to reduce the number of days the Union Flag was flown from City Hall, was also interpreted as a step in a wider &quot;cultural war&quot; against &quot;Britishness&quot;, triggering protest.

The greater issue in inter-party talks proved to be language rights. On Good Friday, 10 April 1998, Prime Minister Tony Blair was surprised by a last minute demand for recognition of a &quot;Scottish dialect spoken in some parts of Northern Ireland&quot; that Unionists regarded their &quot;equivalent to the Irish language&quot;. In insisting on parity for Ulster Scots or Ullans, Trimble believed he was taking the cultural war onto the nationalists&#x27; own ground. Unionists argued that nationalists had &quot;weaponised&quot; the Irish language issue as &quot;a tool&quot; with which to &quot;batter the Protestant people&quot;.

The DUP&#x27;s first Minister of Culture, Arts and Leisure, Nelson McCausland, argued that privileging Irish through a language act would be an exercise in &quot;ethnic territorial marking&quot;. His decision, and that of his party colleagues, to resist Sinn Féin&#x27;s demand for a stand-alone Irish Language Act, in part by insisting on compensating provisions for Ulster Scots, became one of the principal, publicly acknowledged, sticking points in the three years of on and off again negotiations required to restore the power-sharing executive in 2020. Other unionists object. The &quot;positive ethnic, religious or national special pleading&quot; implicit in the parading, flags and language counteroffensive, they argue, risks defining unionist culture as &quot;subaltern and therefore ripe for absorption into Irish culture as a &#x27;cherished&#x27; minor tradition&quot;.

The 2020 &quot;New Decade New Approach&quot; agreement promised both the Irish language and Ulster-Scots new Commissioners to support their development but did not accord them equal legal status. While the UK government recognised Scots and Ulster Scots as a regional or minority language for the &quot;encouragement&quot; and &quot;facilitation&quot; purposes of Part II of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, for Irish it assumed the more stringent Part III obligations in respect of education, media and administration. Yet &quot;New Decade, New Approach&quot; did take a step with Ulster Scots that it does not take with Irish speakers: the UK government pledged to &quot;recognise Ulster Scots as a national minority under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities&quot;. This is a second Council of Europe treaty whose provisions were previously applied in Northern Ireland to non-white groups, to Irish Travellers and to the Roma.

Insofar as unionists are persuaded to identity with Ulster Scots and employ it as a marker (as the reference to &quot;the Ulster Scots / Ulster British tradition in Northern Ireland&quot; in &quot;New Decade, New Approach&quot; might imply) they define themselves, &quot;in effect&quot;, as a scheduled ethnicity.

In 2022, over the objections of unionists who in protest against the Northern Ireland Protocol continued to veto a return to devolved power-sharing, the legislation foreseen in &quot;New Decade New Approach&quot; was enacted by the Parliament of the United Kingdom. The Identity and Language (Northern Ireland) Act received royal assent on December 6.

===Brexit and the Northern Ireland Protocol===

While the UUP decided that &quot;on balance Northern Ireland is better remaining in the European Union&quot;, in the run-up to the UK&#x27;s June 2016 referendum on the future of UK membership in the European Union, the larger DUP, with an equal claim to be a pro-business party with a strong farming support base, campaigned actively for Leave. At a time when Sinn Féin was citing the cross-border, all-island, economic activity facilitated and supported by the EU as a further argument for Irish unity, there was a sense that, among other benefits, Brexit would restore a measure of &quot;distance&quot; from Dublin.

When, by a margin of 12% Northern Ireland voted Remain (with Scotland, the only UK region to do so outside London), the DUP was left to argue that Leave had been the UK-wide decision, and could be honoured only by the UK &quot;leaving the European Union as a whole&quot;, its &quot;territorial and economic integrity&quot; intact.

The party&#x27;s ten MPs enabled Theresa May&#x27;s Conservative Government to remain in power; following the hung parliament that resulted from the snap general election in June 2017. But, to their dismay, at year&#x27;s end May returned from Brussels with a proposal that Northern Ireland, alone, continue with the Republic of Ireland under a common EU&#x27;s trade regime.

Coalescing behind the Dublin government, the EU 27 had ruled that the interests of the Northern Ireland peace process are &quot;paramount&quot;. To avoid the &quot;step backwards&quot; that would be represented, &quot;symbolically and psychologically&quot;, by a &quot;hardening&quot; of the Irish border, Northern Ireland should remain in regulatory alignment with the European Single Market and behind the Customs Union frontier. That would allow necessary physical checks on goods to be removed to air and sea points of entry.

Arlene Foster protested that the hazards of a no-deal Brexit would be better than this &quot;annexation of Northern Ireland away from the rest of the United Kingdom&quot;. She was supported by prominent Brexiteers. Boris Johnson told the 2018 DUP conference that the EU had made Northern Ireland &quot;their indispensable bargaining chip&quot;: &quot;if we wanted to do free trade deals, if we wanted to cut tariffs or vary our regulation the we would have to leave Northern Ireland behind as a semi-colony of the EU . . . damaging the fabric of the Union with regulatory checks . . . down the Irish Sea&quot;. It would be an &quot;historic mistake&quot;. Privately, Johnson complained that the attention to Northern Ireland sensitivities was a case of &quot;the tail wagging the dog&quot; Within three months of replacing May in July 2019, he had amended her withdrawal agreement, stripping the Irish Backstop not of its essential provisions—Northern Ireland would remain a customs point of entry for the EU—but rather dropping the suggestion that, to avoid treating Northern Ireland differently, the UK as a whole might accept an interim regulatory and customs partnership.

Unionists acknowledged the sense of &quot;betrayal&quot;. Johnson&#x27;s Northern Ireland Protocol was &quot;the worst of all worlds&quot;. Citing free-trade provisions of the Act of Union, past and present unionist leaders pressed for a judicial review. When eventually rendered in June 2021, the ruling of the Belfast High Court was that while there indeed was a conflict with the Act, in approving the implicitly amending Protocol Parliament was sovereign.

With the Prime Minister secure in his &quot;Get-Brexit-Done&quot; mandate from the 2019 UK general election, the DUP&#x27;s last line of defence was themselves to appeal to the international and constitutional status of the Good Friday Agreement. Johnson had made one apparent concession: every four years the Northern Ireland Assembly would be called upon to renew the region&#x27;s new double-border trade arrangements. However, this was to be by simple majority vote. The decision could not be subject to a Petition of Concern, and thus to the prospect of a unionist veto. For the DUP this was a violation of the Good Friday Agreement under which, they argued, any proposal to &quot;treat NI differently to the rest of UK&quot; had to be on the basis of parallel unionist-nationalist majorities. Citing &quot; the total disregard of this principle&quot;, in February 2022 the new DUP leader, Jeffrey Donaldson, withdrew Paul Givan as First Minister, collapsing the Assembly and executive.

Two years later, on the strength of the government&#x27;s assurances that the Protocol (and the ancillary 2022 Windsor Framework) would be implemented without routine checks on &quot;internal&quot; trade with Great Britain and would be accompanied by measures to promote East-West (i.e. UK) as opposed to North-South (EU/Irish) movements of goods and services, the DUP agreed to a restoration of the Assembly. On 3 February, Michelle O&#x27;Neill (Sinn Féin) and Emma Little-Pengelly (DUP) were sworn in as First, and Deputy First, Ministers of a Northern Ireland executive in which, with 3 of 8 ministerial departments, unionists are for the first time a minority.

==Unionist political parties==

* Irish Conservative Party (1835–1891)
* Irish Loyal and Patriotic Union (1885–1891)
* Liberal Unionist Party (1886–1912)
* Irish Unionist Alliance (1891–1922)
* Ulster Unionist Party (1905/1921–present)
* Conservative and Unionist Party (1912–present)
* Commonwealth Labour Party (1942–1947)
* Protestant Unionist Party (1966–1971)
* Democratic Unionist Party (1971–present)
* Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party (1973–1978)
* Unionist Party of Northern Ireland (1974–1981)
* Volunteer Political Party (1974–1975)
* United Ulster Unionist Party (1975–1984)
* Progressive Unionist Party (1978–present)
* Ulster Popular Unionist Party (1980–1995)
* Ulster (Loyalist) Democratic Party (1982–2001)
* UK Independence Party (UKIP 1993–present)
* UK Unionist Party (UKUP 1995–2007)
* United Unionist Coalition (1998–2012)
* Northern Ireland Unionist Party (1999–2008)
* Traditional Unionist Voice (2007–present)
* NI21 (2013–2016)

==See Also==
*Reform Group (Ireland)
*West Brit

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="0" end="19" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="Unionism in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="75" end="80" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="88" end="102" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="139" end="146" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="148" end="156" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="161" end="166" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251652" start="213" end="232" title="Protestantism in Ireland" label="Protestant minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="278" end="299" title="Catholic Emancipation" label="Catholic Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="344" end="360" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Irish parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="368" end="377" title="Partition of Ireland" label="Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="390" end="405" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="Ulster unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="434" end="450" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="456" end="464" title="devolved" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752036" start="531" end="551" title="United Ireland" label="all-Ireland republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="581" end="603" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="1998 Belfast Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="692" end="710" title="Irish nationalists" label="Irish nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="725" end="750" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="852" end="868" title="Irish republican" label="Irish republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="870" end="879" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362221" start="881" end="895" title="First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland" label="First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q653009" start="1003" end="1015" title="Presbyterian Church in Ireland" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="1032" end="1040" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="1070" end="1078" title="Church of Ireland" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="1079" end="1091" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070653" start="1092" end="1105" title="Irish Conservative Party" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="1118" end="1139" title="Irish Home Rule Bills" label="Irish Home Rule Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="1168" end="1176" title="Ulster loyalism" label="loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1199" end="1210" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="1274" end="1281" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q935581" start="1358" end="1375" title="Ulster Volunteers" label="Ulster Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="1389" end="1409" title="Partition of Ireland" label="partition settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="1456" end="1474" title="Irish Free State" label="separate statehood"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="1619" end="1640" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="1655" end="1670" title="devolved powers" label="devolved powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9300937" start="1678" end="1705" title="Northern Ireland Parliament" label="Northern Ireland Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="1793" end="1804" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="2115" end="2127" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969678" start="2169" end="2182" title="power-sharing" label="power-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="2229" end="2248" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058504" start="2299" end="2321" title="1998 Northern Ireland Good Friday Agreement referendum" label="1998 Belfast Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="2340" end="2350" title="Irish republicanism" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="2355" end="2378" title="loyalist paramilitaries" label="loyalist paramilitaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="2490" end="2518" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414948" start="2579" end="2593" title="consociational" label="consociational"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="2777" end="2783" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q105474751" start="2821" end="2846" title="Northern Ireland Protocol" label="Northern Ireland Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="3220" end="3238" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3252" end="3263" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366584" start="3302" end="3317" title="Irish Patriot Party" label="Irish Patriots."/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="3355" end="3375" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Parliament in Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="3445" end="3453" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="3469" end="3480" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777934" start="3487" end="3508" title="Protestant Ascendancy" label="Protestant Ascendancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229301" start="3577" end="3587" title="Dissenters" label="Dissenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3654" end="3668" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3756" end="3784" title="American War of Independence" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294261" start="3793" end="3809" title="Irish Volunteers (18th century)" label="Irish Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995076" start="3896" end="3920" title="Constitution of 1782" label="legislative independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="3996" end="4008" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q742767" start="4128" end="4141" title="Dublin Castle" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="4185" end="4200" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="4312" end="4329" title="French Revolution" label="republican France"/>
<link wikidata="Q535030" start="4337" end="4352" title="United Irishmen" label="United Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="4538" end="4554" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="uprising in 1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555173" start="4608" end="4617" title="Loyalists" label="Loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="4835" end="4856" title="Catholic emancipation" label="Catholic emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="4878" end="4890" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Act of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="5065" end="5076" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="5385" end="5406" title="Catholic emancipation" label="Catholic emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053072" start="5707" end="5727" title="Catholic Association" label="Catholic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q314917" start="5729" end="5750" title="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995076" start="5859" end="5879" title="Constitution of 1782" label="Constitution of 1782"/>
<link wikidata="Q106175747" start="5947" end="6008" title="Parliamentary Elections (Ireland) Act 1829" label="fivefold increase in the threshold for the property franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539004" start="6062" end="6074" title="George Ensor" label="George Ensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443493" start="6310" end="6325" title="Second Reformation (England and Ireland)" label="New Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6501" end="6515" title="Catholic Church" label="Church of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719785" start="6607" end="6618" title="Henry Cooke (minister)" label="Henry Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070653" start="6679" end="6691" title="Irish Conservative Party" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346115" start="6716" end="6726" title="Robert Jocelyn, 3rd Earl of Roden" label="Lord Roden"/>
<link wikidata="Q58094" start="6730" end="6742" title="Royal Hillsborough" label="Hillsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="7028" end="7033" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640154" start="7061" end="7073" title="tenant-right" label="tenant-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="7078" end="7088" title="free-trade" label="free-trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q40062" start="7089" end="7097" title="Liberal Party" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070653" start="7108" end="7120" title="Irish Conservative Party" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="7125" end="7137" title="Orange Order" label="Orange-Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777934" start="7163" end="7173" title="Protestant Ascendancy" label="Ascendancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="7506" end="7518" title="Irish Famine" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="7699" end="7710" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699485" start="7740" end="7759" title="Tenant Right League" label="Tenant Right League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016677" start="7818" end="7841" title="Independent Irish Party" label="Independent Irish Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450559" start="7852" end="7865" title="Young Ireland" label="Young Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q167386" start="7868" end="7879" title="Charles Gavan Duffy (Australian politician)" label="Gavan Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699485" start="7891" end="7916" title="Tenant Right League" label="League of North and South"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018324" start="8114" end="8138" title="William Sharman Crawford" label="William Sharman Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q106240540" start="8143" end="8158" title="James MacKnight (Irish agrarian reformer)" label="James MacKnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="8200" end="8209" title="Orange Order" label="Orangemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318051" start="8277" end="8292" title="Reform Act 1867" label="Reform Act 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851889" start="8690" end="8707" title="Ballot Act 1872" label="the secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q918351" start="8852" end="8856" title="1874 United Kingdom general election" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q476840" start="8865" end="8881" title="Home Rule League" label="Home Rule League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311653" start="8953" end="8978" title="Irish Parliamentary Party" label="Irish Parliamentary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="9042" end="9065" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070614" start="9106" end="9142" title="Disestablishment of the Church of Ireland" label="disestablished the Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931985" start="9171" end="9204" title="Landlord and Tenant (Ireland) Act 1870" label="Landlord and Tenant (Ireland) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417847" start="9711" end="9726" title="Long Depression" label="Long Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801918" start="9744" end="9752" title="Land War" label="Land War"/>
<link wikidata="Q446921" start="9814" end="9840" title="Irish National Land League" label="Irish National Land League"/>
<link wikidata="Q317436" start="9873" end="9896" title="Charles Stewart Parnell" label="Charles Stewart Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931954" start="9920" end="9928" title="Land Law (Ireland) Act 1881" label="Land Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797490" start="9953" end="9967" title="three F&amp;#x27;s" label="three F&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128826" start="10333" end="10345" title="James Armour" label="James Armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q805450" start="10349" end="10359" title="Ballymoney" label="Ballymoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q192761" start="10448" end="10454" title="County Armagh" label="Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q187402" start="10456" end="10461" title="County Cavan" label="Cavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190678" start="10463" end="10472" title="County Fermanagh" label="Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q192229" start="10477" end="10483" title="County Tyrone" label="Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314210" start="10643" end="10667" title="Representation of the People Act 1884" label="Third Reform Act of 1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397257" start="10780" end="10793" title="1885 United Kingdom general election" label="1885 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349848" start="11166" end="11192" title="Government of Ireland Bill 1886" label="Government of Ireland Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859616" start="11449" end="11460" title="Peerage of Ireland" label="Irish Peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600557" start="12321" end="12330" title="Clydeside" label="Clydeside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="12493" end="12505" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363003" start="12530" end="12539" title="Rome Rule" label="Rome Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="12707" end="12715" title="Church of Ireland" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="12838" end="12845" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="12847" end="12857" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="12859" end="12868" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694455" start="13042" end="13068" title="Loyalist Anti-Repeal Union" label="Loyalist Anti-Repeal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343734" start="13209" end="13234" title="Edward James Saunderson" label="Colonel Edward Saunderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054835" start="13256" end="13261" title="Cavan (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370565" start="13293" end="13297" title="sash" label="sash"/>
<link wikidata="Q314773" start="13531" end="13554" title="Lord Randolph Churchill" label="Lord Randolph Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="13991" end="14008" title="Liberal Unionists" label="Liberal Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071313" start="14083" end="14106" title="Irish Unionist Alliance" label="Irish Unionist Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="14149" end="14153" title="Whip (politics)" label="whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128165" start="14327" end="14348" title="Government of Ireland Bill 1893" label="second Home Rule bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q75865389" start="14522" end="14537" title="Thomas Sinclair (politician, 1838–1914)" label="Thomas Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043276" start="14739" end="14752" title="Northern Whig" label="Northern Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="14870" end="14880" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070653" start="14949" end="14955" title="Irish Conservative Party" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="15080" end="15092" title="Church of Ireland" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="15108" end="15117" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="15982" end="15996" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="16086" end="16090" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="16110" end="16124" title="Lord Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310838" start="16227" end="16240" title="Dublin Castle administration" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="16283" end="16296" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q251724" start="16316" end="16343" title="Chief Secretary for Ireland" label="Chief Secretary for Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="16369" end="16383" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Arthur Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160466" start="16591" end="16610" title="Congested Districts Board for Ireland" label="Congested Districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566909" start="16759" end="16771" title="South Dublin (UK Parliament constituency)" label="South Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140471" start="16773" end="16788" title="Horace Plunkett" label="Horace Plunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="17319" end="17341" title="Liberal Unionist Party" label="Liberal Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070896" start="17381" end="17401" title="Land Acts (Ireland)" label="The Land Act of 1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q177235" start="17570" end="17587" title="Sir Edward Carson" label="Sir Edward Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664026" start="17829" end="17868" title="Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898" label="1898 to democratically elected councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070896" start="17941" end="17957" title="Land Acts (Ireland)" label="Wyndham Land Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084261" start="18060" end="18078" title="Sir Thomas Russell, 1st Baronet" label="Thomas Russell, MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402801" start="18111" end="18118" title="crofter" label="crofter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071313" start="18156" end="18179" title="Irish Unionist Alliance" label="Irish Unionist Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568708" start="18215" end="18227" title="South Tyrone (UK Parliament constituency)" label="South Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170760" start="18296" end="18305" title="Cork City (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cork City"/>
<link wikidata="Q246726" start="18310" end="18330" title="William O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="William O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q875645" start="18623" end="18636" title="Gaelic League" label="Gaelic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="18664" end="18671" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227790" start="18704" end="18725" title="John Crozier (archbishop of Armagh)" label="John Baptiste Crozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258722" start="18734" end="18752" title="John St. Clair Boyd" label="John St Clair Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q124608800" start="18824" end="18845" title="Richard Rutledge Kane (senior)" label="Richard Rutledge Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q275465" start="18903" end="18917" title="George Wyndham" label="George Wyndham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777235" start="19008" end="19026" title="Anthony MacDonnell" label="Anthony MacDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="19982" end="19988" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526416" start="20169" end="20180" title="Denis Henry" label="Denis Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567857" start="20217" end="20234" title="South Londonderry (UK Parliament constituency)" label="South Londonderry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679069" start="20387" end="20425" title="Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland" label="Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="20524" end="20547" title="Ulster Unionist Council" label="Ulster Unionist Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="20642" end="20654" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="20710" end="20721" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="20777" end="20790" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="20885" end="20911" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083121" start="20913" end="20944" title="Charles Stewart Vane-Tempest-Stewart, 6th Marquess of Londonderry" label="The 6th Marquess of Londonderry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895348" start="21042" end="21059" title="Dublin University (constituency)" label="Dublin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q336809" start="21167" end="21178" title="James Craig, 1st Viscount Craigavon" label="James Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315799" start="21221" end="21237" title="Dunville &amp;amp; Co" label="Dunville Whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="21393" end="21401" title="Irish Catholics" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318051" start="21927" end="21953" title="Reform Act 1867" label="new workingman&amp;#x27;s vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013699" start="22093" end="22109" title="William Johnston (Irish politician)" label="William Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390816" start="22170" end="22187" title="1874 Factory Act" label="labour protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640154" start="22189" end="22201" title="tenant right" label="tenant right"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851889" start="22203" end="22220" title="Ballot Act 1872" label="the secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q751599" start="22292" end="22305" title="South Belfast (UK Parliament constituency)" label="South Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794013" start="22307" end="22319" title="Thomas Sloan" label="Thomas Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882319" start="22380" end="22410" title="Belfast Protestant Association" label="Belfast Protestant Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="22591" end="22606" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q104177435" start="22786" end="22805" title="Robert Lindsay Crawford" label="R. Lindsay Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016920" start="22816" end="22840" title="Independent Orange Order" label="Independent Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353993" start="22898" end="22909" title="syndicalist" label="syndicalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583571" start="22910" end="22922" title="James Larkin" label="James Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558653" start="22937" end="22960" title="1907 Belfast Dock strike" label="Belfast Lockout of 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="23316" end="23330" title="British Labour" label="British Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848605" start="23406" end="23433" title="Irish Trades Union Congress" label="Irish Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q177235" start="23784" end="23797" title="Edward Carson" label="Edward Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027199" start="24108" end="24131" title="Trade Disputes Act 1906" label="Trade Disputes Act 1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374979" start="24137" end="24162" title="People&amp;#x27;s Budget" label="People&amp;#x27;s Budget 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336898" start="24172" end="24199" title="National Insurance Act 1911" label="National Insurance Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435643" start="25016" end="25042" title="Ulster Covenant" label="Solemn League and Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q322170" start="25171" end="25182" title="suffragette" label="suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576364" start="25185" end="25197" title="Isabella Tod" label="Isabella Tod"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="25458" end="25465" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013699" start="25469" end="25485" title="William Johnston (Irish politician)" label="William Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q78173170" start="25845" end="25864" title="Elizabeth McCracken (Irish writer)" label="Elizabeth McCracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967499" start="26129" end="26168" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="26360" end="26372" title="Irish nationalism" label="nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q177235" start="26486" end="26492" title="Edward Carson" label="Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q76499700" start="26714" end="26727" title="Lillian Metge" label="Lillian Metge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108771" start="26746" end="26763" title="Lisburn Cathedral" label="Lisburn Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576049" start="26803" end="26816" title="Dorothy Evans" label="Dorothy Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q935581" start="26885" end="26902" title="Ulster Volunteers" label="Ulster Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427309" start="27107" end="27137" title="Representation of the People Act 1918" label="women&amp;#x27;s franchise in 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="27181" end="27197" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314203" start="27199" end="27226" title="Representation of the People (Equal Franchise) Act 1928" label="equal voting rights in 1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252362" start="27238" end="27250" title="Dehra Parker" label="Dehra Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589274" start="27303" end="27327" title="Northern Ireland Cabinet (1921 - 1972)" label="Northern Ireland cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="27472" end="27485" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279790" start="27502" end="27522" title="Third Home Rule Bill" label="Third Home Rule Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374979" start="27836" end="27861" title="People&amp;#x27;s Budget" label="1910 People&amp;#x27;s Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043276" start="28044" end="28057" title="Northern Whig" label="Northern Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q333573" start="28868" end="28877" title="Leo Amery" label="Leo Amery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435643" start="29149" end="29189" title="Ulster Covenant" label="Ulster&amp;#x27;s Solemn League and Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18074156" start="29419" end="29429" title="Conspiracy (political)" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q935581" start="29623" end="29640" title="Ulster Volunteers" label="Ulster Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q59281" start="29712" end="29734" title="Provisional Government" label="Provisional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969864" start="29917" end="29933" title="British Covenant" label="British Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q356361" start="29947" end="29960" title="Alfred Milner" label="Alfred Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q553229" start="29973" end="29993" title="Union Defence League" label="Union Defence League"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643440" start="30262" end="30300" title="British declaration of war on Germany (1914)" label="United Kingdom declared war on Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="30348" end="30360" title="Royal Assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074958" start="30742" end="30758" title="Irish Volunteers" label="Irish Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190570" start="30779" end="30791" title="Irish Citizen Army" label="Citizen Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q18108964" start="30891" end="30898" title="German occupation of Belgium during World War I" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="30940" end="30961" title="Easter Rising" label="Dublin in Easter 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225239" start="31083" end="31104" title="Conscription in Ireland" label="military conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042701" start="31156" end="31171" title="Coupon Election" label="Coupon Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="31402" end="31411" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="31489" end="31501" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="32086" end="32101" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q129968" start="32374" end="32404" title="Government of Ireland Act 1920" label="Government of Ireland Act 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="33041" end="33057" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="33082" end="33100" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anglo-Irish Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="33239" end="33247" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="33251" end="33257" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="33809" end="33827" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="35552" end="35568" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q107001347" start="35574" end="35604" title="Government of Northern Ireland" label="Government of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="35657" end="35665" title="dominion" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="35718" end="35724" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9300937" start="35752" end="35762" title="Parliament of Northern Ireland" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q684914" start="35778" end="35792" title="Prime Minister of Northern Ireland" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q336809" start="35794" end="35809" title="Sir James Craig" label="Sir James Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="35816" end="35825" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867127" start="35843" end="35851" title="Governor of Northern Ireland" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246341" start="35869" end="35882" title="Privy Council of Northern Ireland" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="36289" end="36302" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="36321" end="36342" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q152910" start="36364" end="36368" title="whip" label="whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q9247597" start="36376" end="36392" title="House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="36503" end="36515" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354552" start="36601" end="36615" title="election agent" label="election agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019914" start="36656" end="36670" title="William Walker (trade unionist)" label="William Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="36672" end="36688" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257567" start="36797" end="36813" title="Home Rule Crisis" label="Home Rule Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642359" start="36827" end="36847" title="Labour Party in Northern Ireland" label="British Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="36878" end="36890" title="Irish Labour" label="Irish Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819513" start="37620" end="37635" title="Tommy Henderson" label="Tommy Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879996" start="37717" end="37750" title="Ulster Progressive Unionist Association" label="Ulster Progressive Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997422" start="37754" end="37774" title="William John Stewart" label="William John Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058511" start="37914" end="37943" title="Northern Ireland Labour Party" label="Northern Ireland Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979785" start="38059" end="38076" title="Nationalist Party (Northern Ireland)" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577325" start="38113" end="38148" title="MPs elected in the Northern Ireland general election, 1921" label="first Stormont parliament (1921–25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="38181" end="38200" title="official Opposition" label="official Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q333368" start="39161" end="39177" title="Charles Stewart Henry Vane-Tempest-Stewart" label="Lord Londonderry"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="39698" end="39710" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q336890" start="39756" end="39774" title="Lord Brookeborough" label="Lord Brookeborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q815420" start="39922" end="39935" title="Belfast Blitz" label="Belfast Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724649" start="40576" end="40602" title="Labour Government 1945-1951" label="post-War Labour government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="40712" end="40725" title="Welfare state in the United Kingdom" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="40899" end="40922" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071100" start="40986" end="40994" title="Irish Poor Laws" label="Poor Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q336512" start="41289" end="41309" title="Terence O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Terence O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096524" start="42140" end="42164" title="New University of Ulster" label="New University of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702713" start="42173" end="42179" title="Lurgan" label="Lurgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q768714" start="42184" end="42193" title="Portadown" label="Portadown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004085" start="42198" end="42232" title="Craigavon, County Armagh" label="a new urban-industrial development"/>
<link wikidata="Q193630" start="42300" end="42309" title="John Hume" label="John Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q13406660" start="43571" end="43593" title="civil rights movements" label="civil rights movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027812" start="43739" end="43766" title="Campaign for Social Justice" label="Campaign for Social Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121855" start="43916" end="43957" title="Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association" label="Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154432" start="44003" end="44018" title="Communist Party of Northern Ireland" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898973" start="44027" end="44041" title="Betty Sinclair" label="Betty Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263192" start="44239" end="44269" title="Derry Housing Action Committee" label="Derry Housing Action Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q778360" start="44343" end="44367" title="Apprentice Boys of Derry" label="Apprentice Boys of Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904605" start="44508" end="44520" title="Eamon McCann" label="Eamon McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q890677" start="44927" end="44934" title="Bogside" label="Bogside"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="44990" end="45002" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="45217" end="45226" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q467680" start="45227" end="45238" title="Seán Lemass" label="Seán Lemass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354420" start="45494" end="45523" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Opposition" label="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="45678" end="45693" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q296597" start="45879" end="45890" title="Ian Paisley" label="Ian Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q925585" start="45917" end="45941" title="Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster" label="Free Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q960590" start="46048" end="46073" title="Irish Council of Churches" label="Irish Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q653009" start="46151" end="46172" title="Presbyterian Church of Ireland" label="Irish Presbyterianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719785" start="46178" end="46189" title="Henry Cooke (minister)" label="Henry Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="46224" end="46235" title="ecumenicism" label="ecumenicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007229" start="46585" end="46598" title="William Craig (Northern Ireland politician)" label="William Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q849837" start="46813" end="46818" title="Rates (tax)" label="rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974875" start="47077" end="47095" title="Civil Authorities (Special Powers) Act (Northern Ireland) 1922" label="Special Powers Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q192687" start="47123" end="47137" title="Downing Street" label="Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="47175" end="47188" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="48017" end="48028" title="Backbencher" label="Backbencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058565" start="48092" end="48108" title="1969 Northern Ireland general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058511" start="48193" end="48199" title="Northern Ireland Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857012" start="48268" end="48276" title="Bannside" label="Bannside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251625" start="48428" end="48447" title="Protestant Unionist" label="Protestant Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519515" start="48677" end="48697" title="Ulster Special Constabulary" label="Special Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706972" start="48859" end="48882" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democracy (Ireland)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000253" start="48994" end="49011" title="Burntollet Bridge" label="Burntollet Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699570" start="49123" end="49133" title="Free Derry" label="Free Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994450" start="49200" end="49210" title="no-go area" label="no-go area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454977" start="49412" end="49428" title="Scarman Tribunal" label="Scarman Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127576" start="49638" end="49660" title="Ulster Volunteer Force" label="Ulster Volunteer Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482143" start="49861" end="49864" title="Royal Ulster Constabulary" label="RUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699570" start="51047" end="51057" title="Free Derry" label="Free Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="51282" end="51293" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050397" start="51295" end="51313" title="Operation Motorman" label="Operation Motorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481076" start="51528" end="51545" title="Seán Mac Stíofáin" label="Seán Mac Stíofáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57689" start="51566" end="51583" title="Martin McGuinness" label="Martin McGuinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q76139" start="51588" end="51599" title="Gerry Adams" label="Gerry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369302" start="51675" end="51701" title="Northern Ireland Secretary" label="Northern Ireland Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333963" start="51702" end="51718" title="William Whitelaw, 1st Viscount Whitelaw" label="William Whitelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="51763" end="51775" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="51832" end="51841" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="52220" end="52234" title="British Raj" label="Imperial India"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="52236" end="52254" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandated Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146587" start="52261" end="52267" title="Cyprus Emergency" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="52423" end="52434" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299864" start="52562" end="52566" title="Aden Emergency" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="52785" end="52795" title="internment" label="internment"/>
<link wikidata="Q335547" start="52855" end="52869" title="Brian Faulkner" label="Brian Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418831" start="52908" end="52948" title="Operation Demetrius" label="342 persons suspected of IRA involvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548637" start="53106" end="53115" title="Official Irish Republican Army" label="Officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="53295" end="53307" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456263" start="53649" end="53664" title="five techniques" label="five techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="53865" end="53895" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q190819" start="54034" end="54047" title="Bloody Sunday (1972)" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680843" start="56268" end="56283" title="James Molyneaux" label="James Molyneaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314601" start="56623" end="56633" title="Republican Labour Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058511" start="56638" end="56662" title="Northern Ireland Labour Party" label="Northern Ireland, Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123452" start="56974" end="56986" title="Paddy Devlin" label="Paddy Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q321925" start="57216" end="57237" title="Sunningdale Agreement" label="Sunningdale Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120711" start="57973" end="58002" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland" label="surprise Westminster election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893620" start="58048" end="58080" title="United Ulster Unionist Coalition" label="United Ulster Unionist Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896802" start="58171" end="58186" title="Ulster Vanguard" label="Ulster Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="58210" end="58230" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q321925" start="58472" end="58493" title="Sunningdale Agreement" label="Sunningdale Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547982" start="58521" end="58549" title="Ulster Workers&amp;#x27; Council" label="Ulster Workers&amp;#x27; Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330968" start="58625" end="58651" title="Ulster Defence Association" label="Ulster Defence Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q336534" start="58931" end="58942" title="Merlyn Rees" label="Mervyn Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369302" start="58948" end="58974" title="Northern Ireland Secretary" label="Northern Ireland Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417046" start="59226" end="59237" title="Direct rule (Northern Ireland)" label="Direct Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249224" start="59617" end="59628" title="Green Paper" label="Green Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="60503" end="60511" title="Ulster loyalism" label="Loyalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879999" start="61504" end="61528" title="Ulster Protestant Action" label="Ulster Protestant Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785591" start="61536" end="61564" title="Ulster Protestant Volunteers" label="Ulster Protestant Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127576" start="61723" end="61726" title="Ulster Volunteer Force" label="UVF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="63027" end="63044" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q58094" start="63068" end="63080" title="Hillsborough, County Down" label="Hillsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="63090" end="63105" title="Irish Taoiseach" label="Irish Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425313" start="63107" end="63124" title="Garret FitzGerald" label="Garret FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971473" start="63236" end="63276" title="British–Irish Intergovernmental Conference" label="Anglo-Irish Intergovernmental Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q859482" start="63299" end="63310" title="Secretariat (administrative office)" label="secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="63924" end="63945" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="63956" end="63981" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708643" start="64043" end="64080" title="Anglo-Irish Agreement" label="Anglo-Irish or Hillsborough Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="64105" end="64123" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351920" start="64347" end="64364" title="Belfast City Hall" label="Belfast City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015653" start="64948" end="64965" title="Ulster Resistance" label="Ulster Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971278" start="66315" end="66355" title="British and Irish Communist Organisation" label="British and Irish Communist Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859129" start="66465" end="66483" title="Two nations theory (Ireland)" label="Two-nations Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q689166" start="67156" end="67165" title="Kate Hoey" label="Kate Hoey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027790" start="67249" end="67279" title="Campaign for Equal Citizenship" label="Campaign for Equal Citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347473" start="67439" end="67455" title="Robert McCartney (Northern Irish politician)" label="Robert McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q985706" start="67503" end="67520" title="UK Unionist Party" label="UK Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272410" start="67521" end="67525" title="Member of the Legislative Assembly (Northern Ireland)" label="MLAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467451" start="67558" end="67581" title="Labour Party Conference" label="Labour Party Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q220117" start="67591" end="67603" title="legal advice" label="legal advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="67703" end="67731" title="National Executive Committee of the Labour Party" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642359" start="67765" end="67797" title="Labour Party in Northern Ireland" label="Labour Party in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q336064" start="67892" end="67901" title="Reg Empey" label="Reg Empey"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="68060" end="68073" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879942" start="68265" end="68311" title="Ulster Conservatives and Unionists – New Force" label="Ulster Conservatives and Unionists – New Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q676383" start="68405" end="68418" title="Sylvia Hermon" label="Sylvia Hermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="68518" end="68543" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="68590" end="68598" title="populism" label="populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058484" start="68636" end="68666" title="Northern Ireland Conservatives" label="Northern Ireland Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q123481753" start="68746" end="68771" title="2024 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland" label="2024 Westminster election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499853" start="68848" end="68867" title="Jim Allister" label="Jim Allister&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q985076" start="68868" end="68894" title="Traditional Unionist Voice" label="Traditional Unionist Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q125372004" start="68917" end="68931" title="Reform UK–TUV alliance" label="electoral pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="68937" end="68946" title="Reform UK" label="Reform UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q751685" start="68994" end="69006" title="North Antrim (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q575881" start="69052" end="69066" title="Ian Paisley Jr" label="Ian Paisley Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q318471" start="69099" end="69111" title="Nigel Farage" label="Nigel Farage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476695" start="69244" end="69257" title="Seamus Mallon" label="Seamus Mallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="69292" end="69314" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday, Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q321925" start="69331" end="69342" title="Sunningdale Agreement" label="Sunningdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q192556" start="69393" end="69406" title="David Trimble" label="David Trimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362221" start="69497" end="69537" title="First Minister and Deputy First Minister" label="First Minister and Deputy First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038544" start="70284" end="70306" title="Nineteenth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="amend its Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q337866" start="70960" end="70979" title="d&amp;#x27;Hondt method" label="d&amp;#x27;Hondt method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188122" start="71688" end="71707" title="Cross-community vote" label="Petition of Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188122" start="71724" end="71740" title="Cross-community vote" label="parallel consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q321925" start="72348" end="72359" title="Sunningdale Agreement" label="Sunningdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708643" start="72368" end="72389" title="Anglo-Irish Agreement" label="Anglo-Irish Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038322" start="72420" end="72446" title="Downing Street Declaration" label="Downing Street Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058504" start="72904" end="72943" title="1998 Northern Ireland Good Friday Agreement referendum" label="referendum on the Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q57689" start="73931" end="73948" title="Martin McGuinness" label="Martin McGuinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q76139" start="73953" end="73964" title="Gerry Adams" label="Gerry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249560" start="74117" end="74143" title="Decommissioning in Northern Ireland" label="decommissioning their arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620257" start="74154" end="74186" title="Stormontgate" label="raid on Sinn Féin&amp;#x27;s offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187354" start="74447" end="74462" title="Denis Donaldson" label="Denis Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822798" start="74692" end="74712" title="St Andrews Agreement" label="St Andrews Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q336064" start="74875" end="74884" title="Reg Empey" label="Reg Empey"/>
<link wikidata="Q333036" start="75352" end="75366" title="Peter Robinson (Northern Ireland politician)" label="Peter Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792148" start="75381" end="75394" title="Arlene Foster" label="Arlene Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q28113354" start="75660" end="75679" title="Renewable Heat Incentive scandal" label="a financial scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231972" start="75817" end="75835" title="2017 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q96395328" start="76094" end="76118" title="New Decade, New Approach" label="New Decade, New Approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837191" start="76209" end="76230" title="Michelle O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Michelle O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053681" start="76421" end="76448" title="Executive of the 6th Northern Ireland Assembly" label="an Executive with Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499853" start="76501" end="76513" title="Jim Allister" label="Jim Allister"/>
<link wikidata="Q985076" start="76530" end="76556" title="Traditional Unionist Voice" label="Traditional Unionist Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="76702" end="76723" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q751685" start="76771" end="76783" title="North Antrim (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q575881" start="76805" end="76819" title="Ian Paisley Jr" label="Ian Paisley Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="76884" end="76888" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q55615175" start="77007" end="77020" title="John Finucane" label="John Finucane"/>
<link wikidata="Q751580" start="77024" end="77037" title="Belfast North (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q300243" start="77057" end="77068" title="Nigel Dodds" label="Nigel Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="77859" end="77865" title="County Antrim" label="Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q190684" start="77870" end="77874" title="County Down" label="Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828035" start="77947" end="77954" title="Lisburn" label="Lisburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="78553" end="78576" title="United Kingdom general election, 2019" label="Westminster MPs in 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q48771420" start="78616" end="78632" title="2022 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="Stormont in 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605011" start="78704" end="78708" title="2005 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q244927" start="79281" end="79315" title="Alliance Party of Northern Ireland" label="Alliance Party of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058448" start="79410" end="79432" title="Northern Ireland (European Parliament constituency)" label="May European elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q73024702" start="79463" end="79492" title="2019 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland" label="December Westminster election"/>
<link wikidata="Q48771420" start="79511" end="79533" title="2022 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2022 Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="79598" end="79620" title="Single transferable vote" label="first-preference votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="79631" end="79645" title="Single transferable vote" label="vote transfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058565" start="80338" end="80374" title="1969 Northern Ireland general election" label="last Stormont parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038322" start="81355" end="81381" title="Downing Street Declaration" label="Downing Street Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469294" start="82260" end="82274" title="Parades in Northern Ireland" label="Orange marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309150" start="82311" end="82331" title="Drumcree conflict" label="conflict at Drumcree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860754" start="82407" end="82414" title="Ardoyne" label="Ardoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="82566" end="82576" title="Union Flag" label="Union Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351920" start="82592" end="82601" title="Belfast City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="83033" end="83047" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q201966" start="83082" end="83104" title="Ulster Scots dialects" label="Ulster Scots or Ullans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044732" start="83381" end="83418" title="Department of Culture, Arts and Leisure" label="Minister of Culture, Arts and Leisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990642" start="83420" end="83437" title="Nelson McCausland" label="Nelson McCausland"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769991" start="83656" end="83674" title="Irish Language Act" label="Irish Language Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="84476" end="84481" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="84624" end="84675" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="85085" end="85102" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q875651" start="85195" end="85211" title="Irish Travellers" label="Irish Travellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="85223" end="85227" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q105474751" start="85614" end="85639" title="Northern Ireland Protocol" label="Northern Ireland Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="85777" end="85809" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769991" start="85815" end="85859" title="Identity and Language (Northern Ireland) Act" label="Identity and Language (Northern Ireland) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="85869" end="85881" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="86092" end="86160" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 referendum on the future of UK membership in the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="86497" end="86503" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="86557" end="86563" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178117" start="86931" end="86973" title="Second May ministry" label="Theresa May&amp;#x27;s Conservative Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="87142" end="87150" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="87215" end="87234" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="87320" end="87325" title="European Union" label="EU 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="87645" end="87667" title="European Single Market" label="European Single Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377619" start="87683" end="87696" title="European Customs Union" label="Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792148" start="87806" end="87819" title="Arlene Foster" label="Arlene Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="88021" end="88034" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q105474751" start="89056" end="89081" title="Northern Ireland Protocol" label="Northern Ireland Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="89159" end="89171" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Act of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q85763329" start="89488" end="89503" title="Get Brexit Done" label="Get-Brexit-Done"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="89527" end="89551" title="2019 UK general election" label="2019 UK general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188122" start="89954" end="89973" title="Petition of Concern" label="Petition of Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q300292" start="90339" end="90356" title="Jeffrey Donaldson" label="Jeffrey Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150914" start="90367" end="90377" title="Paul Givan" label="Paul Givan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116930211" start="90548" end="90565" title="Windsor Framework" label="Windsor Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837191" start="90862" end="90883" title="Michelle O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Michelle O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21234823" start="90900" end="90920" title="Emma Little-Pengelly" label="Emma Little-Pengelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362221" start="90944" end="90978" title="First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland" label="First, and Deputy First, Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665914" start="90984" end="91010" title="Northern Ireland Executive" label="Northern Ireland executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070653" start="91138" end="91162" title="Irish Conservative Party" label="Irish Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159594" start="91177" end="91208" title="Irish Loyal and Patriotic Union" label="Irish Loyal and Patriotic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="91223" end="91245" title="Liberal Unionist Party" label="Liberal Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071313" start="91260" end="91283" title="Irish Unionist Alliance" label="Irish Unionist Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="91298" end="91319" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="91342" end="91373" title="Conservative and Unionist Party" label="Conservative and Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153800" start="91391" end="91416" title="Commonwealth Labour Party" label="Commonwealth Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251625" start="91431" end="91456" title="Protestant Unionist Party" label="Protestant Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="91471" end="91496" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896802" start="91514" end="91549" title="Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party" label="Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886826" start="91564" end="91598" title="Unionist Party of Northern Ireland" label="Unionist Party of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941044" start="91613" end="91638" title="Volunteer Political Party" label="Volunteer Political Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893627" start="91653" end="91681" title="United Ulster Unionist Party" label="United Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817613" start="91696" end="91722" title="Progressive Unionist Party" label="Progressive Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879995" start="91740" end="91769" title="Ulster Popular Unionist Party" label="Ulster Popular Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781051" start="91784" end="91818" title="Ulster Democratic Party" label="Ulster (Loyalist) Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="91833" end="91854" title="UK Independence Party" label="UK Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q985706" start="91877" end="91894" title="UK Unionist Party" label="UK Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893622" start="91914" end="91939" title="United Unionist Coalition" label="United Unionist Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058534" start="91954" end="91985" title="Northern Ireland Unionist Party" label="Northern Ireland Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q985076" start="92000" end="92026" title="Traditional Unionist Voice" label="Traditional Unionist Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980856" start="92044" end="92048" title="NI21" label="NI21"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760025" start="92076" end="92098" title="Reform Group (Ireland)" label="Reform Group (Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984571" start="92100" end="92109" title="West Brit" label="West Brit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258893" wikidata="Q3043172" url="?curid=258893" title="Disfigurement">
<text>Disfigurement is the state of having one&#x27;s appearance deeply and persistently harmed medically, such as from a disease, birth defect, or wound. General societal attitudes towards disfigurement have varied greatly across cultures and over time, with cultures possessing strong social stigma against it often causing psychological distress to disfigured individuals. Alternatively, many societies have regarded some forms of disfigurement in a medical, scientific context where someone having ill will against the disfigured is viewed as anathema. In various religious and spiritual contexts, disfigurement has been variously described as being a punishment from the divine for sin (such as Yahweh&#x27;s defacement of Cain for Abel&#x27;s murder in Judaism), as being (such as Paul of the New Testament&#x27;s arguments about Christ&#x27;s sufferings) caused by supernatural forces of hate and evil against the good and just, which will be later atoned for, or as being without explanation &quot;&quot; with people just having to endure.

The topic has been frequently commented on and referred to in a great many forms of fictional media as well. Villainous examples include the iconic fiend The Joker from various DC Comics and the mysterious figure with a &quot;red right hand&quot; from the song of the same name by the band Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds. Heroic examples include Daredevil, a crime-fighter who was rendered blind (from Marvel Comics), and the compassionate character Edward Scissorhands from the film of the same name. Antiheroic examples include Deadpool, a mercenary whose healing factor gives his skin a scarred appearance, and The Punisher, who has facial disfigurement, also from Marvel Comics.

==Overview==
Disfigurement, whether caused by a benign or malignant condition, often leads to severe psychosocial problems such as negative body image; depression; difficulties in one&#x27;s social, sexual, and professional lives; prejudice; and intolerance. This is partly due to how the individual copes with looking &#x27;visibly different&#x27;, though the extent of the disfigurement rarely correlates with the degree of distress the patient feels. An additional factor which affects people with a disfigurement is the reaction they get from other people. The general population responds to people with a disfigurement with less trust and respect, and often try to avoid making contact or having to look at the disfigurement. Disfigurements affecting visible areas, such as the face, arms, and hands, are thought to present greater difficulty for affected people to cope with than do other disfigurements.

Deliberate mutilation resulting in physical disfigurement has also been practiced by many cultures throughout human history for religious or judicial purposes. During the Byzantine Empire, the emperor was considered God&#x27;s on Earth, and as such, the physical wholeness of his person was an essential complement to the perfection of Heaven. For this reason, many deposed emperors were blinded, had their noses cut off, or their tongues split by their successors, as these permanent disfigurements disqualified them from ever reclaiming the throne.

A case of voluntary disfigurement is that of St. Æbbe the Younger and the nuns of Coldingham Monastery in Scotland. When the monastery was attacked by Vikings, she and the other nuns cut off their own noses and upper lips, fearing rape. In response, the Vikings burned down the building with the nuns inside.

Some cases of disfigurement may also result from animal attacks, like Charla Nash, whose face and hands were disfigured in an attack by her friend&#x27;s pet chimpanzee, Travis.

==Causes==
Conditions that can cause disfigurement include: 
*severe or mismanaged acne
*acromegaly
*amniotic band constriction
*alopecia
*amputation
*argyria
*birthmarks
*burns
*cancer
*cataracts
*circumcision
*cleft lip
*eczema
*elephantiasis
*erysipelas
*frostbite
*gangrene
*gigantomastia
*gynecomastia

*keloids
*leprosy
*necrosis
*McCune–Albright syndrome
*neurofibromatosis
*noma
*paralysis
*proteus syndrome
*radiation poisoning
*scalping
*scars
*smallpox
*severe strabismus
*synkinesis
*syphilis
*vitiligo
*severe warts

Plastic surgery or reconstructive surgery is available in many cases to disfigured people. Some health insurance companies and government health care systems cover plastic surgery for these problems when they do not generally cover plastic surgery for what is labeled as &quot;cosmetic purposes&quot;.

The term &quot;disfigurement&quot; is sometimes used pejoratively to describe the results of intentional body modification. Scarification and other forms of such modification are sometimes referred to as such by neutral parties or by advocates of the processes, as well. Many types of body modification are subject to strong social debate as such.

==Society and culture==
People with disfigurement are often treated poorly.

===In American fiction===
*In most adaptations (literary, stage, film, or otherwise) of &quot;The Phantom of the Opera&quot;, the title character (known as &quot;Erik&quot; or &quot;The Phantom&quot;) wears either a full- or half-face mask to conceal a disfigurement. Some adaptations infer that his disfigurement was present from birth, such as in the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical, whereas others infer or show it to be the result of a horrible accident such as burning from fire or chemicals. The Phantom&#x27;s disfigured face is usually described as having caused him anguish and despair, thus influencing him to adopt the enigmatic &quot;phantom&quot; persona.
*The DC Comics character the Joker, often a foe of Batman, possesses a clown-like grin and a grotesque combination of bleached skin, red lips, and green hair that are typically described or inferred to be the result of injuries and disfigurement in most media. A common origin of his skin and hair colors revolve around chemical burns as the result of the Joker character either falling into, jumping into, or being thrown into a vat of noxious chemicals. In Tim Burton&#x27;s 1989 film adaptation of &quot;Batman&quot;, the Joker character, in this version a criminal originally known as &quot;Jack Napier&quot;, receives his distinct rictus grin as the result of a botched plastic surgery that he received after a ricocheted bullet that Napier intended to harm Batman badly injured the Joker&#x27;s face. In most media, the Joker&#x27;s mania and insanity begin as a result of him seeing his own disfigurement, the 1989 film being an example.
*Several enemies of fictional British secret agent James Bond have been known for their distinctive facial features. An example is the North Korean criminal and terrorist Zao from the film &quot;Die Another Day&quot;. Played by Rick Yune, the terrorist has partly translucent skin with thick veins shown on his face and numerous diamonds embedded into his skin.
*The Punisher, an antihero appearing in various Marvel Comics-related works, has confronted several enemies known for their drastic facial disfigurement. A prominent example is Jigsaw, a sadist and psychopath with incredible stamina, while having no superhuman powers that has a deeply mutilated face somewhat similar to a jigsaw puzzle. Perhaps the Punisher&#x27;s most iconic nemesis, he was played in 2008&#x27;s &quot;&quot; by Dominic West.
*Deadpool, an antihero also appearing in Marvel Comics-related works, was disfigured from a healing factor that gives his skin a scarred appearance.
*Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds&#x27; popular alternative rock song &quot;Red Right Hand&quot;, first released in 1994&#x27;s &quot;Let Love In&quot;, describes a nightmarish figure with a blood-red, disfigured hand (as referred to in the title).

==See also==

*AboutFace – Canadian charitable organization
*Changing Faces (charity) – British charitable organization
*Dermatology
*Face transplant – experimental treatment for severe facial disfigurement
*Corporal punishment, of which disfigurement is the most permanent type

==References==
==External links==

*Changing Faces – a British organization for people with facial disfigurements
*Project Harar – a British organization helping children with facial disfigurements in Africa
*Let&#x27;s Face It – an American organization for people with facial disfigurements
*Unique Face – a Japanese organization for people with facial disfigurements
* Centre for Appearance Research – Psychological and psychosocial research at the University of the West of England, Bristol, UK
* Derriford Appearance Scale – a standardised psychological measure of distress and dysfunction in relation to disfigurement and visible difference
* www.karibuanawim.com – Australian organisation for people with facial disfigurements</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3043172" start="0" end="13" title="Disfigurement" label="Disfigurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="125" end="137" title="birth defect" label="birth defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="281" end="294" title="social stigma" label="social stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817452" start="320" end="342" title="psychological distress" label="psychological distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="694" end="700" title="Yahweh" label="Yahweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q492728" start="708" end="726" title="Curse and mark of Cain" label="defacement of Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q717996" start="731" end="735" title="Cain and Abel" label="Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="781" end="785" title="Apostle Paul" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="793" end="806" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="830" end="836" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="866" end="878" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q10797504" start="898" end="919" title="conflict between good and evil" label="evil against the good"/>
<link wikidata="Q290691" start="1152" end="1159" title="Villain" label="Villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q217533" start="1197" end="1206" title="Joker (character)" label="The Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="1220" end="1229" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048118" start="1299" end="1320" title="Red Right Hand" label="song of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051182" start="1333" end="1360" title="Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds" label="Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="1362" end="1366" title="Hero" label="Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q327553" start="1386" end="1395" title="Daredevil (Marvel Comics character)" label="Daredevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="1430" end="1435" title="Blindness" label="blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="1442" end="1455" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217182" start="1490" end="1509" title="Edward Scissorhands" label="Edward Scissorhands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631090" start="1570" end="1578" title="Deadpool" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q729150" start="1654" end="1666" title="The Punisher" label="The Punisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410145" start="1825" end="1837" title="psychosocial" label="psychosocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733239" start="1864" end="1874" title="body image" label="body image"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="1876" end="1886" title="clinical depression" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509755" start="2049" end="2066" title="visible difference" label="visibly different"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2807" end="2823" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4310099" start="3037" end="3056" title="Rhinotomy" label="their noses cut off"/>
<link wikidata="Q230101" start="3061" end="3080" title="Tongue splitting" label="their tongues split"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930556" start="3237" end="3253" title="Æbbe the Younger" label="Æbbe the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142535" start="3270" end="3290" title="Coldingham Monastery" label="Coldingham Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="3339" end="3346" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836194" start="3668" end="3674" title="Travis_(chimpanzee)" label="Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="3760" end="3764" title="acne" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q189580" start="3766" end="3776" title="acromegaly" label="acromegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q473753" start="3778" end="3804" title="Constriction ring syndrome" label="amniotic band constriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q181391" start="3806" end="3814" title="alopecia" label="alopecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="3816" end="3826" title="amputation" label="amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q648982" start="3828" end="3835" title="argyria" label="argyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513591" start="3837" end="3846" title="birthmark" label="birthmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q170518" start="3849" end="3854" title="burn (injury)" label="burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="3856" end="3862" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="3864" end="3872" title="cataract" label="cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="3875" end="3887" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q222634" start="3889" end="3898" title="Cleft lip and cleft palate" label="cleft lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="3900" end="3906" title="Dermatitis" label="eczema"/>
<link wikidata="Q16775468" start="3908" end="3921" title="elephantiasis" label="elephantiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207092" start="3923" end="3933" title="erysipelas" label="erysipelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350326" start="3935" end="3944" title="frostbite" label="frostbite"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="3946" end="3954" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q924002" start="3956" end="3969" title="gigantomastia" label="gigantomastia"/>
<link wikidata="Q339221" start="3971" end="3983" title="gynecomastia" label="gynecomastia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131260" start="3986" end="3992" title="keloid" label="keloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="3995" end="4002" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178069" start="4004" end="4012" title="necrosis" label="necrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q727008" start="4014" end="4038" title="McCune–Albright syndrome" label="McCune–Albright syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q847605" start="4040" end="4057" title="neurofibromatosis" label="neurofibromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q994794" start="4059" end="4063" title="noma (disease)" label="noma"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="4065" end="4074" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q281115" start="4076" end="4092" title="proteus syndrome" label="proteus syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q275459" start="4094" end="4113" title="Acute radiation syndrome" label="radiation poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q13694993" start="4115" end="4123" title="scalping" label="scalping"/>
<link wikidata="Q206060" start="4125" end="4129" title="scar" label="scar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="4132" end="4140" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q179951" start="4149" end="4159" title="strabismus" label="strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508182" start="4161" end="4171" title="synkinesis" label="synkinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="4173" end="4181" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180152" start="4183" end="4191" title="vitiligo" label="vitiligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q101971" start="4200" end="4204" title="wart" label="wart"/>
<link wikidata="Q182442" start="4207" end="4222" title="Plastic surgery" label="Plastic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131496" start="4226" end="4248" title="reconstructive surgery" label="reconstructive surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="4303" end="4319" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000047" start="4345" end="4364" title="Health system" label="health care systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q182442" start="4371" end="4386" title="plastic surgery" label="plastic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q890057" start="4615" end="4632" title="body modification" label="body modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q570784" start="4634" end="4647" title="Scarification" label="Scarification"/>
<link wikidata="Q272506" start="5030" end="5054" title="The Phantom of the Opera (novel)" label="The Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750813" start="5098" end="5102" title="Erik (Phantom of the Opera)" label="Erik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750813" start="5118" end="5129" title="Erik (Phantom of the Opera)" label="The Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="5289" end="5308" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q382353" start="5309" end="5316" title="The Phantom of the Opera (musical)" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="5606" end="5615" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217533" start="5630" end="5635" title="Joker (character)" label="Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="5652" end="5658" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358" start="5672" end="5677" title="clown" label="clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="6060" end="6070" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q116852" start="6078" end="6120" title="Batman (1989 film)" label="1989 film adaptation of &amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001556" start="6237" end="6248" title="Risus sardonicus" label="rictus grin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182442" start="6276" end="6291" title="plastic surgery" label="plastic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q323227" start="6317" end="6334" title="Ricochet" label="ricocheted bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="6597" end="6607" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="6681" end="6692" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="6707" end="6716" title="Terrorism" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q30931" start="6741" end="6756" title="Die Another Day" label="Die Another Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q923084" start="6774" end="6783" title="Rick Yune" label="Rick Yune"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="6803" end="6821" title="Transparency and translucency" label="partly translucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="6875" end="6882" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q729150" start="6909" end="6921" title="The Punisher" label="The Punisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="6926" end="6934" title="antihero" label="antihero"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="6956" end="6969" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q955796" start="7085" end="7091" title="Jigsaw (Marvel Comics)" label="Jigsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211650" start="7095" end="7101" title="sadomasochism" label="sadist"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="7106" end="7116" title="Psychopathy" label="psychopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q181008" start="7231" end="7244" title="jigsaw puzzle" label="jigsaw puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q430100" start="7312" end="7323" title="2008 in film" label="2008&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q313020" start="7340" end="7352" title="Dominic West" label="Dominic West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631090" start="7355" end="7363" title="Deadpool" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051182" start="7504" end="7531" title="Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds" label="Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="7546" end="7562" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048118" start="7574" end="7588" title="Red Right Hand" label="Red Right Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q967395" start="7632" end="7643" title="Let Love In (Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds album)" label="Let Love In"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668571" start="7763" end="7772" title="AboutFace" label="AboutFace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072014" start="7809" end="7833" title="Changing Faces (charity)" label="Changing Faces (charity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q171171" start="7869" end="7880" title="Dermatology" label="Dermatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519214" start="7882" end="7897" title="Face transplant" label="Face transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="7956" end="7975" title="Corporal punishment" label="Corporal punishment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258899" wikidata="Q257134" url="?curid=258899" title="Palm Springs (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Palm Springs]] is a desert city in California.

Palm Springs may also refer to:

== Places ==
* Palm Springs, California
** Palm Springs High School
** Palm Springs International Airport
** Palm Springs station, a train station
* Palm Springs, Florida
* Coachella Valley, California, also known as the Palm Springs area

== Entertainment ==
* &quot;Palm Springs&quot; (1936 film), a film directed by Aubrey Scotto
* &quot;Palm Springs&quot; (2020 film), an American romantic comedy film

==See also==
* North Palm Springs, California
* Palm Springs North, Florida</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q257134" start="0" end="16" title="Palm Springs (disambiguation)" label="[[Palm Springs]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q257134" start="50" end="62" title="Palm Springs (disambiguation)" label="Palm Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q488004" start="98" end="122" title="Palm Springs, California" label="Palm Springs, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128068" start="126" end="150" title="Palm Springs High School" label="Palm Springs High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550620" start="154" end="188" title="Palm Springs International Airport" label="Palm Springs International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128062" start="192" end="212" title="Palm Springs station" label="Palm Springs station"/>
<link wikidata="Q986304" start="232" end="253" title="Palm Springs, Florida" label="Palm Springs, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331865" start="256" end="272" title="Coachella Valley" label="Coachella Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128063" start="345" end="381" title="Palm Springs (1936 film)" label="&amp;quot;Palm Springs&amp;quot; (1936 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084655" start="418" end="454" title="Palm Springs (2020 film)" label="&amp;quot;Palm Springs&amp;quot; (2020 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683507" start="505" end="535" title="North Palm Springs, California" label="North Palm Springs, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393514" start="538" end="565" title="Palm Springs North, Florida" label="Palm Springs North, Florida"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258900" wikidata="Q1086632" url="?curid=258900" title="Christopher Dewdney">
<text>Christopher Dewdney (born May 9, 1951) is a prize-winning Canadian poet and essayist. His poetry reflects his interest in natural history. His book &quot; Acquainted with the Night, an investigation into darkness&quot; was nominated for both the Charles Taylor Prize and the Governor General&#x27;s Award.

==Early life and education==
Dewdney was born and grew up in London, Ontario. He is the son of Canadian artist and author Selwyn Dewdney, brother of Alexander Keewatin Dewdney. He was influenced by London artists Greg Curnoe and Jack Chambers. Dewdney is the long-time partner of writer Barbara Gowdy.

==Career==
Dewdney moved to Toronto, Ontario in 1980.

In 1988, when he published his book &quot;Last Flesh&quot;, he was teaching at the McLuhan Institute in Toronto. In 1992 he was writer-in-residence at the University of Western Ontario. In 2002 he published &quot;The Natural History&quot;, a book-length poem which brings together and interprets several scientific disciplines.

In 2007 he was presented with the Harbourfront Prize at the International Festival of Authors. In 2008 he was writer-in-residence at the University of Toronto.

&quot;Soul of World, Unlocking the Secrets of Time&quot; was listed at number 4 in &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;′s 100 Books of 2008. &quot;Acquainted with the Night&quot; was released as a feature documentary in 2010, and in 2011 the film received a Gemini Award. Dewdney appeared in the classic documentary &quot;Poetry in Motion&quot;.

He is currently a professor at the Glendon campus of York University.

==Poetic style and critical evaluation==
Dewdney&#x27;s poetry has been described as post-modern and experimental. He frequently uses poetry to highlight the wonders of science. Author Karl Jirgens praises his ability to &quot;articulate the link...between the empirical and the mystic.&quot;

In his 1986 book, &quot;The Immaculate Perception&quot;, Dewdney describes nature as &quot;divine technology,&quot; and language as a &quot;cognitive prosthesis&quot;. In this same book he refers to language as an &quot;organically derived software downloaded into a child&#x27;s mind at an early age&quot;. He writes that this process leaves a wound, &quot;language acquisition trauma&quot;, in the unconscious. His two subsequent non-fiction books, &quot;The Secular Grail&quot; and &quot;Last Flesh&quot;, deal with consciousness, media and a possible future evolution of humans. In more recent years his nonfiction have explored the subjects of night and time.

==Bibliography==

===Poetry===
*&quot;A Palaeozoic Geology of London, Ontario&quot; (1974), Coach House Press
*&quot;Fovea Centralis&quot; (1975), Coach House Press
*&quot;Alter Sublime&quot; (1980), Coach House Press
*&quot;Predators of the Adoration,&quot; (1983), McClelland and Stewart
*&quot;Permugenesis&quot; (1987), Nightwood Editions
*&quot;The Radiant Inventory&quot; (1988), McClelland and Stewart
*&quot;Concordat Proviso Ascendant&quot; (A Natural History of Southwestern Ontario, book 3) (1991), The Figures, Mass
*&quot;Demon Pond&quot; (1994), McClelland and Stewart
*&quot;Signal Fires&quot; (including A Natural History of Southwestern Ontario, books 3 and 4 (2000), McClelland and Stewart
*&quot;The Natural History&quot; (2002) ECW Press
*&quot;Children of the Outer Dark, the Poetry of Christopher Dewdney&quot; (2007), Wilfrid Laurier Press

===Non-fiction===
*&quot;The Immaculate Perception,&quot; (1986), House of Anansi Press
*&quot;The Secular Grail&quot; (1993), Somerville House Books
*&quot;Last Flesh: Life in the Transhuman Era&quot; (1998), HarperCollins Canada
*&quot;Acquainted with the Night&quot; (2004), HarperCollins Canada; Bloomsbury, New York; Bloomsbury, London, England; Locus Publishing, Taiwan; YeWon Media, South Korea; Editions Autrement, France; Makri Publications, Greece.
*&quot;Soul of The World: Unlocking the Secrets of Time&quot; (2008), HarperCollins Canada; YeWon Media, South Korea.
*&quot; 18 Miles: The Epic Drama of Our Atmosphere and Its Weather&quot; (2018), ECW Press, Canada; Bloomsbury/Sigma, London, England.

==Awards and honours==
*1983 Finalist, Governor General&#x27;s Award for Poetry (for &quot;Predators of the Adoration&quot;)
*1986 Winner, CBC Literary Competition for Poetry (for &quot;A Natural History of Southwestern Ontario&quot;)
*1986 Finalist, Governor General&#x27;s Award for Poetry (for &quot;The Immaculate Perception&quot;)
*1988 Finalist, Governor General&#x27;s Award for Poetry (for &quot;The Radiant Inventory&quot;)
*2004 Finalist, Governor General&#x27;s Award for Non-Fiction (for &quot;Acquainted with the Night&quot;)
*2005 Finalist, Charles Taylor Prize (for &quot;Acquainted with the Night&quot;)
*2007 Harbourfront Festival Prize
*2019 The Lane Anderson Award for Best Canadian Science Book

==References==
==External links==
*Christopher Dewdney&#x27;s entry in &quot;The Canadian Encyclopedia&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1086632" start="0" end="19" title="Christopher Dewdney" label="Christopher Dewdney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="58" end="66" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="368" end="383" title="London, Ontario" label="London, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448915" start="429" end="443" title="Selwyn Dewdney" label="Selwyn Dewdney"/>
<link wikidata="Q93036" start="456" end="482" title="Alexander Dewdney" label="Alexander Keewatin Dewdney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605459" start="520" end="531" title="Greg Curnoe" label="Greg Curnoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q552981" start="536" end="549" title="Jack Chambers (artist)" label="Jack Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q537699" start="594" end="607" title="Barbara Gowdy" label="Barbara Gowdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="638" end="645" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="1244" end="1262" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q116633471" start="1296" end="1321" title="Acquainted with the Night (film)" label="Acquainted with the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q923408" start="1407" end="1419" title="Gemini Award" label="Gemini Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207526" start="1471" end="1487" title="Poetry in Motion (film)" label="Poetry in Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q849751" start="1549" end="1564" title="York University" label="York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q75135116" start="1752" end="1764" title="Karl Jirgens" label="Karl Jirgens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137585" start="2619" end="2636" title="Coach House Press" label="Coach House Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800322" start="2794" end="2816" title="McClelland and Stewart" label="McClelland and Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q130334" start="4897" end="4922" title="The Canadian Encyclopedia" label="The Canadian Encyclopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258901" wikidata="Q767568" url="?curid=258901" title="Mutilation">
<text>Mutilation or maiming (from the ) is severe damage to the body that has a subsequent harmful effect on an individual&#x27;s quality of life. 

In the modern era, the term has an overwhelmingly negative connotation, referring to alterations that render something inferior, dysfunctional, imperfect, or ugly.

== Terminology ==

In 2019, Michael H. Stone, Gary Brucato, and Ann Burgess proposed formal criteria by which &quot;mutilation&quot; might be systematically distinguished from the act of &quot;dismemberment&quot;, as these terms are commonly used interchangeably. They suggested that dismemberment involves &quot;the entire removal, by any means, of a large section of the body of a living or dead person, specifically, the head (also termed decapitation), arms, hands, torso, pelvic area, legs, or feet&quot;. Mutilation, by contrast, involves &quot;the removal or irreparable disfigurement, by any means, of some smaller portion of one of those larger sections of a living or dead person. The latter would include castration (removal of the testicles), evisceration (removal of the internal organs), and flaying (removal of the skin).&quot; According to these parameters, removing a whole hand would constitute dismemberment, while removing or damaging a finger would be mutilation; decapitation of a full head would be dismemberment, while removing or damaging a part of the face would be mutilation; and removing a whole torso would be dismemberment, while removing or damaging a breast or the organs contained within the torso would be mutilation.

==Usage==
Some ethnic groups practice ritual mutilation, for example, burning, clitoridectomy, or flagellation, sometimes as part of a rite of passage. In some cases, the term may even apply to treatment of dead bodies, as in the case of scalping, when a person is mutilated after they have been killed by an enemy. Castration is also a form of mutilation. The traditional Chinese practice of foot binding is a form of mutilation. Another form of mutilation that has captured the imagination of Westerners is the &quot;long-neck&quot; people, a sub-group of the Karen known as the Padaung where women wear brass rings around their necks to artificially make them longer. 

A joint statement released by the United Nations and numerous other international bodies opposes female genital mutilation. 

==Maiming==
&quot;Maiming&quot;, or mutilation which involves the loss of, or incapacity to use, a bodily member, is and has been practiced by many societies with various cultural and religious significance, and is also a customary form of physical punishment, especially applied on the principle of an eye for an eye.

Historical examples are plenty; Chinese general Sun Bin had his kneecaps removed after being framed for treason during the Warring States period, while Araucanian warrior Galvarino had his hands amputated as punishment while as a prisoner during the Spanish conquest of Chile.

Maiming has often been a criminal offense; the old law term for a special case of maiming of persons was mayhem, an Anglo-French variant form of the word.

Maiming of animals by others than their owners is a particular form of the offense generally grouped as malicious damage. For the purpose of the law as to this offense animals are divided into cattle, which includes pigs and equids, and other animals which are either subjects of larceny at common law or are usually kept in confinement or for domestic purposes.

In Britain under the Malicious Damage Act 1861 the punishment for maiming of cattle was three to fourteen years&#x27; penal servitude; malicious injury to other animals was a misdemeanor punishable on summary conviction. For a second offense the penalty was imprisonment with hard labor for over twelve months. Today maiming of animals falls under the Cruelty to Animals Acts, while maiming by others is additionally treated as criminal damage.

==Mutilation as human punishment== 
In times when even judicial physical punishment was still commonly allowed to cause not only intense pain and public humiliation during the administration but also to inflict permanent physical damage, or even deliberately intended to mark the criminal for life by cropping or branding, one of the common anatomical target areas not normally under permanent cover of clothing (so particularly merciless in the long term) were the ear(s).

In England, for example, various pamphleteers attacking the religious views of the Anglican episcopacy under William Laud, the Archbishop of Canterbury, had their ears cut off for those writings: in 1630 Alexander Leighton and in 1637 still other Puritans, John Bastwick, Henry Burton, and William Prynne.

In Scotland one of the Covenanters, James Gavin of Douglas, Lanarkshire, had his ears cut off for refusing to renounce his religious faith. In Japan, Gonsalo Garcia and his companions were similarly punished.

Notably in various jurisdictions of the Thirteen Colonies, even relatively minor crimes, such as hog stealing, were punishable by having one&#x27;s ears nailed to the pillory and slit loose, or even cropped, a counterfeiter would be branded on top (for that crime, considered lèse-majesté, the older mirror punishment was boiling in oil), which was an example of western mutilation.

Independence did not render American justice any less brutal. For example, in the Southwest Territory (what would become the state of Tennessee), an example of harsh &#x27;frontier law&#x27; under the 1780 Cumberland Compact took place in 1793 when Judge John McNairy sentenced Nashville&#x27;s first horse thief, John McKain Jr., to be fastened to a wooden stock one hour for 39 lashes, have his ears cut off and cheeks branded with the letters &quot;H&quot; and &quot;T&quot;.

Nebahne Yohannes, an unsuccessful claimant to the Ethiopian imperial throne, had his ears and nose cut off, yet was then freed. This form of mutilation against unsuccessful claimants to thrones has been in use in middle-eastern regions for thousands of years. To qualify as a king, formerly, one had to exemplify perfection. Obvious physical deformities such as missing noses, ears, or lips, are thereby sufficient disqualifications. The victim in these cases is typically freed alive to act as an example to others, and as no longer a threat.

==See also==

* Blinding (punishment)
* Cattle mutilation
* Decapitation
* Dismemberment
* Identification of inmates in Nazi concentration camps
* Overview of discretionary invasive procedures on animals

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q767568" start="0" end="10" title="Mutilation" label="Mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q767568" start="14" end="21" title="Mutilation" label="maiming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936615" start="37" end="62" title="Bodily harm" label="severe damage to the body"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="124" end="139" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="150" end="160" title="modern era" label="modern era"/>
<link wikidata="Q661062" start="202" end="213" title="connotation" label="connotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62000040" start="336" end="352" title="Michael H. Stone" label="Michael H. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q47544060" start="372" end="383" title="Ann Burgess" label="Ann Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q661297" start="501" end="514" title="dismemberment" label="dismemberment"/>
<link wikidata="Q58929" start="1024" end="1034" title="castration" label="castration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="1051" end="1060" title="testicles" label="testicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q778417" start="1063" end="1075" title="Disembowelment" label="evisceration"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="1092" end="1107" title="internal organs" label="internal organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145315" start="1114" end="1121" title="flaying" label="flaying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="1138" end="1142" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170518" start="1632" end="1636" title="burn" label="burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707435" start="1641" end="1655" title="clitoridectomy" label="clitoridectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q779753" start="1660" end="1672" title="flagellation" label="flagellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131696" start="1697" end="1712" title="rite of passage" label="rite of passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13694993" start="1800" end="1808" title="scalping" label="scalping"/>
<link wikidata="Q58929" start="1878" end="1888" title="Castration" label="Castration"/>
<link wikidata="Q498231" start="1955" end="1967" title="foot binding" label="foot binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q271790" start="2124" end="2129" title="Karen people" label="Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q943349" start="2143" end="2150" title="Kayan people (Myanmar)" label="Padaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2269" end="2283" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="2332" end="2357" title="female genital mutilation" label="female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="2601" end="2620" title="Corporal punishment" label="physical punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q312718" start="2664" end="2678" title="eye for an eye" label="eye for an eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q334090" start="2729" end="2736" title="Sun Bin" label="Sun Bin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="2804" end="2825" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q178484" start="2833" end="2843" title="Araucanian" label="Araucanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q965840" start="2852" end="2861" title="Galvarino" label="Galvarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="2876" end="2885" title="amputation" label="amputated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055950" start="2939" end="2956" title="conquest of Chile" label="conquest of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389131" start="3064" end="3070" title="Mayhem (crime)" label="mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065184" start="3075" end="3080" title="Anglo" label="Anglo"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3081" end="3087" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q165115" start="3340" end="3345" title="equid" label="equid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="3413" end="3416" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743463" start="3500" end="3525" title="Malicious Damage Act 1861" label="Malicious Damage Act 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q554774" start="3907" end="3922" title="criminal damage" label="criminal damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="3989" end="4008" title="Corporal punishment" label="physical punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300625" start="4071" end="4089" title="public humiliation" label="public humiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187980" start="4226" end="4234" title="cropping (punishment)" label="cropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602017" start="4238" end="4246" title="human branding" label="branding"/>
<link wikidata="Q325408" start="4509" end="4521" title="William Laud" label="William Laud"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="4527" end="4551" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719383" start="4604" end="4622" title="Alexander Leighton" label="Alexander Leighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="4647" end="4655" title="Puritans" label="Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221052" start="4657" end="4670" title="John Bastwick" label="John Bastwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718926" start="4672" end="4684" title="Henry Burton (theologian)" label="Henry Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020129" start="4690" end="4704" title="William Prynne" label="William Prynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="4730" end="4740" title="Covenanter" label="Covenanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301155" start="4758" end="4778" title="Douglas, South Lanarkshire" label="Douglas, Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380169" start="4857" end="4871" title="Gonsalo Garcia" label="Gonsalo Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="4957" end="4974" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10682443" start="5084" end="5091" title="pillory" label="pillory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187980" start="5116" end="5123" title="cropping (punishment)" label="cropped"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="5127" end="5138" title="counterfeit" label="counterfeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134057" start="5193" end="5205" title="lèse-majesté" label="lèse-majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574137" start="5217" end="5234" title="mirror punishment" label="mirror punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="5301" end="5313" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548588" start="5383" end="5402" title="Southwest Territory" label="Southwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193859" start="5507" end="5525" title="Cumberland Compact" label="Cumberland Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248189" start="5556" end="5568" title="John McNairy" label="John McNairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602017" start="5722" end="5729" title="Branding persons" label="branded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901164" start="5781" end="5797" title="Nebahne Yohannes" label="Nebahne Yohannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962705" start="5831" end="5856" title="Emperor of Ethiopia" label="Ethiopian imperial throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18228398" start="6342" end="6363" title="Blinding (punishment)" label="Blinding (punishment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754927" start="6366" end="6383" title="Cattle mutilation" label="Cattle mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="6386" end="6398" title="Decapitation" label="Decapitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q661297" start="6401" end="6414" title="Dismemberment" label="Dismemberment"/>
<link wikidata="Q169799" start="6417" end="6470" title="Identification of inmates in Nazi concentration camps" label="Identification of inmates in Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114078" start="6473" end="6529" title="Overview of discretionary invasive procedures on animals" label="Overview of discretionary invasive procedures on animals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258909" wikidata="Q27169" url="?curid=258909" title="Member of the European Parliament">
<text>A member of the European Parliament (MEP) is a person who has been elected to serve as a popular representative in the European Parliament.

When the European Parliament (then known as the Common Assembly of the European Coal and Steel Community) first met in 1952, its members were directly appointed by the governments of member states from among those already sitting in their own national parliaments. Since 1979, however, MEPs have been elected by direct universal suffrage every five years. Each member state establishes its own method for electing MEPs – and in some states this has changed over time – but the system chosen must be a form of proportional representation. Some member states elect their MEPs to represent a single national constituency; other states apportion seats to sub-national regions for election.

There may also be non-voting observers when a new country is seeking membership of the European Union.

== Election ==

From 1 January 2007, when Romania and Bulgaria joined the EU, there were 785 MEPs, but their number was reduced to 736 at the elections in 2009. With effect from the elections held in May 2014 the number had risen to 751. This has been reduced to 705 members after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union in January 2020, with each member state now having at least six and at most 96 MEPs. From the 2024 elections, there will be 720 members.

Elections are held once every five years, on the basis of universal suffrage. There is no uniform voting system for the election of MEPs; rather, each member state is free to choose its own system, subject to three restrictions:
* The system must be a form of proportional representation, under either the party list or Single Transferable Vote system.
* The electoral area may be subdivided if this will not generally affect the proportional nature of the voting system.
* Any election threshold on the national level must not exceed five percent.

The allocation of seats to each member state is based on the principle of degressive proportionality, so that, while the size of the population of each nation is taken into account, smaller states elect more MEPs than would be strictly justified by their populations alone. As the number of MEPs granted to each member state has arisen from treaty negotiations, there is no precise formula for the apportionment of seats. No change in this configuration can occur without the unanimous consent of all national governments.

=== Length of service ===
The European Parliament has a high turnover of members compared to some national parliaments. After every recent election, just over half of elected members had not been members in the previous parliament. Elmar Brok served the longest continuous term from the first elections in 1980 until 2019 (39 years).

== MEPs within the Parliament ==

MEPs organise themselves into cross-national political groups, except for a few non-attached members known as &quot;Non-Inscrits&quot; who choose not to join a Group (or no Group wants them). The two largest groups are the European People&#x27;s Party Group (EPP Group) and the Socialists &amp; Democrats (S&amp;D). These two groups have dominated the Parliament for much of its life, continuously holding between 40 and 70 percent of the seats together. No single group has ever held a majority in Parliament. As a result of being broad alliances of national parties, European groups parties are decentralised and hence have more in common with parties in federal states like Germany or the United States than unitary states like the majority of the EU states. Although, the European groups, between 2004 and 2009, were actually more cohesive than their US counterparts.

Aside from working through their groups, individual members are also guaranteed a number of individual powers and rights within the Parliament:
* the right to vote on all legislative proposals, the EU budget and all other items placed before the Parliament.
* the right to table a motion for resolution
* the right to put questions to the Council of the European Union, the Commission, and to the leaders of the Parliament
* the right to table an amendment to any text in committee or (jointly with others) in plenary
* the right to make explanations of vote
* the right to raise points of order
* the right to move the inadmissibility of a matter

== Job of an MEP ==
Every month except August the Parliament meets in Strasbourg for a four-day plenary session. For the rest of the time, it is based in Brussels, where some six supplementary plenary sessions are held for two days each, and where the Parliament&#x27;s committees, political groups, and other organs also mainly meet. The obligation to spend one week a month in Strasbourg was imposed on Parliament by the member state governments at the 1992 European Council meeting in Edinburgh.

== Payment and privileges ==
The total cost of the European Parliament is approximately €2.247 billion per year according to its 2023 budget, with the cost of translation and interpretation, and the cost of its buildings in two main locations, being significant extra burdens not faced by national parliaments.

=== Salary ===
Until 2009, MEPs were paid (by their own Member State) exactly the same salary as a member of the lower House of their own national parliament. As a result, there was a wide range of salaries in the European Parliament. In 2002, Italian MEPs earned €130,000, while Spanish MEPs earned less than a quarter of that at €32,000.

However, in July 2005, the Council agreed to a single statute for all MEPs, following a proposal by the Parliament. Thus, since the 2009 elections, all MEPs receive a monthly pre-tax salary set at 38.5 percent of that of a judge at the European Court of Justice. As of July 1, 2019, the monthly salary is of , or just over per year. MEPs also receive a general expenditure allowance of per month.

The single statute represented a pay cut for MEPs from some member states (e.g. Italy, Germany and Austria), a rise for others (particularly the low-paid eastern European members) and status quo for those from the United Kingdom, until January 2020 (depending on the euro-pound exchange rate). The much-criticised expenses arrangements were also partially reformed.

=== Financial interests ===
Members declare their financial interests in order to prevent any conflicts of interest. These declarations are published in a register and are available on the Internet. They must also make a detailed declaration of private interests, listing their memberships of company boards, associations, and public bodies (including those held during the three years prior to their election). They must also publish on-line all meetings that they have had with lobbyists and representatives of third country governments. They may not accept gifts, other than courtesy gifts valued at less than €150. They must declare all sources of outside income if their total outside income exceeds €5000.

=== Immunities ===
Under the protocol on the privileges and immunities of the European Union, MEPs in their home state receive the same immunities as their own national parliamentarians. In other member states, MEPs are immune from detention and from legal proceedings, except when caught in the act of committing an offense. This immunity may be waived by application to the European Parliament by the authorities of the member state in question.

== Individual members ==

=== Members&#x27; experience ===
Around a third of MEPs have previously held national parliamentary mandates, and over 10 percent have ministerial experience at a national level. There are usually a number of former prime ministers and former members of the European Commission. Many other MEPs have held office at a regional or local level in their home states.

Current MEPs also include former judges, trade union leaders, media personalities, actors, soldiers, singers, athletes, and political activists.

Many outgoing MEPs move into other political office. Several presidents, prime ministers or deputy prime ministers of member states are former MEPs, including former Presidents of France Nicolas Sarkozy, Francois Hollande, Jacques Chirac and Francois Mitterrand, the former Deputy PM of the United Kingdom Nick Clegg, current Prime Minister of Italy Giorgia Meloni, Danish former Prime Minister Helle Thorning-Schmidt, and Belgian former PM Elio Di Rupo.

=== Dual mandates ===
A dual mandate, in which an individual is a member of both their national parliament and the European Parliament, was officially discouraged by a growing number of political parties and member states, and is prohibited as of 2009. In the 2004–2009 Parliament, a small number of members still held a dual mandate. Ian Paisley and John Hume once held triple mandates as MEP, Member of Parliament in the House of Commons, and Members of the Northern Ireland Assembly simultaneously.

=== Gender ===

Women are generally under-represented in politics and public life in the EU, as well as in national parliaments, governments and local assemblies. The percentage of women in the EU parliament has increased from 15.2 percent after the first European Parliament election in 1979 to 41 percent after 2019 European Parliament election. To reach gender parity, women should hold 50 percent of seats and positions of power. However, according to the goal set by the European Institute for Gender Equality, a ratio between 40 and 60 percent is considered acceptable.

After the 2014 European Parliament election 11 countries of 28 reached this goal in their own quota of elected candidates. While in nine EU countries there were mechanisms in place to facilitate female representation, only in four of these countries did women exceeded 40 percent of elected candidates. On the other hand, in eight countries this goal was reached despite the absence of such systems. The FEMM Committee requested a study exploring the results of the election in terms of gender balance. EU institutions have focused on how to achieve a better gender balance (at least 40 percent) or gender parity (50 percent) in the next Parliament, and for other high-level posts in other institutions.

In the 2019 elections 308 female MEPs were elected (41 percent). Sweden elected the highest percentage of female MEPs: 55 percent. Overall, thirteen countries elected 45 to 55 percent female MEPs, with seven countries reaching exactly 50 percent. On the other hand, Cyprus has elected zero women, and Slovakia elected only 15 percent. Other Eastern European countries, namely Romania, Greece, Lithuania and Bulgaria, all elected fewer than 30 percent female MEPs. Eight member states elected a lower number of women in 2019 than in 2014. Malta, Cyprus and Estonia lost the most female representation in the EU parliament, dropping by 17 percentage points, while Slovakia dropped by 16. However, despite the drop, Malta still elected 50 percent women in 2019. Cyprus dropped from 17 percent in 2014 to zero women this year, while Estonia dropped from 50 to 33 percent. Hungary, Lithuania and Luxembourg made the greatest gains (19, 18 and 17 percentage points respectively) when we compare 2019 with 2014, followed by Slovenia and Latvia, both increasing their percentage of women MEPs by 13 points. Luxembourg, Slovenia and Latvia all elected 50 percent female MEPs.

=== Age ===
, the youngest MEP is Kira Marie Peter-Hansen of Denmark, who was 21 at the start of the July 2019 session, and is also the youngest person ever elected to the European Parliament. The oldest MEP ever was Manolis Glezos who was 92 when elected in 2014.

== Election of non-nationals ==
European citizens are eligible for election in the member state where they reside (subject to the residence requirements of that state); they do not have to be a national of that state. The following citizens have been elected in a state other than their native country;

== Observers ==

It is conventional for countries acceding to the European Union to send a number of observers to Parliament in advance. The number of observers and their method of appointment (usually by national parliaments) is laid down in the joining countries&#x27; Treaties of Accession.

Observers may attend debates and take part by invitation, but they may not vote or exercise other official duties. When the countries then become full member states, these observers become full MEPs for the interim period between accession and the next European elections. From 26 September 2005 to 31 December 2006, Bulgaria had 18 observers in Parliament and Romania 35. These were selected from government and opposition parties as agreed by the countries&#x27; national parliaments. Following accession on 1 January 2007, the observers became MEPs (with some personnel changes). Similarly, Croatia had 12 observer members from 17 April 2012, appointed by the Croatian parliament in preparation for its accession in 2013.

== See also ==
* EUobserver
* Apportionment in the European Parliament
* :Category:Members of the European Parliament
* List of current members of the European Parliament

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* &quot;The European Parliament&quot; (eighth edition, 2011, John Harper publishing), by Richard Corbett, Francis Jacobs and Michael Shackleton.

== External links ==
*Official Register of MEPs 
*The election of the Members of the European Parliament European Navigator
*The European Parliament</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="2" end="35" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="member of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="37" end="40" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="67" end="74" title="Election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="119" end="138" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="212" end="245" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="460" end="478" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="502" end="514" title="Member state of the European Union" label="member state"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="650" end="677" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47232" start="874" end="929" title="Enlargement of the European Union" label="new country is seeking membership of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="974" end="981" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="986" end="994" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="1470" end="1488" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q182985" start="1510" end="1523" title="voting system" label="voting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="1672" end="1699" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="1718" end="1728" title="party-list proportional representation" label="party list"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="1732" end="1756" title="Single Transferable Vote" label="Single Transferable Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q217032" start="1890" end="1908" title="election threshold" label="election threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251855" start="2036" end="2062" title="degressive proportionality" label="degressive proportionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="2512" end="2535" title="European Parliament" label="The European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q71674" start="2718" end="2728" title="Elmar Brok" label="Elmar Brok"/>
<link wikidata="Q779079" start="2900" end="2916" title="Political groups of the European Parliament" label="political groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440626" start="2971" end="2983" title="Non-Inscrits" label="Non-Inscrits"/>
<link wikidata="Q635616" start="3078" end="3112" title="European People&amp;#x27;s Party Group" label="European People&amp;#x27;s Party Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q507343" start="3133" end="3159" title="Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats" label="Socialists &amp;amp; Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="3207" end="3217" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="4067" end="4096" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="4102" end="4112" title="European Commission" label="Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="4447" end="4457" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="4837" end="4853" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="5753" end="5758" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="5766" end="5791" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7086" end="7100" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="7741" end="7760" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q329" start="8180" end="8195" title="Nicolas Sarkozy" label="Nicolas Sarkozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157" start="8197" end="8214" title="Francois Hollande" label="Francois Hollande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="8216" end="8230" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="8235" end="8254" title="Francois Mitterrand" label="Francois Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q189947" start="8299" end="8309" title="Nick Clegg" label="Nick Clegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q451791" start="8343" end="8357" title="Giorgia Meloni" label="Giorgia Meloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q57652" start="8388" end="8410" title="Helle Thorning-Schmidt" label="Helle Thorning-Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15048" start="8434" end="8446" title="Elio Di Rupo" label="Elio Di Rupo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="8564" end="8583" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q296597" start="8784" end="8795" title="Ian Paisley" label="Ian Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193630" start="8800" end="8809" title="John Hume" label="John Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="8844" end="8864" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="8872" end="8888" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272410" start="8894" end="8934" title="Members of the Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Members of the Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376068" start="9202" end="9244" title="1979 European Parliament election" label="first European Parliament election in 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999180" start="9265" end="9298" title="2019 European Parliament election" label="2019 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q48718" start="9428" end="9466" title="European Institute for Gender Equality" label="European Institute for Gender Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376095" start="9539" end="9572" title="2014 European Parliament election" label="2014 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q780189" start="9933" end="9947" title="European Parliament Committee on Women&amp;#x27;s Rights and Gender Equality" label="FEMM Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="10500" end="10506" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="10535" end="10543" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="10610" end="10617" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="10619" end="10625" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="10627" end="10636" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="10641" end="10649" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="10772" end="10777" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="10790" end="10797" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="11102" end="11109" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="11111" end="11120" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="11125" end="11135" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="11251" end="11259" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="11264" end="11270" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q64084024" start="11436" end="11459" title="Kira Marie Peter-Hansen" label="Kira Marie Peter-Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q728169" start="11619" end="11633" title="Manolis Glezos" label="Manolis Glezos"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="12584" end="12592" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="12628" end="12635" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="12861" end="12868" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q507198" start="13010" end="13020" title="EUobserver" label="EUobserver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030804" start="13023" end="13063" title="Apportionment in the European Parliament" label="Apportionment in the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13066" end="13110" title=":Category:Members of the European Parliament" label=":Category:Members of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q126485566" start="13113" end="13163" title="List of current members of the European Parliament" label="List of current members of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q652908" start="13294" end="13309" title="Richard Corbett" label="Richard Corbett"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258910" wikidata="Q578326" url="?curid=258910" title="University of Jyväskylä">
<text>The University of Jyväskylä () is a research university in Jyväskylä, Finland. It has its origins in the first Finnish-speaking Teacher Training College (the so-called Teacher Seminary), founded in 1863. Around 14,000 students are currently enrolled in the degree programs of the university. 

==History==
Founded in 1863, the university has its origins in the first Finnish-speaking teacher training college, the so-called Teacher Seminary. Uno Cygnaeus was enthusiastic to educate the people and created a programme for organising primary school education in Finland. Cygnaeus&#x27; plan was realised in 1863, when a teacher seminary was established in Jyväskylä, on the current university campus. Based on the town&#x27;s central location, the first Finnish-medium secondary schools for boys and girls were also established in Jyväskylä. The foundation of the world-famous school system was created at the University of Jyväskylä. The teacher seminary evolved into the College of Education in 1937, at which time it was given the authority to grant doctorate degrees. In the 1960s, the college started teaching and researching in the sciences and in 1967 was renamed the University of Jyväskylä.

Today the University of Jyväskylä is a nationally and internationally significant research university with expertise in education and a focus on human and natural sciences. The university is Finland&#x27;s leading expert in teacher training and adult education, as well as a major exporter of education. The Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences is the only one of its kind in the country.

The university offers a wide range of study programmes for master&#x27;s degree conducted in English, many of which are unique in Finland. Natural Sciences, Human Sciences, Sports and Health Sciences as well as Teacher education are the university&#x27;s areas of special expertise.

==Size==
The university has around 14,300 students, in addition to its adult education students, representing nearly 40,000 students in total. Each year around 2,800 new students are admitted and generally only a seventh of applicants are accepted; this makes University of Jyväskylä one of the most popular and selective universities in Finland. Measured according to the number of master&#x27;s degrees conferred, the University of Jyväskylä is ranked as the second largest university in Finland.

==Organisation==
The university offers undergraduate and postgraduate degrees, teacher training programmes and over 120 subject area disciplines.

The university is currently divided into six faculties:
* Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences
* Faculty of Information Technology
* Faculty of Education and Psychology
* Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences
* Faculty of Mathematics and Science
* Jyväskylä University School of Business and Economics

Independent institutes in addition to faculties:
* Centre for Multilingual Academic Communication, Movi
* Finnish Institute for Educational Research
* Kokkola University Consortium Chydenius
* Open University
* Open Science Centre | University Library | University Museum

==Research centres and rankings==
Centres of Excellence in Research nominated by the Academy of Finland:

2022-2029
*Center of Excellence in Quark Matter, Physics
*Centre of Excellence in Learning Dynamics and Intervention Research, Psychology and Educational Sciences
*Centre of Excellence in Music, Mind, Body and Brain, Music
*Finnish Centre of excellence in Randomness and Structures, Mathematics, coordinated by University of Helsinki

2018-2025
*Research on Ageing and Care (Coordinated by Jyväskylä)
*Inverse Modelling and Imaging (Coordinated by Helsinki)
*Game Culture Studies (Coordinated by Tampere)

University of Jyväskylä in global rankings

In the global rankings, research activity at the JYU is among the top two to three percent of all universities.

Research funding

The university has succeeded well in acquiring competitive research funding - European Research Council funding as an example.

Also Academy Professorships are internationally leading-edge researchers and recognised experts in their field. They are expected to have great scientific impact in the scientific community and in society at large.

==International cooperation in education==

The University of Jyväskylä aims to offer its students the opportunity to study abroad and internationalisation at home. Therefore, the University of Jyväskylä is active in a variety of international programmes, such as the Lifelong Learning Programme, Nordplus, north–south-South Higher Education Exchange, FIRST and ISEP. The university has also concluded bilateral agreements on student exchange with 25 universities around the world. Altogether, the university is involved in student exchanges with more than 360 universities worldwide.

==Campuses== 

The faculties and departments are mainly located on three campus areas: the Main Campus area in the city centre - where the original Teacher Seminary has first started - as well as Mattilanniemi and Ylistönrinne Campuses on opposite shores of Lake Jyväsjärvi, united by a bridge, some 10 minutes walk from the Main Campus area.

Several buildings in the main campus area were designed by famous Finnish architect Alvar Aalto. Aalto received the commission to design the College of Education campus following a competition held in 1951. Aalto played on the idea of Jyväskylä&#x27;s image among the town&#x27;s inhabitants as it being the &quot;Athens of the North&quot;, and layout of the campus reflects principles of Greek acropolis layouts. His scheme even included a Greek-style open-air theatre, though executed in minimal form.

Buildings in the campus area designed by Alvar Aalto:

* Teachers Training School 1951-54
* Staff housing 1951 (now offices of the Jyväskylä University Museum, Building G)
* Student&#x27;s Hall of Residence 1952-54 (Building Philologica, P)
* Lozzi and Lyhty staff and student refectories (P)
* Main Building 1954–1956, Building C
* Swimming Pool 1954–1958, 1964, several alterations (called Aalto-Alvari)
* Physical Education Building 1971
* Library 1957 (now the Aalto Reading Room)

In 1969-1970 an architectural competition was arranged for the design of new university campus sites at Mattilanniemi and Ylistönrinne. The competition was won by architect Arto Sipinen, who had previously worked in Aalto&#x27;s office. Sipinen also designed new buildings for the main campus, including a new main library (1974).

The three campus areas of the university - Seminaarinmäki, Mattilanniemi and Ylistönrinne - constitute a multifaceted cultural and natural environment.

The Seminaarinmäki area is of particular interest as it depicts over 100 years of history of this institute of higher education. The three distinct eras in the history of the university, first as a Teacher Training College (Seminar) 1863–1937), then as the Jyväskylä College of Education (1934-1966), to its present-day university status (1966-) are reflected in the buildings dating from the different periods.

The Teacher Seminary complex comprised five red brick buildings from 1879 to 1883 by architect Constantin Kiseleff. The old Seminar buildings and the college buildings designed by Alvar Aalto are all listed as buildings protected by the law.

Because of the need to build more facilities for the university, new buildings have been designed, many of them by architect Arto Sipinen. The Faculty of Education and Psychology has the most recently designed facility, Ruusupuisto (&quot;Rose Park&quot;, 2015) by SARC Architects Ltd. The building got its name from a former park from the beginning of the 20th century. It was named after the many luxuriant rosebushes planted on its southern hill.
==Student Union==
The Student Union of the University of Jyväskylä (JYY) is the students’ very own organization. The basic task of the Student Union is to represent its members and protect their interests and rights at the university as well as in the surrounding society. All degree and exchange students enrolled in the University of Jyväskylä become members of the Student Union.

==Accommodation==
===Kortepohja Student Village===

Kortepohja Student Village is owned by the Student Union of the University of Jyväskylä. Kortepohja, located about 2.5 kilometres from the Main Campus and city centre, housing approximately 1900 students.

===Central Finland Student Housing Foundation, KOAS===

KOAS offers ca. 3900 apartments all around the Jyväskylä town area. The apartment buildings are conveniently located in the suburbs of Jyväskylä.

==Notable people and alumni==
* Alvar Aalto
* Minna Canth
* Faina Jyrkilä
* Martti J. Kari
* Seminaarinmäen mieslaulajat
* Sofi Oksanen
* Jutta Urpilainen
* Majaliwa Kassim Majaliwa, prime minister of Tanzania, November 2015 – present.

==Rectors==
*Kaarle Oksala 1934–1940
*Erik Ahlman 1940–1948
*Aarni Penttilä 1948–1962
*Martti Takala 1963–1967
*Ilppo Simo Louhivaara 1967–1977
*Kalevi Heinilä 1977–1982
*Martti Takala 1982–1988
*Antti Tanskanen 1988–1992
*Aino Sallinen 1992–2012
*Matti Manninen 2012–2017
*Keijo Hämäläinen from 1 August 2017 to 21 April 2023
*Maija-Leena Laakso 21 April to 14 August 2023
*Jari Ojala from 14 August 2023

==See also==
* List of summer schools of nature sciences

==References==
==External links==

*University of Jyväskylä - Official site
*Architecture of Jyvaskyla University by Alvar Aalto on Architectuul</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q578326" start="4" end="27" title="University of Jyväskylä" label="University of Jyväskylä"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="36" end="55" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q134620" start="59" end="68" title="Jyväskylä" label="Jyväskylä"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="111" end="127" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q627006" start="128" end="152" title="Teacher Training College" label="Teacher Training College"/>
<link wikidata="Q402782" start="442" end="454" title="Uno Cygnaeus" label="Uno Cygnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="1729" end="1745" title="Natural Sciences" label="Natural Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587903" start="1747" end="1761" title="Human science" label="Human Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298380" start="1763" end="1769" title="Sports science" label="Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q843601" start="1774" end="1789" title="Health Sciences" label="Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q82840" start="5246" end="5257" title="Alvar Aalto" label="Alvar Aalto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801372" start="6326" end="6338" title="Arto Sipinen" label="Arto Sipinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432701" start="8180" end="8190" title="Kortepohja" label="Kortepohja"/>
<link wikidata="Q82840" start="8621" end="8632" title="Alvar Aalto" label="Alvar Aalto"/>
<link wikidata="Q298027" start="8635" end="8646" title="Minna Canth" label="Minna Canth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17381262" start="8649" end="8662" title="Faina Jyrkilä" label="Faina Jyrkilä"/>
<link wikidata="Q103358269" start="8665" end="8679" title="Martti J. Kari" label="Martti J. Kari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449458" start="8682" end="8709" title="Seminaarinmäen mieslaulajat" label="Seminaarinmäen mieslaulajat"/>
<link wikidata="Q233953" start="8712" end="8724" title="Sofi Oksanen" label="Sofi Oksanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q241376" start="8727" end="8743" title="Jutta Urpilainen" label="Jutta Urpilainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737420" start="8746" end="8770" title="Majaliwa Kassim Majaliwa" label="Majaliwa Kassim Majaliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="8790" end="8798" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8839" end="8852" title="Kaarle Oksala" label="Kaarle Oksala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388452" start="8864" end="8875" title="Erik Ahlman" label="Erik Ahlman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8887" end="8901" title="Aarni Penttilä" label="Aarni Penttilä"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8913" end="8926" title="Martti Takala" label="Martti Takala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8938" end="8959" title="Ilppo Simo Louhivaara" label="Ilppo Simo Louhivaara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8971" end="8985" title="Kalevi Heinilä" label="Kalevi Heinilä"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8997" end="9010" title="Martti Takala" label="Martti Takala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9022" end="9037" title="Antti Tanskanen" label="Antti Tanskanen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9049" end="9062" title="Aino Sallinen" label="Aino Sallinen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9074" end="9088" title="Matti Manninen (physicist)" label="Matti Manninen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9100" end="9116" title="Keijo Hämäläinen" label="Keijo Hämäläinen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9154" end="9172" title="Maija-Leena Laakso" label="Maija-Leena Laakso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9201" end="9211" title="Jari Ojala" label="Jari Ojala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641760" start="9248" end="9289" title="List of summer schools of nature sciences" label="List of summer schools of nature sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q82840" start="9408" end="9419" title="Alvar Aalto" label="Alvar Aalto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258911" wikidata="Q3133110" url="?curid=258911" title="Henry Thrale">
<text>Henry Thrale (1724/1730?–4 April 1781) was a British politician who sat in the House of Commons from 1765 to 1780. He was a close friend of Samuel Johnson. Like his father, he was the proprietor of the large London brewery H. Thrale &amp; Co.

Born at the Alehouse in Harrow Corner, Southwark, he was the son of the rich brewer Ralph Thrale (1698–1758) and Mary Thrale. He married Hester Lynch Salusbury on 11 October 1763; they had 12 children, and she outlived him. He was MP for Southwark 23 December 1765 – September 1780, an Alderman, and Sheriff of the City of London: a respected, religious man who was a good hunter and sportsman with a taste for gambling.

==Education==
Thrale was educated at Eton College and University College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 4 June 1744. He travelled in Europe with Lord William Henry Lyttleton Westcote (1724–1808).

==Friendship with Samuel Johnson==
Johnson first met the Thrales on the 9 or 10 January 1765, and immediately became almost a part of their family. There was much good literary company. When Fanny Burney was admitted to the circle, Samuel Crisp wrote &quot;Where will you find such another set? Oh, Fanny, set this down as the happiest period of your life.&quot; Johnson mostly lived with the Thrales at his country house Streatham Park or brewery home for the next 15 years until Henry&#x27;s death in 1781.

==Parliamentary and business career==
On 23 December 1765, Henry Thrale was elected to Parliament. He continued to represent Southwark until his election defeat in 1780.

Thrale inherited the Anchor Brewery, Southwark from his father. In 1772 a scheme for brewing beer without malt or hops put the brewery in debt by £130,000 (£13 million today). This almost bankrupted Henry Thrale. Hester Thrale raised money from her mother and other friends and he cleared the debt in nine years.

==Travels==
In 1774 Samuel Johnson went with the Thrales on a tour of Wales, during which time they visited Hester&#x27;s cousin, Sir Robert Cotton at Lleweni Hall in Denbighshire.

In September 1775 Hester, Henry and their eldest child Queeney, together with Samuel Johnson and Giuseppe Baretti, went to Paris.

On 19 October 1775 the party was admitted to the Court of King Louis XVI and Queen Marie Antoinette at Fontainebleau, and enjoyed dinner and an evening at the theatre with them.

==Family life==
Henry and Hester Thrale had twelve children of whom only four daughters survived to adulthood:

*Hester Maria (Queeney) (17 September 1764 – 31 March 1857)
*Frances (27 September 1765 – 6 October 1765)
*Henry Salusbury (15 February 1766 – 23 March 1776)
*Anna Maria (1 April 1768 – 21 March 1770)
*Elizabeth (22 June 1769 – 22 November 1773)
*Susannah Arabella (23 May 1770 – 5 November 1858)
*Sophia (23 July 1771 – 8 November 1824)
*Penelope (15 September 1772 – 15 September 1772)
*Ralph (8 November 1773 – 13 July 1775)
*Frances Anna (4 May 1775 – 9 December 1775)
*Cecelia Margaretta (8 February 1777 – 1 May 1857)
*Hester Sophia (21 June 1778 – 25 April 1783)

Henry and Hester&#x27;s marriage has misleadingly been described as loveless. While there was no great passion, they loved and respected each other. On their wedding anniversary in 1787 Hester wrote:
The speculation that Hester did not love her husband may have originated from the fact that she was of significantly higher social status than Thrale, and often eclipsed him at social events due to her family&#x27;s pedigree. This, according to all reports, infuriated Thrale at certain times and may have led to an awkward relationship between the two during the public events. Fanny Burney records that Hester&#x27;s mind was &#x27;cruelly disordered&#x27; with grief at Henry&#x27;s death.

==Personality==
In June 1777 his wife wrote in Thraliana ...
==Illness and death==
On 1 April 1777 Henry&#x27;s death was falsely reported in the newspapers, and threw James Boswell into &quot;a state of very uneasy uncertainty&quot;.

On 8 or 11 June 1779, Thrale went to the house of his sister – Mrs Susannah Nesbitt – to read the will of her husband Arnold Nesbitt, MP for Cricklade. During the meal, Henry had his first stroke. Read more » The second stroke came on 19 or 21 February 1780; on 10 September he had a third, while canvassing constituents during the 1780 general election campaign.

The strokes were largely caused by Henry&#x27;s voracious appetite for large indulgent meals, accompanied by large quantities of ale.

Henry Thrale died in London at 5 a.m. 4 April 1781, with his wife and Johnson by his side. He was buried in the crypt of St. Leonards Church, Streatham. Henry&#x27;s epitaph was written by Samuel Johnson.

==Obituaries==
He also wrote of Thrale:


In his &quot;Life of Johnson&quot;, James Boswell mentions Henry&#x27;s worthy principles, sound scholarship, business acumen, general intelligence and polished manners. He also added his impressive looks, dignified bearing and generosity towards his wife in his allowance to her for entertaining those guests of her own choosing.

==Will==
The executors of Henry Thrale&#x27;s will were Samuel Johnson, Henry Smith, Joseph Crutchley, John Cator and Hester Thrale. The Anchor Brewhouse was quickly sold to David Barclay, who took Thrale&#x27;s old manager, John Perkins (1730–1812), into partnership. They became Barclay, Perkins and Company. The sale figure was £135,000 (£13,500,000 or $22,500,000 today).

This was all left in trust for Thrale&#x27;s five daughters who are said to have been left £20,000 each (£2,000,000 today). From other assets his wife was left the interest from £50,000 for life and the contents of Streatham Park (including all Sir Joshua Reynolds paintings) for life.

Samuel Johnson famously said, &quot;We are not here to sell a parcel of boilers and vats, but the potentiality of growing rich beyond the dreams of avarice.&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*Henry Thrale&#x27;s homes
*Henry Thrale&#x27;s parliamentary career
*Anchor Brewery
*Henry Thrale&#x27;s death &amp; funeral
*Henry Thrale&#x27;s will
*Henry Thrale at the National Portrait Gallery, London</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3133110" start="0" end="12" title="Henry Thrale" label="Henry Thrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q9247597" start="79" end="95" title="House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="140" end="154" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="283" end="292" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="321" end="327" title="brewing" label="brewer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="328" end="340" title="Ralph Thrale" label="Ralph Thrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q291322" start="381" end="403" title="Hester Thrale" label="Hester Lynch Salusbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571116" start="482" end="491" title="Southwark (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364526" start="530" end="538" title="Alderman" label="Alderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495002" start="544" end="573" title="Sheriff of the City of London" label="Sheriff of the City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="703" end="715" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="720" end="746" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193162" start="757" end="769" title="Matriculation" label="matriculated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014826" start="814" end="851" title="Lord William Henry Lyttleton Westcote" label="Lord William Henry Lyttleton Westcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="901" end="908" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q259530" start="1057" end="1069" title="Fanny Burney" label="Fanny Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q18546858" start="1098" end="1110" title="Samuel Crisp" label="Samuel Crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500213" start="1288" end="1302" title="Streatham Park" label="Streatham Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="1463" end="1473" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571116" start="1501" end="1510" title="Southwark (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752665" start="1568" end="1593" title="Anchor Brewery, Southwark" label="Anchor Brewery, Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q291322" start="1760" end="1773" title="Hester Thrale" label="Hester Thrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="1931" end="1936" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528844" start="1991" end="2008" title="Sir Robert Salusbury Cotton, 5th Baronet" label="Sir Robert Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662131" start="2012" end="2024" title="Lleweni Hall" label="Lleweni Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q291322" start="2061" end="2067" title="Hester Thrale" label="Hester"/>
<link wikidata="Q741900" start="2140" end="2156" title="Giuseppe Marc&amp;#x27;Antonio Baretti" label="Giuseppe Baretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="2232" end="2246" title="Louis XVI of France" label="King Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="2251" end="2273" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Queen Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q201428" start="2277" end="2290" title="Chateau Fontainebleau" label="Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5746326" start="2466" end="2488" title="Hester Maria Elphinstone, Viscountess Keith" label="Hester Maria (Queeney)"/>
<link wikidata="Q259530" start="3615" end="3627" title="Fanny Burney" label="Fanny Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q291322" start="3759" end="3767" title="Hester Thrale" label="his wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990838" start="3777" end="3786" title="Thraliana" label="Thraliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q335060" start="3898" end="3911" title="James Boswell" label="James Boswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185072" start="4107" end="4116" title="Cricklade (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cricklade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="4155" end="4161" title="Cerebrovascular accident" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971368" start="4298" end="4319" title="1780 British general election" label="1780 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q291322" start="4523" end="4531" title="Hester Thrale" label="his wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="4655" end="4669" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q335060" start="4750" end="4763" title="James Boswell" label="James Boswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="5102" end="5116" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q291322" start="5164" end="5177" title="Hester Thrale" label="Hester Thrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231117" start="5220" end="5233" title="David Barclay of Youngsbury" label="David Barclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q291322" start="5565" end="5573" title="Hester Thrale" label="his wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500213" start="5638" end="5652" title="Streatham Park" label="Streatham Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q194402" start="5668" end="5687" title="Joshua Reynolds" label="Sir Joshua Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="5710" end="5724" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="6081" end="6114" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery, London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258919" wikidata="Q401628" url="?curid=258919" title="Maplewood">
<text>Maplewood may refer to:

== Places ==

=== United States ===

==== Populated places ====
* Maplewood, Indiana
* Maplewood, Minnesota
* Maplewood, Missouri
* Maplewood, New Jersey
** Maplewood (NJT station), a New Jersey Transit station in Maplewood, New Jersey
* Maplewood, Albany County, New York (non-CDP community/hamlet)
* Maplewood, Sullivan County, New York (non-CDP community/hamlet)
* Maplewood, Ohio
* Maplewood, Portland, Oregon, a neighborhood
* Maplewood, Houston, Texas, a neighborhood
* Maplewood, Fall River, Massachusetts (neighborhood in Fall River, Massachusetts)
* Maplewood, Virginia
* Maplewood, Washington
* Maplewood, West Virginia
* Maplewood, Wisconsin

==== Places listed on the National Register of Historic Places ====
*Maplewood (Pembroke, Kentucky), listed on the NRHP in Christian County, Kentucky
*Maplewood (Walton, Kentucky), listed on the NRHP in Boone County, Kentucky
*Maplewood (Columbia, Missouri), NRHP-listed
*Maplewood Commercial Historic District at Manchester and Sutton, Maplewood, Missouri, listed on the NRHP in St. Louis County, Missouri
*Maplewood (Montgomery Township, New Jersey), listed on the NRHP in Somerset County, New Jersey
*Maplewood Historic District, Rochester, New York, NRHP-listed
*Maplewood (Chesapeake, Ohio), listed on the NRHP in Lawrence County, Ohio
*Maplewood (Pliny, West Virginia), listed on the NRHP in Mason County, West Virginia

=== Canada ===

* Maplewood, Nova Scotia

== Other ==
*&quot;Maplewood&quot; (EP), by Ed Harcourt
*Maplewood (Milford, New Hampshire), listed on the New Hampshire State Register of Historic Places
*SS &quot;Maplewood&quot;, cargo ship sunk during World War I.

==See also==
* Maplewood Parent Cooperative, a K-8 public school in Edmonds, Washington
* Maple Woods Community College, a campus of Metropolitan Community College in Kansas City
* Maplewood Mall, a shopping mall in Maplewood, Minnesota
* Maplewood Cemetery (Pulaski, Tennessee), a historic cemetery in Pulaski, Tennessee, U.S.
* Maple (wood)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q401628" start="0" end="9" title="Maplewood" label="Maplewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754092" start="91" end="109" title="Maplewood, Indiana" label="Maplewood, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q990856" start="112" end="132" title="Maplewood, Minnesota" label="Maplewood, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q953462" start="135" end="154" title="Maplewood, Missouri" label="Maplewood, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q32525" start="157" end="178" title="Maplewood, New Jersey" label="Maplewood, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705728" start="182" end="205" title="Maplewood (NJT station)" label="Maplewood (NJT station)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="263" end="297" title="Maplewood, Albany County, New York" label="Maplewood, Albany County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="327" end="363" title="Maplewood, Sullivan County, New York" label="Maplewood, Sullivan County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754095" start="393" end="408" title="Maplewood, Ohio" label="Maplewood, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754094" start="411" end="438" title="Maplewood, Portland, Oregon" label="Maplewood, Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754091" start="457" end="482" title="Maplewood, Houston, Texas" label="Maplewood, Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="501" end="537" title="Maplewood, Fall River, Massachusetts" label="Maplewood, Fall River, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49194" start="555" end="580" title="Fall River, Massachusetts" label="Fall River, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754096" start="584" end="603" title="Maplewood, Virginia" label="Maplewood, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995075" start="606" end="627" title="Maplewood, Washington" label="Maplewood, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754098" start="630" end="654" title="Maplewood, West Virginia" label="Maplewood, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714527" start="657" end="677" title="Maplewood, Wisconsin" label="Maplewood, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063298" start="748" end="778" title="Maplewood (Pembroke, Kentucky)" label="Maplewood (Pembroke, Kentucky)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="830" end="858" title="Maplewood (Walton, Kentucky)" label="Maplewood (Walton, Kentucky)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12062487" start="860" end="904" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Boone County, Kentucky" label="listed on the NRHP in Boone County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754102" start="906" end="936" title="Maplewood (Columbia, Missouri)" label="Maplewood (Columbia, Missouri)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="951" end="1014" title="Maplewood Commercial Historic District at Manchester and Sutton" label="Maplewood Commercial Historic District at Manchester and Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705756" start="1037" end="1085" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in St. Louis County, Missouri" label="listed on the NRHP in St. Louis County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831212" start="1087" end="1130" title="Maplewood (Montgomery Township, New Jersey)" label="Maplewood (Montgomery Township, New Jersey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754112" start="1183" end="1210" title="Maplewood Historic District" label="Maplewood Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1246" end="1274" title="Maplewood (Chesapeake, Ohio)" label="Maplewood (Chesapeake, Ohio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976588" start="1276" end="1319" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Lawrence County, Ohio" label="listed on the NRHP in Lawrence County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754103" start="1321" end="1353" title="Maplewood (Pliny, West Virginia)" label="Maplewood (Pliny, West Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754093" start="1424" end="1446" title="Maplewood, Nova Scotia" label="Maplewood, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754101" start="1461" end="1487" title="Maplewood (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Maplewood&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1505" end="1539" title="Maplewood (Milford, New Hampshire)" label="Maplewood (Milford, New Hampshire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008320" start="1555" end="1602" title="New Hampshire State Register of Historic Places" label="New Hampshire State Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q56281093" start="1604" end="1628" title="SS Maplewood" label="SS &amp;quot;Maplewood&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338954" start="1682" end="1710" title="Maplewood Parent Cooperative" label="Maplewood Parent Cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825055" start="1757" end="1786" title="Maple Woods Community College" label="Maple Woods Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754113" start="1848" end="1862" title="Maplewood Mall" label="Maplewood Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610010" start="1906" end="1945" title="Maplewood Cemetery (Pulaski, Tennessee)" label="Maplewood Cemetery (Pulaski, Tennessee)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="1997" end="2009" title="Maple (wood)" label="Maple (wood)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258926" wikidata="Q240380" url="?curid=258926" title="Fifty-move rule">
<text>The fifty-move rule in chess states that a player can claim a draw if no has been made and no pawn has been moved in the last fifty moves (where a &quot;move&quot; consists of a player completing a turn followed by the opponent completing a turn). The purpose of this rule is to prevent a player with no chance of winning from obstinately continuing to play indefinitely or seeking to win by tiring the opponent.

Chess positions with only a few pieces can be &quot;solved&quot;, that is, the outcome of best play for both sides can be determined by exhaustive analysis; if the outcome is a win for one side or the other (rather than a draw), it is of interest to know whether the defending side can hold out long enough to invoke the fifty-move rule. The simplest common endings, called the basic checkmates, such as king and queen versus king, can all be won in well under 50 moves. However, in the 20th century it was discovered that certain endgame positions are winnable but require more than 50 moves (without a capture or a pawn move). The rule was therefore changed to allow certain exceptions in which 100 moves were allowed with particular material combinations. Winnable positions that required even more moves were later discovered, however, and in 1992, FIDE abolished all such exceptions and reinstated the strict 50-move rule over the board. In correspondence chess, a rule that resembles these endgame exceptions is in effect. Players can claim a win or draw using seven-piece endgame tablebases; however, under ICCF rules, these tablebases do not take the 50-move rule into account.

== Statement of rule ==
The relevant part of the FIDE laws of chess is quoted below:
A claim does not have to be made at the first opportunity; it can be made any time when there have been no captures or pawn moves in the last fifty moves.

A game is not automatically declared a draw under the fifty-move rule; the draw must be claimed by the player whose turn it is to move. Therefore, a game can continue beyond a point where a draw could be claimed under the rule. When a draw under the fifty-move rule can be claimed, one of the players is usually happy to claim it.

Games drawn under the fifty-move rule before the endgame are rare. One example was the game Filipowicz versus Smederevac, Polanica Zdrój 1966, where no captures had been made in the whole game. Filipowicz claimed the draw after move 70 by Smederevac, the last pawn having been moved on move 20 by Smederevac.

In correspondence chess under ICCF rules, the fifty-move rule only applies when more than seven pieces remain on the board; when seven pieces or fewer remain, a win or draw may be claimed with reference to endgame tablebases. Tablebases do not consider the 50- or 75-move rules, so a position that is a theoretical win according to the tablebases may be a draw in over-the-board chess. Such a position is sometimes termed a &quot;cursed win&quot; (where mate can be forced, but it runs afoul of the 50-move rule), or a &quot;blessed loss&quot; from the perspective of the other player.

In retrograde analysis problems, castling also resets the fifty-move rule counter.

===Seventy-five-move rule===

If seventy-five moves are made without a pawn move or capture being made, the game is drawn unless the seventy-fifth move delivers a checkmate. No claim needs to be made by either player, as the draw is mandatorily applied by the arbiter.
== Examples ==
===Timman vs. Lutz, 1995===
In this 1995 game between Jan Timman and Christopher Lutz, an endgame with a rook and bishop versus a rook occurred. White is striving for the winning Philidor position while Black is employing the drawing Cochrane Defense and the &quot;second-rank defense&quot; (see rook and bishop versus rook endgame). Black was defending well in the difficult defense and could have claimed a draw on the 119th move. Lutz notes that he claimed a draw on move 121, ironically making a move that enters what would have been a losing position.

===Karpov vs. Kasparov, 1991===
A draw by the fifty-move rule could have been claimed after Black&#x27;s 112th move in a 1991 game between Anatoly Karpov and Garry Kasparov, but neither player claimed it. The last capture occurred on White&#x27;s 63rd move (and the last pawn move occurred before that). White could have written his 113th move (which wouldn&#x27;t have been a capture or pawn move) on his scoresheet and claimed a draw. After White&#x27;s 113th move, either player could have claimed a draw on his turn to move, without having to write down his next move. Instead, the game continued for several more moves:
: 113. Ng5 Ra6+
: 114. Kf7 Rf6+
: ½-½
The players agreed to a draw at this point because after 115.Kxf6 the position is a stalemate. If 115.Ke8, then 115...Rxf5 116.Nxf5, and the position is clearly drawn because the two knights cannot force checkmate (see two knights endgame).

===Lputian vs. Haroutjunian, 2001===
An unusual event occurred in a game in the 2001 Armenian Championship between Smbat Lputian (who won the championship) and Gevorg Haroutjunian. The last pawn move was on White&#x27;s 86th move and no captures occurred after it. (The game was a theoretical draw from before here until Black&#x27;s 141st move.) Black could have claimed a draw after White&#x27;s 136th move (or at any of the subsequent moves). Instead, the game continued and Black resigned on his 142nd move after White had achieved a forced winning position even though the right to claim a draw was still in effect.

===Nguyễn vs. Vachier-Lagrave, 2008===
Another unusual event occurred in the Aeroflot Open of 2008 in a game between Nguyễn Ngọc Trường Sơn and Maxime Vachier-Lagrave. The last capture was on White&#x27;s 71st move, creating a rook and bishop versus rook endgame. The game was a theoretical draw until Black blundered on his 113th move. White managed to find the win, but could not secure checkmate or the win of the black rook before the fifty-move rule came into effect, and Black claimed a draw.

===Nakamura vs. Donchenko, 2024===
The opening day of the World Rapid Championship, 2024 witnessed a rare and bizarre end to a game because of 50 move rule. German Grandmaster Alexander Donchenko made a great escape just by one move away from getting checkmated by Hikaru Nakamura of the USA, thanks to his use of the 50-move rule. Nakamura had placed a check on Donchenko&#x27;s King in the 128th move of their third-round meeting. Donchecko had only one available move: to block the check with his only remaining piece, a rook. But that would not have saved him because Nakamura could have captured that rook with his rook, resulting in a checkmate. Donchenko stopped the clock and summoned the arbiter. He claimed a draw by the 50-move rule. The arbiter came up with her notebook and verified that Donchenko was spot on, denying Nakamura a sure win and giving the German an unexpected draw.

== History ==
The rule has a long history. The purpose of the rule is to prevent someone from playing on indefinitely in a position that cannot be won. A precursor to chess, shatranj, had a seventy-move rule. The fifty-move rule was introduced into chess by Ruy López in his 1561 book. Pietro Carrera (15731647) thought that twenty-four moves was the right number but Bourdonnais (17951840) argued for sixty moves.

By 1800, a claim under the rule could be made only in certain specified types of endgame, which varied from one set of rules to another. The move-count started when the request to implement the rule was made (instead of going back to the last capture or pawn move) and a capture or a pawn move did not reset the count. The rules used at the 1883 London tournament reset the count if there was a capture or pawn move, but still started the count when the claim to apply the rule was made instead of going back to the last capture or pawn move.

At one time, it was believed that all winnable endgames could be won within fifty moves. However, in the early 20th century, some exceptions were found, including A. A. Troitsky&#x27;s (1866–1942) analysis of the two knights endgame as well as the endgame of a rook and bishop versus a rook. The rules of chess were revised several times to admit exceptions to the fifty-move rule for certain specific situations. Early on, the fifty-move rule applied to games but not to games.

During the time periods when the fifty-move rule admitted exceptions, there were a number of revisions. In 1928 FIDE enacted rules that if an endgame theoretically requires more than 50 moves to force checkmate, twice that number of moves were allowed. For instance, in the rook and bishop versus rook endgame, 132 moves were allowed, since it was twice the 66 moves that were thought to be required at that time. (The actual maximum number of moves needed is 59.) In 1952 FIDE revised the law, allowing for 100 moves in such positions but requiring that players agree to an extension for these positions before the first move is made. This was still in effect in 1960. The positions were not specified in the rules, to allow for the possibility of more positions requiring more than 50 moves to be discovered (which is what happened). The following positions were understood to require more than 50 moves:
# rook and bishop versus a rook
# two knights versus a pawn safely blocked by a knight behind the Troitsky line
# rook and pawn on a2 versus a bishop on black squares and a pawn on a3, plus the equivalent positions in the other corners. (In 1979 it was shown that this endgame can actually be won in just under 50 moves.)

Article 12.4 of the 1965 FIDE rules states: The number of moves can be increased for certain positions, provided that this increase in number and these positions have been clearly established before the commencement of the game. Harkness notes that &quot;Some of these unusual positions have been established and accepted by FIDE&quot;, including two knights versus a pawn. The 1975 and 1977 versions of the rules included the same wording (not specifying the positions or the number of moves).

In 1984, the rule was modified and it became Article 10.9. Now 100 moves were explicitly specified and the positions above were listed in the rule. (The wording about the positions and number of moves having to be specified in advance of the game was dropped.) Ken Thompson&#x27;s investigations in the 1980s using the Belle chess computer discovered numerous endgames winnable in more than 50 moves. However, these often involved seemingly random moves that defied human comprehension or analysis, in situations that would hardly ever occur in real gameplay. In 1989 the rule (still Article 10.9) was changed to 75 moves, and the listed positions were:
# Rook and bishop versus rook
# Two knights versus a pawn (no mention of the Troitsky line)
# A queen and a pawn on the seventh rank versus a queen (see queen and pawn versus queen endgame)
# Queen versus two knights (see )
# Queen versus two bishops
# Two bishops versus a knight (see ).

The rule was then changed to allow just 50 moves in all positions. Some sources say that the 1989 rule was in effect for only a &quot;year or so&quot; or a &quot;few years&quot;, but one source of the 1992 rules gives the pre-1984 wording: &quot;...increased for certain positions if it was announced in advance&quot;. By 2001 the rule was Article 9.3 and allowed 50 moves for all positions.

Research into how many moves are required to win certain endgames continued. Exhaustive retrograde analysis using faster computers to build endgame tablebases has uncovered many more such endgames, often of previously unsuspected length. In 2008, the record was 517 moves (assuming optimal play by both sides) to make a piece capture or exchange that achieves a simpler and more obviously winnable sub-endgame, for a particular position involving a queen and knight versus a rook, bishop, and knight. In 2013, this record was improved to 545 moves.

Many of the longest games on record involve the rook and bishop versus rook endgame, when the rule for more moves was in effect. (See pawnless chess endgame and rook and bishop versus rook endgame.)

== See also ==
* Threefold repetition

== References ==
Bibliography
* 
*
* 
* 
*
*
*
*
*

== Further reading ==
*
*“Chess: the 50-move Rule” by Edward Winter</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q240380" start="4" end="19" title="Fifty-move rule" label="fifty-move rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="23" end="28" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137224" start="62" end="66" title="draw (chess)" label="draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q135" start="94" end="98" title="pawn (chess)" label="pawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559040" start="466" end="472" title="Solving chess" label="solved"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="792" end="808" title="Chess endgame#Basic checkmates" label="basic checkmates"/>
<link wikidata="Q332225" start="945" end="952" title="Chess endgame" label="endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q571113" start="1150" end="1158" title="material (chess)" label="material"/>
<link wikidata="Q102178" start="1267" end="1271" title="FIDE" label="FIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128406" start="1360" end="1380" title="correspondence chess" label="correspondence chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340994" start="1493" end="1510" title="endgame tablebase" label="endgame tablebase"/>
<link wikidata="Q102178" start="1650" end="1654" title="Fédération Internationale des Échecs" label="FIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q332225" start="2223" end="2230" title="Chess endgame" label="endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q403100" start="2296" end="2310" title="Polanica-Zdrój" label="Polanica Zdrój"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128406" start="2487" end="2507" title="correspondence chess" label="correspondence chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340994" start="2690" end="2707" title="endgame tablebase" label="endgame tablebase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082711" start="3074" end="3093" title="retrograde analysis" label="retrograde analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q139438" start="3493" end="3503" title="Jan Timman" label="Jan Timman"/>
<link wikidata="Q64754" start="3508" end="3524" title="Christopher Lutz" label="Christopher Lutz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3618" end="3635" title="Rook and bishop versus rook endgame#Philidor position" label="Philidor position"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3673" end="3689" title="Rook and bishop versus rook endgame#Cochrane Defense" label="Cochrane Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366192" start="3735" end="3770" title="rook and bishop versus rook endgame" label="rook and bishop versus rook endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q131674" start="4136" end="4150" title="Anatoly Karpov" label="Anatoly Karpov"/>
<link wikidata="Q28614" start="4155" end="4169" title="Garry Kasparov" label="Garry Kasparov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346244" start="4672" end="4688" title="draw by agreement" label="agreed to a draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q208330" start="4744" end="4753" title="stalemate" label="stalemate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20819848" start="4864" end="4873" title="checkmate" label="checkmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q901706" start="4879" end="4898" title="two knights endgame" label="two knights endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687662" start="4987" end="5008" title="Armenian Chess Championship" label="Armenian Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q738034" start="5017" end="5030" title="Smbat Lputian" label="Smbat Lputian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392263" start="5386" end="5394" title="resign (chess)" label="resigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q381472" start="5601" end="5614" title="Aeroflot Open" label="Aeroflot Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111035" start="5641" end="5663" title="Nguyễn Ngọc Trường Sơn" label="Nguyễn Ngọc Trường Sơn"/>
<link wikidata="Q256923" start="5668" end="5690" title="Maxime Vachier-Lagrave" label="Maxime Vachier-Lagrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q19615148" start="6200" end="6219" title="Alexander Donchenko" label="Alexander Donchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q337223" start="6289" end="6304" title="Hikaru Nakamura" label="Hikaru Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q279829" start="7093" end="7101" title="shatranj" label="shatranj"/>
<link wikidata="Q297457" start="7177" end="7186" title="Ruy López de Segura" label="Ruy López"/>
<link wikidata="Q631673" start="7205" end="7219" title="Pietro Carrera" label="Pietro Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q312020" start="7287" end="7298" title="Louis-Charles Mahé de La Bourdonnais" label="Bourdonnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398788" start="7676" end="7698" title="London 1883 chess tournament" label="1883 London tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q552743" start="8042" end="8056" title="Alexey Troitsky" label="A. A. Troitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q901706" start="8092" end="8111" title="two knights endgame" label="two knights endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366192" start="8140" end="8169" title="rook and bishop versus rook endgame" label="rook and bishop versus a rook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392263" start="8175" end="8189" title="rules of chess" label="rules of chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q102178" start="8471" end="8475" title="FIDE" label="FIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366192" start="9268" end="9297" title="rook and bishop versus rook endgame" label="rook and bishop versus a rook"/>
<link wikidata="Q901706" start="9300" end="9325" title="two knights ending" label="two knights versus a pawn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9364" end="9377" title="Two knights endgame#Two knights versus pawn" label="Troitsky line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107006" start="10346" end="10358" title="Ken Thompson" label="Ken Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746807" start="10404" end="10409" title="Belle (chess machine)" label="Belle"/>
<link wikidata="Q571113" start="10867" end="10871" title="rank (chess)" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270559" start="10892" end="10927" title="queen and pawn versus queen endgame" label="queen and pawn versus queen endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082711" start="11510" end="11529" title="retrograde analysis" label="retrograde analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340994" start="11562" end="11579" title="endgame tablebase" label="endgame tablebase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733833" start="11704" end="11716" title="optimal play" label="optimal play"/>
<link wikidata="Q719632" start="12106" end="12128" title="pawnless chess endgame" label="pawnless chess endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366192" start="12133" end="12168" title="rook and bishop versus rook endgame" label="rook and bishop versus rook endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321234" start="12189" end="12209" title="Threefold repetition" label="Threefold repetition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258931" wikidata="Q425219" url="?curid=258931" title="Piermont">
<text>Piermont is the name of two places in the United States of America:

* Piermont, New Hampshire
* Piermont, New York

==See also==
* Piedmont
* Piedmont (United States)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q425219" start="0" end="8" title="Piermont" label="Piermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430469" start="71" end="94" title="Piermont, New Hampshire" label="Piermont, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452405" start="97" end="115" title="Piermont, New York" label="Piermont, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="132" end="140" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="143" end="167" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont (United States)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258932" wikidata="Q5292530" url="?curid=258932" title="Don Domanski">
<text>Don Domanski (April 29, 1950 – September 7, 2020) was a Canadian poet.

==Biography==
Domanski was born and raised in Sydney, Nova Scotia, and lived briefly in Toronto, Vancouver and Wolfville, before settling in Halifax, Nova Scotia, where he lived for most of his life. Author of nine collections of poetry, his work has been translated into Arabic, Chinese, Czech, French, Portuguese, and Spanish. In a review of &quot;Wolf-Ladder&quot; John Bradley described Domanski&#x27;s poetry as &quot;earthy and astral, dark and buoyant, a cross between Robert Bly, Ted Hughes, and the Brothers Grimm.&quot; 

In 1999 he received the Canadian Literary Award for Poetry from CBC (the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation). His 2007 collection &quot;All Our Wonder Unavenged&quot; was honoured with the Governor General&#x27;s Award for Poetry, the Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia Masterworks Award, and the Atlantic Poetry Prize. In 2014 he won the J.M. Abraham Poetry Award for &quot;Bite Down Little Whisper&quot;. Domanski mentored other poets through the Banff Centre for the Arts Wired Writing Studio and the Writers&#x27; Federation of Nova Scotia Mentorship program.

Also a visual artist, he created art that appeared in galleries in Halifax and Seoul, South Korea, and on covers of his poetry collections. Domanski also collected fossils for over a decade, and subsequently turned his attention to meteorites and Stone Age tools. He found a neural arch of a 350-million-year-old (Lower Carboniferous) amphibian previously thought to have gone extinct in the Devonian period. He was given credit for the find in &quot;Amphibian Biology&quot;, Vol. 4, &quot;Palaeontology&quot;, &quot;The Evolutionary History of Amphibians&quot;, ed. Harold Heatwole and Robert L. Carroll. His interest in religions inspired visits to churches and cathedrals in France, Ireland, England and Argentina, mosques in Istanbul, Rumi&#x27;s tomb in Konya, and Buddhist temples and monasteries in China.

==Bibliography==

=== Poetry collections ===
* 1975: &quot;The Cape Breton Book of the Dead&quot; (House of Anansi Press)
* 1978: &quot;Heaven&quot; (House of Anansi Press)
* 1982: &quot;War in an Empty House&quot; (House of Anansi Press)
* 1986: &quot;Hammerstroke&quot; (House of Anansi Press)
* 1991: &quot;Wolf-Ladder&quot; (Coach House Press) (shortlisted for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
* 1994: &quot;Stations of the Left Hand&quot; (Coach House Press) (shortlisted for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
* 1998: &quot;Parish of the Physic Moon&quot; (McClelland &amp; Stewart)
* 2007: &quot;All Our Wonder Unavenged&quot; (Brick Books) (winner of the Governor General&#x27;s Award, The Atlantic Poetry Prize and the Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia Masterworks Award)
* 2013: &quot;Bite Down Little Whisper&quot; (Brick Books) (shortlisted for a Governor General&#x27;s Award; winner of J. M. Abraham Poetry Prize)
* 2021: &quot;Fetishes of the Floating World&quot; (Brick Books)

=== Pamphlets ===

* 2006: &quot;All Our Wonder Unavenged&quot; (Jack Pine Press)
* 2006: &quot;Poetry and the Sacred&quot; (Ralph Gustafson Lecture, Institute for Coastal Research)
* 2014: &quot;Field Notes&quot; (Corbel Stone Press)
* 2015: &quot;Fetishes of the Floating World&quot; (espresso)

=== Anthologies ===

* 2007: &quot;Earthly Pages: The Poetry of Don Domanski&quot; (Wilfrid Laurier University Press)
*2021: &quot;Selected Poems, 1975-2021&quot; (Hardcover) (Corbel Stone Press)
*2022: &quot;Selected Poems, 1975-2021&quot; (Softcover) (Xylem Books)

== Honours ==

* 1999 – Canadian Literary Award for Poetry (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
* 2007 – Governor General&#x27;s Award for &quot;All Our Wonder Unavenged&quot; 
* 2008 – The Atlantic Poetry Prize for All Our Wonder Unavenged 
* 2008 – Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia Masterworks Award for All Our Wonder Unavenged 
* 2014 – J.M. Abraham Poetry Award for Bite Down Little Whisper 

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5292530" start="0" end="12" title="Don Domanski" label="Don Domanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405762" start="2349" end="2378" title="1991 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405767" start="2465" end="2494" title="1995 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608546" start="2643" end="2672" title="2007 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608546" start="3646" end="3675" title="2007 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816512" start="3727" end="3752" title="J. M. Abraham Poetry Award" label="The Atlantic Poetry Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816512" start="3884" end="3909" title="J. M. Abraham Poetry Award" label="J.M. Abraham Poetry Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258933" wikidata="Q950970" url="?curid=258933" title="Dover Castle">
<text>Dover Castle is a medieval castle in Dover, Kent, England and is Grade I listed. It was founded in the 11th century and has been described as the &quot;Key to England&quot; due to its defensive significance throughout history. Some writers say it is the largest castle in England, a title also claimed by Windsor Castle.

==History==
===Iron age===
This site may have been fortified with earthworks in the Iron Age or earlier, before the Romans invaded in AD 43. This is suggested on the basis of the unusual pattern of the earthworks which does not seem to be a perfect fit for the medieval castle. Excavations have provided evidence of Iron Age occupation within the locality of the castle, but it is not certain whether this is associated with the hillfort.

=== Roman era ===
The site also contains one of Dover&#x27;s two Roman lighthouses (or pharoses), one of only three surviving Roman-era lighthouses in the world, and the tallest and most complete standing Roman structure in England. It is also claimed to be Britain&#x27;s oldest standing building. Built in the early 2nd century, the 5-level 8-sided tower was made of layers of tufa, Kentish ragstone, and red bricks. The castle lighthouse survived after being converted into a belfry in the Saxon era (), having a new upper layer added (), and was partially renovated in 1913–1915. The scant remains of the other Roman lighthouse, known as the Bredenstone or the Devil&#x27;s Drop of Mortar, are located on the opposing Western Heights, across the town of Dover.

The Roman lighthouse at Boulogne-sur-Mer across the Channel, known as the Tour d&#x27;Ordre, survived for many centuries, and its light should have been visible from Dover. It was built circa AD 39 by order of the Emperor Caligula, possibly in preparation for an invasion of Britain. Suetonius refers to Caligula&#x27;s &quot;erection of a tall lighthouse, not unlike the one at Pharos, in which fires were to be kept going all night as a guide to ships&quot;. Coastal erosion led to it toppling into the sea in 1644. Engravings of its height may show how the Dover Roman lighthouse once looked.

===Saxon and early Norman===

After the Battle of Hastings in October 1066, William the Conqueror and his forces marched to Westminster Abbey for his coronation. They took a roundabout route via Romney, Dover and Canterbury. From the Cinque Ports foundation in 1050, Dover has always been a chief member—it may also have been this that first attracted William&#x27;s attention, and got Kent the motto of Invicta. In the words of William of Poitiers:
In 1088, eight knights were appointed under tenures to guard Dover Castle. Their names were William d&#x27;Albrincis, Fulberl (or Fulbert) de Dover, William d&#x27;Arsic, Geoffrey Peverell, William Maminot, Robert du Port, Hugh Crevecoeur, and Adam Fitzwilliam.

===Henry II to early modern times===

It was during the reign of Henry II that the castle began to take recognisable shape. The inner and outer baileys and the great keep belong to this time. Maurice the Engineer was responsible for building the keep. From 1179 to 1188, the king spent over £6,500 on the castle, an enormous sum considering that his annual revenue was likely around £10,000.

In 1216, during the First Barons&#x27; War, a group of rebel barons invited the future Louis VIII of France to come and take the English crown. He had some success breaching the walls, but was ultimately unable to take the castle. The vulnerable north gate that had been breached in the siege was converted into an underground forward-defence complex (including St John&#x27;s Tower), and new gates built into the outer curtain wall on the western (Fitzwilliam&#x27;s Gate) and eastern (Constable&#x27;s Gate) sides. During the siege, the English defenders tunnelled outwards and attacked the French.
During the time of Stephen de Pencester, a windmill was erected on Tower 22, which was later known as the Mill Tower. By the Tudor age, the defences themselves had been superseded by gunpowder. They were improved by Henry VIII, who made a personal visit and added to it with the Moat Bulwark. 
During the English Civil War, it was held for the king but then taken by supporters of the Parliamentarians in 1642 without a shot being fired. Knowing the castle was lightly guarded, a local merchant Richard Dawkes accompanied by 10 men scaled the cliffs and attacked the porter&#x27;s lodge, obtaining the keys and entering the castle before the garrison was summoned.
Dover Castle was a crucial observation point for the cross-channel sightings of the Anglo-French Survey undertaken between 1784 and 1790, which used trigonometric calculations to link the Royal Greenwich Observatory with the Paris Observatory. This work was overseen by General William Roy.

===19th century===
Massive rebuilding took place at the end of the 18th century during the Napoleonic Wars. William Twiss, the Commanding Engineer of the Southern District, as part of his brief to improve the town&#x27;s defences, completed the remodelling of the outer defences of Dover Castle by adding the huge Horseshoe, Hudson&#x27;s, East Arrow and East Demi-Bastions to provide extra gun positions on the eastern side, and constructing the Constable&#x27;s Bastion for additional protection on the west. Twiss further strengthened the Spur at the northern end of the castle, adding a redan, or raised the gun platform. By taking the roof off the keep and replacing it with massive brick vaults, he was able to mount heavy artillery on the top. Twiss also constructed Canon&#x27;s Gateway to link the defences of the castle with those of the town.

With Dover becoming a garrison town, there was a need for barracks and storerooms for the additional troops and their equipment. The solution adopted by Twiss and the Royal Engineers was to create a complex of barracks tunnels about 15 metres below the cliff-top, and the first troops were accommodated in 1803. The windmill on the Mill Tower was demolished during the Anglo-American War on the orders of the Ordnance Board. It was said that the sale of materials from the demolished mill did not cover the cost of the demolition. At the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the tunnels were partly converted and used by the Coast Blockade Service to combat smuggling. This was a short-term endeavour, though, and in 1827 the headquarters were moved closer to shore. The tunnels then remained abandoned for more than a century.

Between 1856 and 1858, Anthony Salvin constructed a new officer&#x27;s barracks to the south of the castle. Salvin was responsible for the exterior, which he designed in a Tudor Revival style, while the castle&#x27;s Clerk of the Works, G. Arnold, was responsible for the interior.

===Second World War===

The outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 saw the tunnels converted first into an air-raid shelter and then later into a military command centre and underground hospital. In May 1940, Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay directed the evacuation of French and British soldiers from Dunkirk, code-named Operation Dynamo, from his headquarters in the cliff tunnels. A military telephone exchange was installed in 1941 and served the underground headquarters. The switchboards were constantly in use and had to have a new tunnel created alongside it to house the batteries and chargers necessary to keep them functioning. A statue of Admiral Ramsay stands outside the tunnels in honour of his work on the Dunkirk evacuation and protecting Dover during the Second World War.

===Post-war===
After the war the tunnels were to be used as a shelter for the Regional Seats of Government in the event of a nuclear attack. This plan was abandoned for various reasons, including the realisation that the chalk of the cliffs would not provide significant protection from radiation, and because of the inconvenient form of the tunnels and their generally poor condition. Tunnel levels are denoted as A - Annexe, B - Bastion, C - Casemate, D - Dumpy and E - Esplanade. Annexe and Casemate levels are open to the public, Bastion is &#x27;lost&#x27;, but investigations continue to locate it and gain access. Dumpy (converted from Second World War use, to serve as a Regional Seat of Government in the event of an atomic war) is closed, together with its esplanade (last used as an air raid shelter in the Second World War).

Between 2007 and 2009, English Heritage spent £2.45 million on recreating the castle&#x27;s interior. According to figures released by the Association of Leading Visitor Attractions, 368,243 people visited Dover Castle in 2019. The Queen&#x27;s &amp; Princess of Wales&#x27;s Royal Regiment Regimental Museum is located in the castle.
Dover Castle remains a Scheduled Monument, which means it is a &quot;nationally important&quot; historic building and archaeological site that has been given protection against unauthorised change. It is also a Grade I listed building, and recognised as an internationally important structure. The Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports is officially head of the castle, in his conjoint position of Constable of Dover Castle, and the Deputy Constable has his residence in Constable&#x27;s Gate.

In October 2021, the castle was one of 142 sites across England to receive part of a £35 million grant from the government&#x27;s Culture Recovery Fund.

==Churches and chapels==

There are two sacred places within the grounds of the castle:
* Royal chapel - Located within the keep, dedicated to St Thomas Becket.
* St Mary in Castro - A Saxon church, rebuilt in the Victorian era.

==Filming location==
The castle has been used by productions in TV series such as the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; episode &quot;The Mind of Evil&quot;, &quot;Wolf Hall&quot;, &quot;The Hollow Crown&quot; and &quot;The Amazing Race 31&quot;. The medieval setting has also been used in films such as &quot;Lady Jane&quot; (1986), &quot;Hamlet&quot; (1990), &quot;To Kill a King&quot; (2003), &quot;The Other Boleyn Girl&quot; (2007), &quot;Into the Woods&quot; (2014), and &quot;&quot; (2015).

==Gallery==
==See also==
*Castles in Great Britain and Ireland
*Dover Castle Clock
*Eastbourne Redoubt
*Governor of Dover Castle
*List of castles in England
*Pevensey Castle

==Notes==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==
* Dover Castle page at the English Heritage website.
* Friends of Dover Castle 

===Images===
* A series of aerial photos of Dover Castle
* Images of World War II tunnels
* Dover Castle images from English Heritage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="0" end="12" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="37" end="42" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="44" end="48" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="305" end="319" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="438" end="461" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="Romans invaded in AD 43"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="827" end="844" title="Dubris#Lighthouses" label="Roman lighthouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q193685" start="1141" end="1145" title="tufa" label="tufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392040" start="1147" end="1163" title="Kentish ragstone" label="Kentish ragstone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1367" end="1393" title="Dover Western Heights#The Western Pharos" label="the other Roman lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302536" start="1484" end="1499" title="Dover Western Heights" label="Western Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="1552" end="1568" title="Boulogne-sur-Mer" label="Boulogne-sur-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="1750" end="1758" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="1812" end="1821" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43244" start="1907" end="1913" title="Lighthouse of Alexandria" label="Pharos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542312" start="1989" end="2004" title="Coastal erosion" label="Coastal erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83224" start="2165" end="2183" title="Battle of Hastings" label="Battle of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="2201" end="2222" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="2249" end="2266" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602144" start="2320" end="2326" title="Old Romney" label="Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q748895" start="2359" end="2371" title="Cinque Ports" label="Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060962" start="2529" end="2536" title="Invicta (motto)" label="Invicta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394175" start="2554" end="2573" title="William of Poitiers" label="William of Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="2903" end="2911" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="3251" end="3273" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="First Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165284" start="3318" end="3338" title="Louis VIII of France" label="Louis VIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q89794" start="3651" end="3663" title="Curtain wall (fortification)" label="curtain wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610926" start="3851" end="3871" title="Stephen de Pencester" label="Stephen de Pencester"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="3875" end="3883" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="4137" end="4154" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="4217" end="4233" title="Roundhead" label="Parliamentarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q20990859" start="4581" end="4600" title="Anglo-French Survey (1784–1790)" label="Anglo-French Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="4646" end="4659" title="trigonometric" label="trigonometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="4685" end="4712" title="Royal Greenwich Observatory" label="Royal Greenwich Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q461340" start="4722" end="4739" title="Paris Observatory" label="Paris Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963397" start="4775" end="4786" title="William Roy" label="William Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="4880" end="4895" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019596" start="4897" end="4910" title="William Twiss" label="William Twiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080919" start="4943" end="4960" title="Southern Command (United Kingdom)" label="Southern District"/>
<link wikidata="Q81851" start="5253" end="5260" title="Bastion" label="Bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q90727" start="5380" end="5385" title="redan" label="redan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="5649" end="5654" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="5666" end="5679" title="garrison" label="garrison town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="5811" end="5826" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131263" start="5854" end="5862" title="barracks" label="barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="6013" end="6031" title="War of 1812" label="Anglo-American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q887539" start="6053" end="6067" title="Ordnance Board" label="Ordnance Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q166559" start="6256" end="6282" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Revenue and Customs" label="the Coast Blockade Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="6293" end="6302" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q573967" start="6487" end="6501" title="Anthony Salvin" label="Anthony Salvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="6636" end="6649" title="Tudor Revival architecture" label="Tudor Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6791" end="6807" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q710439" start="6970" end="6984" title="Bertram Ramsay" label="Bertram Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="7045" end="7052" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="7065" end="7081" title="Operation Dynamo" label="Operation Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="7138" end="7156" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q589666" start="7224" end="7235" title="Telephone switchboard" label="switchboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="7323" end="7332" title="battery (electricity)" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309152" start="7613" end="7641" title="Regional Seats of Government" label="Regional Seats of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="7660" end="7674" title="nuclear attack" label="nuclear attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="7756" end="7761" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="8396" end="8412" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270088" start="8605" end="8617" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Regiment" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403459" start="8624" end="8663" title="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment" label="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="8731" end="8749" title="Scheduled Monument" label="Scheduled Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q839954" start="8826" end="8845" title="archaeological site" label="archaeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="8927" end="8942" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809853" start="9006" end="9037" title="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports" label="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809853" start="9100" end="9125" title="Constable of Dover Castle" label="Constable of Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q104763512" start="9327" end="9348" title="Culture Recovery Fund" label="Culture Recovery Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="9494" end="9510" title="St Thomas Becket" label="St Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594625" start="9514" end="9531" title="St Mary sub Castro, Dover" label="St Mary in Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="9673" end="9683" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q574294" start="9704" end="9720" title="The Mind of Evil" label="The Mind of Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q17039455" start="9734" end="9743" title="Wolf Hall (miniseries)" label="Wolf Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q115647" start="9757" end="9773" title="The Hollow Crown (TV series)" label="The Hollow Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635025" start="9790" end="9809" title="The Amazing Race 31" label="The Amazing Race 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q940321" start="9880" end="9889" title="Lady Jane (1986 film)" label="Lady Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422824" start="9910" end="9916" title="Hamlet (1990 film)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275605" start="9937" end="9951" title="To Kill a King (film)" label="To Kill a King"/>
<link wikidata="Q470073" start="9972" end="9993" title="The Other Boleyn Girl (2008 film)" label="The Other Boleyn Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q14847067" start="10014" end="10028" title="Into the Woods (film)" label="Into the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q11808" start="10095" end="10131" title="Castles in Great Britain and Ireland" label="Castles in Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961545" start="10133" end="10151" title="Dover Castle Clock" label="Dover Castle Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422926" start="10153" end="10171" title="Eastbourne Redoubt" label="Eastbourne Redoubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809853" start="10173" end="10197" title="Governor of Dover Castle" label="Governor of Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807327" start="10199" end="10225" title="List of castles in England" label="List of castles in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970215" start="10227" end="10242" title="Pevensey Castle" label="Pevensey Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="10323" end="10339" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258938" wikidata="Q726243" url="?curid=258938" title="Edward Stafford, 3rd Duke of Buckingham">
<text>Edward Stafford, 3rd Duke of Buckingham (3 February 1478 – 17 May 1521) was an English nobleman. He was the son of Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham and Katherine Woodville and nephew of Elizabeth Woodville and King Edward IV. Thus, Edward Stafford was a first cousin once removed of King Henry VIII. He frequently attended the courts of Henry VII and Henry VIII. He was convicted of treason and executed on 17 May 1521.

==Family==
Edward Stafford, born 3 February 1478 at Brecon Castle in Wales, was the eldest son of Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham, and Katherine Woodville (the daughter of Richard Woodville, 1st Earl Rivers, by Jacquetta of Luxembourg, daughter of Pierre de Luxembourg, Count of St. Pol) and was thus a nephew of Elizabeth Woodville and Edward IV.

By his father&#x27;s marriage to Katherine Woodville, Stafford had a younger brother, Henry Stafford, 1st Earl of Wiltshire, and two sisters: Elizabeth, who married Robert Radcliffe, 1st Earl of Sussex, and Anne, who married firstly Sir Walter Herbert (d. 16 September 1507), an illegitimate son of William Herbert, 1st Earl of Pembroke, and secondly George Hastings, 1st Earl of Huntingdon.

After the execution of the 2nd Duke of Buckingham, his widow, Katherine Woodville, married Jasper Tudor, second son of Owen Tudor and Henry V&#x27;s widow, Catherine of Valois. After Jasper Tudor&#x27;s death on 21 December 1495, Katherine Woodville married Sir Richard Wingfield (d. 22 July 1525). Katherine Woodville died 18 May 1497. After her death, Wingfield married Bridget Wiltshire, daughter and heiress of Sir John Wiltshire of Stone, Kent.

==Career==
In October 1483 Stafford&#x27;s father was central in Buckingham&#x27;s rebellion against Richard III. He was beheaded without trial on 2 November 1483, whereby all his honours were forfeited. Stafford is said to have been hidden in various houses in Herefordshire at the time of the rebellion, and perhaps for the remainder of Richard III&#x27;s reign. After Richard III&#x27;s defeat at Bosworth on 22 August 1485, and Henry VII&#x27;s accession to the crown, Stafford was made a Knight of the Order of the Bath on 29 October 1485 as Duke of Buckingham, and attended Henry VII&#x27;s coronation the following day, although his father&#x27;s attainder was not formally reversed by Parliament until November. The young duke&#x27;s wardship and lands were granted, on 3 August 1486, along with the wardship of his younger brother, Henry Stafford, to the King&#x27;s mother, Margaret Beaufort, and according to Davies it is likely Buckingham was educated in her various households.

Buckingham was in attendance at court at the elevation of Henry VII&#x27;s second son, the future King Henry VIII, as Duke of York, on 9 November 1494, and was made a Knight of the Order of the Garter in 1495. In September 1497 he was a captain in the forces sent to quell a rebellion in Cornwall.

As a young man, Buckingham played a conspicuous part in royal weddings and the reception of ambassadors and foreign princes, &quot;dazzling observers by his sartorial splendour&quot;. At the wedding of Henry VII&#x27;s eldest son and heir Arthur, Prince of Wales, and Katherine of Aragon in 1501, he is said to have worn a gown worth £1500. He was the chief challenger at the jousting tournament held the following day.

At the accession of Henry VIII, Buckingham was appointed on 23 June 1509, for the day of the coronation only, Lord High Constable, an office which he claimed by hereditary right. He also served as Lord High Steward at the coronation and bearer of the crown. In 1509 he was made a member of the King&#x27;s Privy Council. On 9 July 1510 he had licence to crenellate his manor of Thornbury, Gloucestershire, and according to Davies rebuilt the manor house as &quot;an impressively towered castle&quot; with &quot;huge oriel windows in the living-quarters in the inner court&quot;.

In 1510 Buckingham was involved in a scandal concerning his sister, Anne, who was the wife of George Hastings, 1st Earl of Huntingdon. After hearing rumours concerning her and Sir William Compton, Buckingham found Compton in Anne&#x27;s room. Compton was forced to take the sacrament to prove that he and Anne had not committed adultery, and Anne&#x27;s husband sent her away to a convent from the court. There is no extant evidence establishing that Anne and Sir William Compton were guilty of adultery. In 1523 Compton took the unusual step of bequeathing land to Anne in his will, and directing his executors to include her in the prayers for his kin for which he had made provision in his will. There are some suggestions that the affair continued until 1513. Other rumours are that the affair was with the King himself. Buckingham returned to the King&#x27;s graces, being present at the marriage of Henry&#x27;s sister, served in Parliament and was present at the Field of the Cloth of Gold negotiations with Francis I of France and at negotiations with Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor.

From June to October 1513 Buckingham served as a captain during Henry VIII&#x27;s invasion of France, commanding 500 men in the &quot;middle ward&quot;. About 1517 he was one of 12 challengers chosen to joust against the king and his companions but excused himself on the ground that he feared to run against the King&#x27;s person. He and his wife, Eleanor, attended the Field of the Cloth of Gold in 1520.

Although Buckingham was appointed to commissions of the peace in 1514 and charged—together with other Marcher lords—with responsibility for keeping order in south Wales, particularly along the borderland Welsh Marches, he was rebuked by the king in 1518 for failing to achieve the desired results. Buckingham exercised little direct political influence and was never a member of the King&#x27;s inner circle.

Buckingham&#x27;s literary patronage included two translations, a printed translation of &quot;Helyas, Knyghte of the Swanne&quot; (on the Knight of the Swan), which he commissioned in 1512, and &quot;A Lytell Cronicle&quot;, a translation of an account of the Near East which he may have commissioned in 1520 in connection with his proposed pilgrimage to Jerusalem.

==Betrayal and execution==
Buckingham was one of few peers with substantial Plantagenet blood and maintained numerous connections, often among his extended family, with the rest of the upper aristocracy, activities which attracted Henry&#x27;s suspicion. During 1520, Buckingham became suspect of potentially treasonous actions and Henry authorised an investigation, ordering Cardinal Wolsey to watch him. The king personally examined witnesses against him, gathering enough evidence for a trial. The duke was finally summoned to Court in April 1521 and arrested and placed in the Tower. He was tried before a panel of 17 peers, being accused of listening to prophecies of the king&#x27;s death and intending to kill the king. Buckingham was executed on Tower Hill on 17 May 1521 and posthumously attainted by Act of Parliament on 31 July 1523, disinheriting most of his wealth from his children.

Some conclude this was one of the few executions of high personages under Henry VIII in which the accused was &quot;almost certainly guilty&quot;. However, Sir Thomas More complained that the key evidence was hearsay from servants who, as commoners, were threatened and tortured to extract false confessions.

==Marriage and issue==
In 1488, Henry VII had suggested a marriage between Buckingham and Anne of Brittany, but in December 1489 the executors of Henry Percy, 4th Earl of Northumberland, paid the king £4,000 for Buckingham&#x27;s marriage to Percy&#x27;s eldest daughter Eleanor (d. 1530). They had a son and three daughters:

*Henry Stafford, 1st Baron Stafford (18 September 1501 – 30 April 1563), who married Ursula Pole, daughter of Sir Richard Pole by his wife, Margaret, Countess of Salisbury, daughter of George, Duke of Clarence.
*Lady Elizabeth Stafford (c. 1497 – 30 November 1558), the second wife of Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk.
*Lady Katherine Stafford (c. 1499 – 14 May 1555), who married Ralph Neville, 4th Earl of Westmorland.
*Lady Mary Stafford, the youngest daughter, who married, about June 1519, as his third wife, George Neville, 5th Baron Bergavenny.

Buckingham is also said to have had three illegitimate children:

*George Stafford.
*Henry Stafford, who represented Stafford in Parliament 1545–1555.
*Margaret Stafford (c. 1511 – 25 May 1537), whom Buckingham married to his ward, Thomas Fitzgerald of Leixlip, half-brother to the Earl of Kildare.

==In fiction==
*The accusation and condemnation of Buckingham is depicted in the Shakespeare play &quot;Henry VIII&quot;.
* In the 2003 two-part drama &quot;Henry VIII&quot; starring Ray Winstone and Helena Bonham Carter, Buckingham is played by Charles Dance. His character was a minor one, killed off in the first 15 minutes.
*Buckingham is a character in the first two episodes of the first season of the drama series &quot;The Tudors&quot; in 2007. Portrayed by Steven Waddington, Buckingham&#x27;s intrigues are fictionalised, with several key facts omitted.
*Buckingham&#x27;s (fictional) son is a character in the novel &quot;The Blanket of the Dark&quot;, by John Buchan (1931). He has grown up as Peter Pentecost in the forests near Oxford and is told of his true heritage in the year 1536. Later he has a fateful encounter with the king and decides that he does not wish to pursue a life of power.
*He is portrayed by Olly Rix in the 2019 Starz miniseries &quot;The Spanish Princess&quot;, where he is depicted early on as seducing one of Katherine of Aragon&#x27;s ladies in waiting.

== Ancestry ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
*Thornbury Castle
*Stafford family, Tudorplace website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q726243" start="0" end="39" title="Edward Stafford, 3rd Duke of Buckingham" label="Edward Stafford, 3rd Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q714480" start="115" end="153" title="Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham" label="Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q533098" start="158" end="177" title="Katherine Woodville, Duchess of Buckingham" label="Katherine Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q229214" start="192" end="211" title="Elizabeth Woodville" label="Elizabeth Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="221" end="230" title="Edward IV" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="294" end="304" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="343" end="352" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q15107961" start="479" end="492" title="Brecon Castle" label="Brecon Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q714480" start="525" end="563" title="Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham" label="Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q533098" start="569" end="588" title="Katherine Woodville, Duchess of Buckingham" label="Katherine Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q934384" start="606" end="640" title="Richard Woodville, 1st Earl Rivers" label="Richard Woodville, 1st Earl Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q448289" start="645" end="668" title="Jacquetta of Luxembourg" label="Jacquetta of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q474571" start="682" end="720" title="Peter of Luxembourg, Count of Saint-Pol" label="Pierre de Luxembourg, Count of St. Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q229214" start="747" end="766" title="Elizabeth Woodville" label="Elizabeth Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="771" end="780" title="Edward IV" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728607" start="869" end="906" title="Henry Stafford, 1st Earl of Wiltshire" label="Henry Stafford, 1st Earl of Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363546" start="925" end="934" title="Elizabeth Stafford, Countess of Sussex" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349136" start="948" end="984" title="Robert Radcliffe, 1st Earl of Sussex" label="Robert Radcliffe, 1st Earl of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562413" start="990" end="994" title="Anne Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261083" start="1082" end="1119" title="William Herbert, 1st Earl of Pembroke (8th Creation)" label="William Herbert, 1st Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540308" start="1134" end="1173" title="George Hastings, 1st Earl of Huntingdon" label="George Hastings, 1st Earl of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q385679" start="1267" end="1279" title="Jasper Tudor" label="Jasper Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q361128" start="1295" end="1305" title="Owen Tudor" label="Owen Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="1310" end="1317" title="Henry V of England" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q229192" start="1332" end="1351" title="Catherine of Valois" label="Catherine of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330041" start="1438" end="1455" title="Richard Wingfield" label="Richard Wingfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469998" start="1548" end="1565" title="Bridget Wiltshire" label="Bridget Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618827" start="1613" end="1624" title="Stone, Kent" label="Stone, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824862" start="1692" end="1719" title="Buckingham&amp;#x27;s rebellion" label="Buckingham&amp;#x27;s rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="1728" end="1739" title="Richard III" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818067" start="1820" end="1829" title="attainder" label="forfeited"/>
<link wikidata="Q23129" start="1889" end="1902" title="Herefordshire" label="Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q222013" start="2027" end="2035" title="Battle of Bosworth Field" label="Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="2059" end="2075" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="2134" end="2151" title="Order of the Bath" label="Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264513" start="2174" end="2192" title="Duke of Buckingham" label="Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818067" start="2281" end="2290" title="attainder" label="attainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q229202" start="2511" end="2528" title="Margaret Beaufort" label="Margaret Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="2722" end="2732" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q337222" start="2737" end="2749" title="Duke of York" label="Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="2800" end="2819" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q500395" start="2894" end="2915" title="Cornish Rebellion of 1497" label="rebellion in Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q711801" start="3157" end="3180" title="Arthur, Prince of Wales" label="Arthur, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="3186" end="3205" title="Katherine of Aragon" label="Katherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413053" start="3294" end="3302" title="jousting" label="jousting"/>
<link wikidata="Q955642" start="3449" end="3468" title="Lord High Constable of England" label="Lord High Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q510373" start="3536" end="3553" title="Lord High Steward" label="Lord High Steward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246345" start="3645" end="3658" title="Privy Council of England" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543023" start="3682" end="3703" title="licence to crenellate" label="licence to crenellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796332" start="3717" end="3726" title="Thornbury Castle" label="Thornbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562413" start="3987" end="3991" title="Anne Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540308" start="4013" end="4052" title="George Hastings, 1st Earl of Huntingdon" label="George Hastings, 1st Earl of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523981" start="4095" end="4114" title="William Compton (courtier)" label="Sir William Compton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4874" end="4915" title="Field of the Cloth of Gold#English attendants of English King" label="present at the Field of the Cloth of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="4934" end="4953" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="4979" end="5008" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030061" start="5383" end="5409" title="Field of the Cloth of Gold" label="Field of the Cloth of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756973" start="5522" end="5535" title="Marcher lords" label="Marcher lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q427862" start="5624" end="5637" title="Welsh Marches" label="Welsh Marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q138836" start="5969" end="5987" title="Knight of the Swan" label="Knight of the Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106151" start="6274" end="6285" title="Plantagenet" label="Plantagenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q206512" start="6574" end="6589" title="Cardinal Wolsey" label="Cardinal Wolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q499565" start="6952" end="6962" title="Tower Hill" label="Tower Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818067" start="6995" end="7004" title="attainted" label="attainted"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="7256" end="7267" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841968" start="7305" end="7312" title="hearsay in English law" label="hearsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q201143" start="7496" end="7512" title="Anne of Brittany" label="Anne of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705658" start="7552" end="7591" title="Henry Percy, 4th Earl of Northumberland" label="Henry Percy, 4th Earl of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354355" start="7677" end="7684" title="Eleanor Percy, Duchess of Buckingham" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728604" start="7734" end="7768" title="Henry Stafford, 1st Baron Stafford" label="Henry Stafford, 1st Baron Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901273" start="7818" end="7829" title="Ursula Pole" label="Ursula Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528649" start="7843" end="7859" title="Sir Richard Pole" label="Sir Richard Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q241806" start="7873" end="7904" title="Margaret Pole, Countess of Salisbury" label="Margaret, Countess of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q356173" start="7918" end="7942" title="George, Duke of Clarence" label="George, Duke of Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4252416" start="7945" end="7968" title="Elizabeth Stafford, Duchess of Norfolk" label="Lady Elizabeth Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q503816" start="8018" end="8052" title="Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk" label="Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287908" start="8116" end="8154" title="Ralph Neville, 4th Earl of Westmorland" label="Ralph Neville, 4th Earl of Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507985" start="8249" end="8285" title="George Neville, 5th Baron Bergavenny" label="George Neville, 5th Baron Bergavenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q118500064" start="8373" end="8387" title="Henry Stafford (MP)" label="Henry Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003871" start="8440" end="8457" title="Margaret Cheyne" label="Margaret Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q987797" start="8541" end="8548" title="Leixlip" label="Leixlip"/>
<link wikidata="Q180306" start="8570" end="8585" title="Earl of Kildare" label="Earl of Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="8669" end="8680" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q672059" start="8692" end="8702" title="Henry VIII (play)" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551578" start="8739" end="8761" title="Henry VIII (TV serial)" label="&amp;quot;Henry VIII&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q310932" start="8771" end="8783" title="Ray Winstone" label="Ray Winstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="8788" end="8808" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q309690" start="8834" end="8847" title="Charles Dance" label="Charles Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q326731" start="9015" end="9025" title="The Tudors" label="The Tudors"/>
<link wikidata="Q466388" start="9054" end="9071" title="Steven Waddington" label="Steven Waddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408165" start="9221" end="9244" title="The Blanket of the Dark" label="The Blanket of the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q65561625" start="9516" end="9524" title="Olly Rix" label="Olly Rix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422698" start="9537" end="9542" title="Starz" label="Starz"/>
<link wikidata="Q55012267" start="9560" end="9580" title="The Spanish Princess" label="The Spanish Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="9637" end="9663" title="Katherine of Aragon" label="Katherine of Aragon&amp;#x27;s"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258943" wikidata="Q504530" url="?curid=258943" title="Walsall">
<text>Walsall (, ; ) is a market town and administrative centre of the borough of the same name in the West Midlands, England. Historically part of Staffordshire, it is located northwest of Birmingham, east of Wolverhampton and southwest of Lichfield.

Walsall is the administrative centre of the wider Metropolitan Borough of Walsall. It was transferred from Staffordshire to the newly created West Midlands County in 1974. At the 2011 census, the town&#x27;s built-up area had a population of 67,594, with the wider borough having a population of 269,323. Neighbouring settlements in the borough include Darlaston, Brownhills, Pelsall, Willenhall, Bloxwich and Aldridge.

== History ==

===Early settlement===
The name Walsall is derived from &quot;Walh halh&quot;, meaning &quot;valley of the Welsh&quot;, referring to the British who first lived in the area. Later, it is believed that a manor was held here by William FitzAnsculf, who held numerous manors in the Midlands. By the first part of the 13th century, Walsall was a small market town with a manor house, with the weekly market being introduced in 1220 and held on Tuesdays. The mayor of Walsall was created as a political position in the 14th century.

The Manor of Walsall was held by the Crown and given as a reward to royal proteges. In 1525, it was given to the King&#x27;s illegitimate son, Henry Duke of Richmond, and in 1541 to the courtier Sir John Dudley, later Duke of Northumberland. It was seized by Queen Mary in 1553, after Northumberland had been found guilty of treason.

Queen Mary&#x27;s Grammar School was founded in 1554, and the school carries the queen&#x27;s personal badge as its emblem: the Tudor Rose and the sheaf of arrows of Mary&#x27;s mother Catherine of Aragon tied with a Staffordshire Knot.

The town was visited by Queen Elizabeth I, when it was known as &#x27;Walshale&#x27;. It was also visited by Henrietta Maria in 1643. She stayed in the town for one night at a building named the &#x27;White Hart&#x27; in the area of Caldmore.

The Manor of Walsall was later sold to the Wilbrahim and Newport families, and passed by inheritance to the Earls of Bradford. On the death of the fourth Earl in 1762, the estate was transferred to his sister Diana, Countess of Mountrath and then reverted to the Earls of Bradford until the estates were sold after World War II. The family&#x27;s connection with Walsall is reflected in local placenames, including Bridgeman Street, Bradford Lane, Bradford Street and Mountrath Street.

===Industrial Revolution===
The Industrial Revolution changed Walsall from a village of 2,000 people in the 16th century to a town of over 86,000 in approximately 200 years. The town manufactured a wide range of products including saddles, chains, buckles and plated ware. Nearby, limestone quarrying provided the town with much prosperity.

In 1824, the Walsall Corporation received an Act of Parliament to improve the town by providing lighting and a gasworks. The gasworks was built in 1826 at a cost of £4,000. In 1825, the corporation built eleven tiled, brick almshouses for poor women. They were known to the area as &#x27;Molesley&#x27;s Almshouses&#x27;.

The &#x27;Walsall Improvement and Market Act&#x27; was passed in 1848 and amended in 1850. The Act provided facilities for the poor, improving and extending the sewerage system and giving the commissioners the powers to construct a new gas works. On 10 October 1847, a gas explosion killed one person and destroyed the west window of St Matthew&#x27;s Church.

Walsall finally received a railway line in 1847, 48 years after canals reached the town, Bescot having been served since 1838 by the Grand Junction Railway. In 1855, Walsall&#x27;s first newspaper, the &quot;Walsall Courier and South Staffordshire Gazette&quot;, was published.

The Whittimere Street drill hall was completed in 1866. The Victorian Arcade in the town centre, originally named the Digbeth Arcade, was completed in 1897.

===First World War===
Over 2000 men from Walsall were killed in fighting during the First World War. They are commemorated by the town&#x27;s cenotaph, which is located on the site of a bomb which was dropped by Zeppelin &#x27;L 21&#x27;, killing the town&#x27;s mayoress and two others. Damage from the Zeppelin can still be seen on what is now a club on the corner of the main road, just opposite a furniture shop. A plaque commemorates the incident. The town also has a memorial to local VC recipient, John Henry Carless and decorated air ace Frederick Gibbs.

===20th century developments===

Walsall&#x27;s first cinema opened in the town centre in 1908; however, the post World War II decline in cinema attendances brought on by the rise in television ownership resulted in that and all of Walsall&#x27;s other cinemas eventually being closed. The first Wurlitzer theatre organ in Great Britain was installed in the New Picture House cinema in Lower Bridge Street in the town centre. It was later renamed the Gaumont then Odeon.

Slum clearances began after the end of World War I, with thousands of 19th century buildings around the town centre being demolished as the 20th century wore on, with new estates being built away from the town centre during the 1920s and 1930s. These were concentrated in areas to the north of the town centre such as Coal Pool, Blakenall Heath (where Walsall&#x27;s first council houses were built in 1920), Goscote and Harden. after the end of World War II, Beechdale.

Significant developments also took place nearer to the town centre, particularly during the 1960s when a host of tower blocks were built around the town centre; however, most of these had been demolished by 2010.

The Memorial Gardens opened in 1952 in honour of the town&#x27;s fallen combatants of the two world wars. The Old Square Shopping Centre, a modern indoor shopping complex featuring many big retail names, opened in 1969. The Old Square shopping centre is currently laying derelict, with shops set to open in the centre soon. Primark and The Co-operative have opened in the former Tesco store, after the supermarket chained moved to Littleton Street on the site of Walsall College. The college agreed a land swap with Tesco resulting in the construction of a new college building as part of the new Tesco development. A row of derelict shops were demolished in 2016, and rebuilt as a Poundland, which opened on Saturday 15 July 2017, and B &amp; M, which opened on 17 August 2017.

Much of the reconstruction of the post-war period was quickly reconsidered as ugly and having blighted the town. In 1959, John Betjeman advised that with sensitive restoration the old buildings of the High Street could become &quot;one of the most attractive streets in England.&quot; Instead, almost every building was demolished.

The County Borough of Walsall, which was established at Walsall Council House and originally consisted of Walsall and Bloxwich, was expanded in 1966 to incorporate most of Darlaston and Willenhall, as well as small parts of Bilston and Wednesbury. The current Metropolitan Borough of Walsall was formed in 1974 when Aldridge-Brownhills Urban District was incorporated into Walsall. At the same time, Walsall was transferred from the historic county of Staffordshire to become part of the new West Midlands county.
The Saddlers Centre, a modern shopping mall, opened in 1980, being refurbished within a decade. On 23 November 1981, an F1/T2 tornado touched down in Bloxwich and later moved over parts of Walsall town centre and surrounding suburbs, causing some damage. The Jerome K. Jerome museum, dedicated to the locally born author (1859–1927), was opened in 1984.

The town&#x27;s prolific leather industry was recognised in 1988 when the Princess Royal opened Walsall Leather Museum.

By the 1990s, a canalside area in the town centre known as Town Wharf was being developed for leisure, shopping and arts facilities.

===21st century===

The town&#x27;s new art gallery opened at Town Wharf in early 2000. The following year, Crown Wharf retail park opened nearby, accommodating retailers including Next and TK Maxx which closed on 9 September 2020.

The 21st century has also seen a number of housing regeneration projects in the most deprived areas. Many of the town&#x27;s 1960s tower blocks have been demolished, as well as interwar council housing in parts of Blakenall Heath and Harden, along with all of the Goscote estate. New private and social housing has been built on the site of most of the demolished properties.

===Redevelopment and local government reorganisation===
Walsall underwent modernisation in the 1970s with a new town centre being built at the expense of some medieval properties. In 1974, Walsall was transferred from the county of Staffordshire to form the metropolitan county of the West Midlands.

The Saddlers&#x27; Centre, a modern shopping complex, was opened in the town centre in 1980. This included a new Marks &amp; Spencer department store.

Early 2000 saw the opening of The New Art Gallery Walsall in the north-west of the town centre near Wolverhampton Street, along with the new Crown Wharf Retail Park shortly afterwards. Part of Park Street, the town&#x27;s main shopping area, was redeveloped around the same time. The centrepiece of this redevelopment was the new British Home Stores department store, which relocated from St Paul&#x27;s Street at the end of the 1990s. The BHS store closed in 2016 after the company went into administration. Marks and Spencer closed their store a few years later.

Construction is ongoing in St Matthew&#x27;s Quarters. A new Asda store opened in 2007 and when completed St Matthew&#x27;s Quarters will also include brand shops and modern flats. In 2010 Tesco opened a new shopping complex upon the former site of Walsall College, which moved to its new Wisemore Campus the year prior.

The Savoy Cinema was a landmark on Park Street for more than half a century after its opening on 3 October 1938. It was refurbished in 1973 and became the Cannon Cinema after a takeover in 1986, but closed on 18 November 1993 after operating as a cinema for 55 years. It was demolished some 18 months later and the town&#x27;s new Woolworth&#x27;s store was built on its site. The store closed down at the end of 2008 when the retailer went into liquidation, and the building was re-occupied by a new T J Hughes department store which opened on 9 October 2009. However, the building became vacant again on 14 August 2011 when financial difficulties led to T.J. Hughes pulling out of the town after less than two years of trading. (TJ Hughes returned to the former Argos store in the Saddler Centre but have since closed for a second time.) It was re-occupied two months later with the opening of a Poundland store in the building on 22 October that year.

== Geography ==

A local landmark is Barr Beacon, which is reportedly the highest point following its latitude eastwards until the Ural Mountains in Russia. The soil of Walsall consists mainly of clay with areas of limestone, which were quarried during the Industrial Revolution.

=== Suburbs and areas ===


===Climate===
== Demography ==
At the 2021 census, Walsall&#x27;s built-up area population was recorded as having a population of 70,778. Of the findings, the ethnicity and religious composition of the wards separately were:

The religious composition of the built-up area at the 2021 Census was recorded as:

The tables show that Walsall&#x27;s surrounding suburbs have the largest Asian and Muslim populations of any town in West Midlands County. White British and Christians remain the second-largest population of the town and other religions/ethnic minorities form the remainder of the population of the town.

The Walsall dialect is often referred to as &quot;Yam-Yam&quot;. The accent is often incorrectly referred to as a Brummie accent by people from outside the West Midlands.

== Economy ==
Walsall has had many industries, from coal mining to metal working. In the late 19th century, the coal mines ran dry, and Walsall became internationally famous for its leather trade. Walsall manufactured the Queen&#x27;s handbags, saddles for the royal family and leathergoods for the Prince of Wales. Walsall is the traditional home of the English saddle manufacturing industry, hence the nickname of Walsall Football Club, &quot;the Saddlers&quot;. Apart from leather goods, other industries in Walsall include iron and brass founding, limestone quarrying, small hardware, plastics, electronics, chemicals and aircraft parts.

Walsall&#x27;s location in Central England and the fact that the M6 runs through the Metropolitan Borough of Walsall has increased its investment appeal. The main RAC control centre is located in Walsall close by J9 of the M6 and there are now plans to redevelop derelict land in nearby Darlaston and turn it into a state-of-the-art regional centre. Between Bloxwich and Walsall there is a business corridor where TK Maxx has recently opened a regional depot. Currently established businesses include Homeserve plc and South Staffordshire Water.

The three largest businesses by turnover in the borough are all involved with the storage and distribution of retail goods to an associated network of high street or cornershop stores. Poundland Ltd (owned by South African giant Steinhoff), A F Blakemore and Sons Ltd and One Stop Stores Ltd (part of Tesco plc) turn over more than £4.5bn annually between them.

== Education ==

Walsall is home to the University of Wolverhampton&#x27;s Sports and Art Campus and School of Education, all part of the Walsall Campus in Gorway Road, which includes a student village. Walsall College provides further education, and is based around three sites across Walsall. There are ten secular junior schools and three religious junior schools near the town centre. Walsall also houses many secondary schools, including comprehensives, academies, private and state grammar schools (Namely Queen Mary&#x27;s Grammar School and Queen Mary&#x27;s High School).

The age of transfer to secondary school throughout the borough is 11 years, although the Aldridge-Brownhills area of the borough had a system of 5–9 first, 9–13 middle and 13–18 secondary schools until 1986, as the former urban district council of this area had adopted the three-tier system in 1972.

Schools within the borough are administered by Walsall MBC.SERCO .

==Religion==

Christianity is the largest religion in the Walsall Borough, shown in the 2011 census as 59.0%. The second largest is Islam recorded at 8.2%.

Of the churches in Walsall, St Matthew&#x27;s Church lies to the north of the town centre near the ASDA supermarket, and can be seen when entering Walsall in any direction where it is the highest structure. In 1821, St Matthew&#x27;s Church was demolished with exception of the tower and chancel and replaced at a cost of £20,000 to a design by Francis Goodwin.

St Martin&#x27;s Church was consecrated in 1960 to serve the suburban housing estates of Orchard Hills, Brookhouse and Park Hall.

Mellish Road Methodist Chapel, built 1910, had to be demolished in 2011, due to subsidence.

Other churches in Walsall include: The Crossing at St Paul&#x27;s, in the town centre, and the Rock Church, near the Walsall Arboretum, Walsall Community Church, which meets at the Goldmine Centre.

The Catholic St Mary&#x27;s Church was built in 1827, designed by Joseph Ireland and is a Grade II* listed building.

There are also numerous mosques or Masjids in Walsall. Most of these are in close proximity to each other, located in the adjoining areas of Caldmore and Palfrey, just south of the town centre.

In the ward of Palfrey, there is Walsall&#x27;s most-attended mosque, Masjid-Al-Farouq, alongside Aisha Mosque. Caldmore is home to four mosques: Masjid-e-Usman, Shah Jalal Masjid, Jalalia Masjid, and Ghausia Qasmia Mosque. In Chuckery, in the southeast of Walsall, lies Anjuman-e-Gosia Mosque, and Jamia Masjid Ghausia is located in the Birchills neighbourhood.

There is also a private Islamic school and Madrassah with four campuses across Walsall known as Abu Bakr Trust. Most mosques in Walsall also run their own evening Madrassahs.

== Transport ==

===Buses===
Walsall bus station is made up of two smaller bus stations: Bradford Place bus station and St Paul&#x27;s bus station; one being larger than the other and providing more services. Over 90 bus routes are operated predominantly by National Express West Midlands and Rotala&#x27;s Diamond West Midlands, but also by smaller operators Walsall Community Transport, Carolean and Chaserider (formerly Arriva). Services from St Paul&#x27;s bus station leave Walsall serving Birmingham; Wolverhampton and Willenhall; north to Bloxwich, Cannock and Brownhills; and east to Sutton Coldfield and Aldridge. In addition, services link Staffordshire areas such as Burntwood, Lichfield and Little Aston. St Paul&#x27;s did have a travel Information Centre, but this was closed to save costs.

Bradford Place mainly operates buses to the south and south-west, to West Bromwich, Bilston, Willenhall, Darlaston, Oldbury, Dudley and Merry Hill Centre. There are also numerous shorter bus routes leaving from both stations which give the town centre a link to housing estates including Alumwell, Beechdale, Chuckery, Gility Village, Park Hall and the Walsall Manor Hospital.

===Roads===
Walsall is extremely well connected within the UK road network, as it is served by the M6 which connects the M1 motorway towards London and M74 motorway towards Glasgow. There are three nearby junctions which serve Walsall on the M6 motorway: J7, J9 and J10. The stretch between these junctions is one of the busiest in Europe. The town is also served by A34 road which connects Manchester and the M42 motorway towards London, and is connected regionally by the A454 Black Country route. In 2018, the UK Department for Transport estimated that 953 million miles were driven on Walsall&#x27;s roads.

===Railway===
Walsall railway station is situated on Station Street in the town centre and is also accessible from the Saddlers shopping centre. There are typically four trains per hour from the station to Birmingham and one train per hour to Rugeley, with fewer trains in the evenings and on Sundays. There is also a suburban station at Bescot.

===Trams===
A tram service began in the town towards the end of the 19th century and ran until 2 October 1933.

The West Midlands Metro now runs from Wolverhampton to Birmingham city centre. Soon, the metro will operate a tram extension from north of the former Wednesbury Town railway station across Potter Lane to a stop at Brierley Hill; this will see the metro line use the corridor from Wednesbury Town to Dudley, before running street level and back onto the track at Canal Street, then branching off to Merry Hill and a tram stop at Brierley Hill.

The corridor section from Walsall to Wednesbury Town has been preserved for freight traffic to use to Round Oak Steel Terminal in the near future. It is possible that the metro extension will look to run an extension to Walsall via Bescot, but will utilise the line with either people carriers or tram-trains.

Walsall was also to be part of the former &quot;5 Ws&quot; scheme which would have connected it to Wolverhampton, Wednesfield, Willenhall and Wednesbury. Walsall Council decided to pull Walsall and Willenhall out of the scheme in favour of reopening the line to Wolverhampton to passengers via Darlaston and Willenhall. A proposal for the new stations to be built is part of a wider investment strategy to improve local services.

===Air===
Walsall Aerodrome operated from the 1930s until 1956. The nearest airport to Walsall is Birmingham Airport, which is located within 30 minutes&#x27; drive.

== Culture ==
=== Arboretum and illuminations ===
Walsall Arboretum was officially opened on 4 May 1874 by the wealthy Hatherton family. It was hoped that the park would provide &quot;a healthy change from dogfights, bull-baiting and cockfights&quot;; however, the 2d (old pence) admission was not popular with the public and within seven years the council took over ownership to provide free admission. Among the attractions available were two boating lakes on the sites of former quarries, tennis courts, an outdoor swimming pool, and later – in the extension – a children&#x27;s play area and paddling pool.

Over the years the Arboretum has seen many events and changes, including the beginnings of the Walsall Arboretum Illuminations as an annual event in 1951.

Originally white bulbs in trees for courting couples in the autumn, in the 1960s and 1970s, the lights were purchased secondhand from Blackpool Illuminations, but over the years they were increasingly made &quot;in house&quot; and now all are.

The Illuminations had up to sixty thousand bulbs and took year-round planning. Although the event had attracted an estimated 250,000 people in 1995, lack of growth beyond this figure has raised the prospect of major redevelopment as the light shows have been exactly the same for a number of years. In February 2009, Walsall council announced that the Illuminations would not take place in 2009, 2010 and 2011.

In January 2010, it was announced that the Illuminations had been permanently scrapped and would be replaced by other events such as concerts and laser shows throughout the year. The existing lights would be sold off where possible to interested parties.

=== Art gallery ===

The New Art Gallery Walsall opened in 2000. Named, as was its predecessor, the E M Flint Gallery in memory of Ethel Mary Flint, head of art at Queen Mary&#x27;s Grammar School, an exhibitor at the Royal Academy, and a former mayor of Walsall, it contains a large number of works by Jacob Epstein as well as works by Van Gogh, Monet, Turner, Renoir and Constable. The large gallery space is host to temporary exhibitions. The lifts of the building use the voice of Noddy Holder to announce the arrival at various floors.

=== Museums ===
Walsall had two museums, Walsall Museum (closed 2015) and Walsall Leather Museum (still open). Walsall Museum featured local history objects primarily from the manufacturing trades and also had a space for temporary exhibitions, while the leather museum displays a mixture of leather goods and has recreations of leatherworkers workshops.

=== Public art ===

The refurbished Sister Dora statue stands at the crossroads of Park Street and Bridge Street. Opposite this stood a locally famous concrete hippopotamus, which has since been moved to outside the library and replaced by a fountain. The hippo was designed by local architect and sculptor John Wood. There are three works in the town centre by the sculptor Tom Lomax: &quot;Walsall Saddle&quot; and &quot;Nombelisk&quot; in Bradford Street, and &quot;Source of Ingenuity&quot; in The Bridge.

=== Literature ===
Though the novelist and essayist Jerome K. Jerome was born in the town, he never wrote about it. Some writers have, including the Walsall born John Petty (1919–1973) who set a number of his books in Walsall, most famously &quot;Five Fags a Day&quot; (1956). More recently the comic novelist Paul McDonald has used Walsall as a location for &quot;Surviving Sting&quot; (2001) and &quot;Kiss Me Softly, Amy Turtle&quot; (2004).

=== Media ===
Local television news programmes are &quot;BBC Midlands Today&quot; and &quot;ITV News Central&quot;. Big Centre TV, the local television channel covering Birmingham and the Black Country, was for a short time based in Walsall town centre. Big Centre TV ceased broadcasting at midnight on Friday 4 November 2016 and reopened and relaunched as Made in Birmingham at 6 pm on Tuesday 8 November 2016. On 19 August 2018, Made in Birmingham rebranded its social media pages as Birmingham TV and changed its website address. Local radio stations are BBC Radio WM, Heart West Midlands, Smooth West Midlands, Capital Midlands, Hits Radio Birmingham, Greatest Hits Radio Birmingham &amp; The West Midlands and Ambur Radio, a community based station which broadcast from the town. The town is served by the local newspapers,&quot;Walsall Advertiser&quot; and &quot;Walsall Chronicle&quot; which is owned by the &quot;Express &amp; Star&quot;.

=== Sport ===

Walsall&#x27;s football club, Walsall F.C., &quot;the Saddlers&quot;, was founded in 1888 when Walsall Town F.C. and Walsall Swifts F.C. merged. They won their first game against Aston Villa. The club currently play in Football League Two.

There are also a number of non-league football clubs based within the borough, including Rushall Olympic.

Walsall has a cricket club, Walsall Cricket Club who won Birmingham League Premier Division in 2006.

Walsall RUFC is Walsall&#x27;s rugby union team which is currently competing in Midlands 1 West. There is also Handsworth RUFU, Aldridge RFC and Wednesbury RUFU.

Beacon Hockey Club (formerly Aldridge and Walsall Hockey Club) is a field hockey club that competes in the Midlands Hockey League.

Walsall was also once home to Formula 1 constructor Ensign Racing, in Walsall Wood from 1973 to 1980, before moving to Chasetown.

Walsall was home to a horse racing course. The grandstand was constructed in 1809 at a cost of £1,300 on a piece of land donated by the Earl of Bradford on a lease of 99 years. Soon after completion, one of the lower compartments was converted into a billiards room, which contained a table donated by Lord Chichester Spencer of Fisherwick Park. Throughout the 19th century, races were held annually at the racecourse at Michaelmas.

=== Shopping ===
In 1809, a market house was constructed at the end of High Street, on the site of the market cross, for the sale of poultry, eggs, butter and dairy produce. The building was demolished in 1852 along with other buildings that had fallen into disrepair. A pig market was constructed in the town in 1815 on High Street. At its peak, the market would handle the sale of 2,000 pigs per day.
In 1847, the corporation tried to construct a new market hall on the &#x27;Bowling Green&#x27;, to the rear of the Dragon Inn. The scheme proposed to use a large amount of public money to construct the hall. Shopkeepers feared that their businesses would be affected and demonstrations were held across the town against the proposals. The demonstrations forced the plans to be shelved.

Walsall town centre is a popular shopping destination in the Black Country. This is partly because of the ample supply of free or extremely cheap parking available within the town centre, including at two large supermarkets — Tesco and Asda — located on opposite sides of the town centre. Crown Wharf Retail Park is the most popular area of shopping, Housing Asda&#x27;s first non-food store, Asda Living, as well as popular shops and restaurants.

Park Street remains Walsall&#x27;s main shopping high street. Well-known retailers such as New Look, Deichmann, USC and Primark are all located on this fully pedestrianized high street. There is one main shopping mall &#x27;Bradford Mall&#x27; formerly known as the &#x27;Saddlers Centre&#x27; and two smaller malls located in the town centre. &#x27;The Old Square&#x27; shopping mall houses other smaller retailers, while &#x27;Quasar Centre&#x27;, now known as &#x27;Park Place Shopping Centre&#x27;, houses Wilko&#x27;s and the other smaller retailers. Other shopping destinations include Broadwalk Retail Park and Reedswood Retail Park.

The area around Walsall Art Gallery is under redevelopment. A new Premier Inn hotel has opened along with an 8 screen The Light Cinemas. There is also a second cinema to be opened across the road opposite Tesco, which will also house popular restaurants.

== Recent changes ==
Projects due for completion in 2009 and 2010 include Walsall Manor Hospital redevelopment worth £174 million, the new Walsall College worth £65 million, the Waterfront South development worth £60 million and the St Matthew&#x27;s Quarter worth more than £25 million. Other projects with approval include £500 million Walsall Gigaport which is a high-speed fibre optic internet environment for national and international businesses, Waterfront North development worth £65 million and the Waterfront Lex development.

Walsall Transport Package worth £17 million was also due for completion in 2009 but was actually completed earlier, allowing the early opening of a £55 million supermarket development to create scores of extra jobs. This is an overall development of roads in and out of Walsall town centre as well as those towards Walsall Arboretum.

== Notable people ==
== Twin towns ==
Walsall is twinned with:
*Bahla, Oman (since 1953)
*Mulhouse, France (since 1962)
* Amritsar, India
* Kobar, West Bank, Palestine

==References==
==External links==
*Walsall Metropolitan Borough Council </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q504530" start="0" end="7" title="Walsall" label="Walsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="36" end="57" title="administrative centre" label="administrative centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q178356" start="65" end="89" title="Metropolitan Borough of Walsall" label="borough of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q23124" start="97" end="110" title="West Midlands (county)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="121" end="133" title="Historic counties of England" label="Historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="142" end="155" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="184" end="194" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="204" end="217" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207371" start="235" end="244" title="Lichfield" label="Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q178356" start="297" end="328" title="Metropolitan Borough of Walsall" label="Metropolitan Borough of Walsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="512" end="519" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246814" start="529" end="550" title="List of English districts by population" label="population of 269,323"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571235" start="600" end="609" title="Darlaston" label="Darlaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q730103" start="611" end="621" title="Brownhills" label="Brownhills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161724" start="623" end="630" title="Pelsall" label="Pelsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q617799" start="632" end="642" title="Willenhall" label="Willenhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571140" start="644" end="652" title="Bloxwich" label="Bloxwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807596" start="657" end="665" title="Aldridge" label="Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q257905" start="745" end="749" title="Walhaz" label="Walh"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="820" end="827" title="Celtic Britons" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009085" start="909" end="928" title="William Fitz-Ansculf" label="William FitzAnsculf"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="962" end="970" title="English Midlands" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="1031" end="1042" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q113686220" start="1048" end="1061" title="Walsall Castle" label="a manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264599" start="1361" end="1377" title="Duke of Richmond" label="Duke of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q347125" start="1407" end="1422" title="John Dudley, 1st Duke of Northumberland" label="Sir John Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="1471" end="1481" title="Mary I of England" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270444" start="1547" end="1579" title="Queen Mary&amp;#x27;s Grammar School" label="Queen Mary&amp;#x27;s Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q504918" start="1675" end="1685" title="Tudor Rose" label="Tudor Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="1703" end="1708" title="arrow" label="arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="1732" end="1751" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Catherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596673" start="1764" end="1782" title="Stafford knot" label="Staffordshire Knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="1809" end="1826" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q848615" start="1894" end="1909" title="Henrietta Maria of France" label="Henrietta Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019104" start="2018" end="2026" title="Caldmore" label="Caldmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326214" start="2137" end="2154" title="Earl of Bradford" label="Earls of Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607110" start="2172" end="2187" title="Thomas Newport, 4th Earl of Bradford" label="the fourth Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724139" start="2238" end="2266" title="Algernon Coote, 6th Earl of Mountrath" label="Diana, Countess of Mountrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="2548" end="2569" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="2903" end="2920" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495738" start="2969" end="2977" title="gasworks" label="gasworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15548045" start="3082" end="3091" title="almshouse" label="almshouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q690220" start="3675" end="3697" title="Grand Junction Railway" label="Grand Junction Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963783" start="3750" end="3797" title="Walsall Courier and South Staffordshire Gazette" label="Walsall Courier and South Staffordshire Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060587" start="3825" end="3853" title="Whittimere Street drill hall" label="Whittimere Street drill hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q26672322" start="3881" end="3897" title="Victorian Arcade, Walsall" label="Victorian Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4063" end="4078" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q321053" start="4121" end="4129" title="cenotaph" label="cenotaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460512" start="4191" end="4216" title="LZ 61 (Zeppelin &amp;#x27;L 21&amp;#x27;)" label="Zeppelin &amp;#x27;L 21&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="4470" end="4472" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q12054266" start="4484" end="4502" title="John Henry Carless" label="John Henry Carless"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498107" start="4525" end="4540" title="Frederick J. Gibbs" label="Frederick Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4657" end="4669" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q93623660" start="5015" end="5029" title="Slum clearance in the United Kingdom" label="Slum clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5054" end="5065" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137764" start="5333" end="5342" title="Coal Pool" label="Coal Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053174" start="5344" end="5359" title="Blakenall Heath" label="Blakenall Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587150" start="5424" end="5431" title="Goscote" label="Goscote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655845" start="5436" end="5442" title="Harden, West Midlands" label="Harden"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5461" end="5473" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879625" start="5475" end="5484" title="Beechdale" label="Beechdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="5795" end="5804" title="world war" label="world war"/>
<link wikidata="Q137023" start="6025" end="6032" title="Primark" label="Primark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277439" start="6037" end="6053" title="The Co-operative Food" label="The Co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="6080" end="6085" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434528" start="6383" end="6392" title="Poundland" label="Poundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836931" start="6437" end="6446" title="B &amp;amp; M" label="B &amp;amp; M"/>
<link wikidata="Q962308" start="6603" end="6616" title="John Betjeman" label="John Betjeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q26626940" start="6870" end="6891" title="Walsall Council House" label="Walsall Council House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571235" start="6986" end="6995" title="Darlaston" label="Darlaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q617799" start="7000" end="7010" title="Willenhall" label="Willenhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015967" start="7038" end="7045" title="Bilston" label="Bilston"/>
<link wikidata="Q501023" start="7050" end="7060" title="Wednesbury" label="Wednesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q178356" start="7074" end="7105" title="Metropolitan Borough of Walsall" label="Metropolitan Borough of Walsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713998" start="7130" end="7164" title="Aldridge-Brownhills Urban District" label="Aldridge-Brownhills Urban District"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="7266" end="7279" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23124" start="7306" end="7319" title="West Midlands (county)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397768" start="7332" end="7347" title="Saddlers Centre" label="Saddlers Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55601110" start="7445" end="7461" title="1981 United Kingdom tornado outbreak" label="an F1/T2 tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571140" start="7478" end="7486" title="Bloxwich" label="Bloxwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q218698" start="7587" end="7603" title="Jerome K. Jerome" label="Jerome K. Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q151754" start="7757" end="7771" title="Anne, Princess Royal" label="Princess Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q246655" start="8119" end="8123" title="Next plc" label="Next"/>
<link wikidata="Q23823668" start="8128" end="8135" title="TK Maxx" label="TK Maxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="8770" end="8776" title="Historic counties of England" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="8780" end="8793" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23124" start="8833" end="8846" title="West Midlands (county)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397768" start="8853" end="8874" title="Saddlers Centre" label="Saddlers&amp;#x27; Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830048" start="8921" end="8932" title="town centre" label="town centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="8962" end="8981" title="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer" label="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753511" start="9031" end="9058" title="The New Art Gallery Walsall" label="The New Art Gallery Walsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346145" start="9331" end="9350" title="British Home Stores" label="British Home Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q297410" start="9628" end="9632" title="Asda" label="Asda"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="9756" end="9761" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963767" start="9816" end="9831" title="Walsall College" label="Walsall College"/>
<link wikidata="Q958479" start="10220" end="10236" title="Woolworths Group (United Kingdom)" label="Woolworth&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672651" start="10390" end="10400" title="T J Hughes" label="T J Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434528" start="10787" end="10796" title="Poundland" label="Poundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863102" start="10882" end="10893" title="Barr Beacon" label="Barr Beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="10976" end="10990" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="11041" end="11045" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="11060" end="11069" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985938" start="11820" end="11827" title="Black Country dialect" label="Yam-Yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978814" start="11884" end="11891" title="Brummie dialect" label="Brummie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="12164" end="12176" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="12241" end="12256" title="Charles, Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q192249" start="12305" end="12311" title="saddle" label="saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19644" start="12358" end="12379" title="Walsall Football Club" label="Walsall Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q19644" start="12387" end="12399" title="the Saddlers" label="the Saddlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="12494" end="12503" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="12612" end="12627" title="Central England" label="Central England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881041" start="12650" end="12652" title="M6 motorway" label="M6"/>
<link wikidata="Q178356" start="12670" end="12701" title="Metropolitan Borough of Walsall" label="Metropolitan Borough of Walsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275076" start="12748" end="12751" title="RAC plc" label="RAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881041" start="12808" end="12810" title="M6 motorway" label="M6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571235" start="12872" end="12881" title="Darlaston" label="Darlaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571140" start="12943" end="12951" title="Bloxwich" label="Bloxwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q23823668" start="12999" end="13006" title="TK Maxx" label="TK Maxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890431" start="13086" end="13099" title="Homeserve plc" label="Homeserve plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568541" start="13104" end="13129" title="South Staffordshire Water" label="South Staffordshire Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816202" start="13535" end="13562" title="University of Wolverhampton" label="University of Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963767" start="13698" end="13713" title="Walsall College" label="Walsall College"/>
<link wikidata="Q765192" start="13723" end="13740" title="further education" label="further education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="13977" end="13982" title="state school" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="13983" end="13997" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270444" start="14007" end="14039" title="Queen Mary&amp;#x27;s Grammar School" label="Queen Mary&amp;#x27;s Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15270457" start="14044" end="14073" title="Queen Mary&amp;#x27;s High School" label="Queen Mary&amp;#x27;s High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="14461" end="14473" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="14579" end="14584" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550430" start="14632" end="14656" title="St Matthew&amp;#x27;s Church, Walsall" label="St Matthew&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q297410" start="14703" end="14707" title="ASDA" label="ASDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481102" start="14949" end="14964" title="Francis Goodwin (architect)" label="Francis Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021088" start="14967" end="14990" title="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Church, Walsall" label="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q20202955" start="15098" end="15127" title="Mellish Road Methodist Chapel" label="Mellish Road Methodist Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26409778" start="15226" end="15256" title="The Crossing at St Paul&amp;#x27;s" label="The Crossing at St Paul&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="15394" end="15402" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550428" start="15403" end="15424" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Walsall" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850858" start="15456" end="15470" title="Joseph Ireland" label="Joseph Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="15543" end="15550" title="Masjids" label="Masjids"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019104" start="15649" end="15657" title="Caldmore" label="Caldmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127471" start="15662" end="15669" title="Palfrey, West Midlands" label="Palfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q189232" start="15718" end="15725" title="Palfrey" label="Palfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115867" start="15930" end="15938" title="Chuckery" label="Chuckery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915738" start="16041" end="16050" title="Birchills" label="Birchills"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="16110" end="16119" title="Madrassah" label="Madrassah"/>
<link wikidata="Q106726743" start="16363" end="16389" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s bus station" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972538" start="16501" end="16531" title="National Express West Midlands" label="National Express West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370215" start="16536" end="16542" title="Rotala" label="Rotala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270737" start="16550" end="16571" title="Diamond West Midlands" label="Diamond West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941705" start="16645" end="16655" title="Chaserider" label="Chaserider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="16738" end="16748" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="16750" end="16763" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q617799" start="16768" end="16778" title="Willenhall" label="Willenhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571140" start="16789" end="16797" title="Bloxwich" label="Bloxwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q992665" start="16799" end="16806" title="Cannock" label="Cannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q730103" start="16811" end="16821" title="Brownhills" label="Brownhills"/>
<link wikidata="Q868196" start="16835" end="16851" title="Sutton Coldfield" label="Sutton Coldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807596" start="16856" end="16864" title="Aldridge" label="Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q649909" start="16921" end="16930" title="Burntwood" label="Burntwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q207371" start="16932" end="16941" title="Lichfield" label="Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6648959" start="16946" end="16958" title="Little Aston" label="Little Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q212826" start="17118" end="17131" title="West Bromwich" label="West Bromwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015967" start="17133" end="17140" title="Bilston" label="Bilston"/>
<link wikidata="Q617799" start="17142" end="17152" title="Willenhall" label="Willenhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571235" start="17154" end="17163" title="Darlaston" label="Darlaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857563" start="17165" end="17172" title="Oldbury, West Midlands" label="Oldbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q213832" start="17174" end="17180" title="Dudley" label="Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820454" start="17185" end="17202" title="Merry Hill Shopping Centre" label="Merry Hill Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737478" start="17337" end="17345" title="Alumwell" label="Alumwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879625" start="17347" end="17356" title="Beechdale" label="Beechdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115867" start="17358" end="17366" title="Chuckery" label="Chuckery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137756" start="17384" end="17393" title="Park Hall" label="Park Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q30280852" start="17402" end="17424" title="Walsall Manor Hospital" label="Walsall Manor Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881041" start="17526" end="17528" title="M6 motorway" label="M6"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875" start="17548" end="17559" title="M1 motorway" label="M1 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="17568" end="17574" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q111661842" start="17579" end="17591" title="M74 motorway" label="M74 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="17600" end="17607" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881041" start="17669" end="17680" title="M6 motorway" label="M6 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649158" start="17794" end="17802" title="A34 road" label="A34 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="17818" end="17828" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328487" start="17837" end="17849" title="M42 motorway" label="M42 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="17858" end="17864" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649331" start="17901" end="17905" title="A454 road" label="A454"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586719" start="18053" end="18076" title="Walsall railway station" label="Walsall railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q683063" start="18245" end="18255" title="Birmingham New Street railway station" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066965" start="18282" end="18289" title="Rugeley Trent Valley railway station" label="Rugeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896204" start="18377" end="18383" title="Bescot railway station" label="Bescot"/>
<link wikidata="Q973287" start="18502" end="18521" title="West Midlands Metro" label="West Midlands Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030515" start="18536" end="18549" title="Wolverhampton St George&amp;#x27;s tram stop" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059093" start="18553" end="18575" title="Library tram stop" label="Birmingham city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979223" start="18648" end="18679" title="Wednesbury Town railway station" label="Wednesbury Town railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734868" start="18712" end="18725" title="Brierley Hill" label="Brierley Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820454" start="18896" end="18906" title="Merry Hill Shopping Centre" label="Merry Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q973287" start="18926" end="18939" title="Brierley Hill tram stop" label="Brierley Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371106" start="19044" end="19068" title="Round Oak Steel Terminal" label="Round Oak Steel Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896198" start="19174" end="19180" title="Bescot" label="Bescot"/>
<link wikidata="Q844054" start="19239" end="19250" title="tram-trains" label="tram-trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="19352" end="19365" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260198" start="19367" end="19378" title="Wednesfield" label="Wednesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q617799" start="19380" end="19390" title="Willenhall" label="Willenhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q501023" start="19395" end="19405" title="Wednesbury" label="Wednesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q16897621" start="19694" end="19711" title="Walsall Aerodrome" label="Walsall Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8719" start="19782" end="19800" title="Birmingham Airport" label="Birmingham Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963765" start="19901" end="19918" title="Walsall Arboretum" label="Walsall Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066914" start="20057" end="20066" title="Dog fighting" label="dogfights"/>
<link wikidata="Q812983" start="20068" end="20080" title="bull-baiting" label="bull-baiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q319771" start="20085" end="20095" title="cockfighting" label="cockfights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593203" start="20120" end="20129" title="old pence" label="old pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="20482" end="20491" title="Arboretum" label="Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000391" start="20576" end="20589" title="Illuminations (festival)" label="Illuminations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923257" start="20753" end="20776" title="Blackpool Illuminations" label="Blackpool Illuminations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753511" start="21557" end="21580" title="Walsall Art Gallery" label="New Art Gallery Walsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q354779" start="21835" end="21848" title="Jacob Epstein" label="Jacob Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="21869" end="21877" title="Van Gogh" label="Van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="21879" end="21884" title="Monet" label="Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="21886" end="21892" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="21894" end="21900" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="21905" end="21914" title="John Constable" label="Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q387655" start="22017" end="22029" title="Noddy Holder" label="Noddy Holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963790" start="22115" end="22129" title="Walsall Museum" label="Walsall Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963788" start="22148" end="22170" title="Walsall Leather Museum" label="Walsall Leather Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531106" start="22466" end="22477" title="Sister Dora" label="Sister Dora"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="22590" end="22602" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21461537" start="22805" end="22814" title="Tom Lomax" label="Tom Lomax"/>
<link wikidata="Q218698" start="22993" end="23009" title="Jerome K. Jerome" label="Jerome K. Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152333" start="23251" end="23264" title="Paul McDonald (writer)" label="Paul McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842556" start="23444" end="23462" title="BBC Midlands Today" label="BBC Midlands Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975084" start="23479" end="23495" title="ITV News Central" label="ITV News Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q19364364" start="23503" end="23516" title="Big Centre TV" label="Big Centre TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835005" start="23945" end="23957" title="BBC Radio WM" label="BBC Radio WM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129029" start="23959" end="23978" title="Heart West Midlands" label="Heart West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546567" start="23980" end="24000" title="Smooth West Midlands" label="Smooth West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063602" start="24002" end="24018" title="Capital Midlands" label="Capital Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500031" start="24020" end="24041" title="Hits Radio Birmingham" label="Hits Radio Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992483" start="24043" end="24097" title="Greatest Hits Radio Birmingham &amp;amp; The West Midlands" label="Greatest Hits Radio Birmingham &amp;amp; The West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421650" start="24308" end="24326" title="Express &amp;amp; Star" label="Express &amp;amp; Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q19644" start="24380" end="24392" title="Walsall F.C." label="Walsall F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q19644" start="24445" end="24462" title="Walsall Town F.C." label="Walsall Town F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q19644" start="24467" end="24486" title="Walsall Swifts F.C." label="Walsall Swifts F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="24529" end="24540" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="24569" end="24588" title="Football League Two" label="Football League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963784" start="24726" end="24746" title="Walsall Cricket Club" label="Walsall Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="24831" end="24842" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842486" start="24880" end="24895" title="Midlands 1 West" label="Midlands 1 West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="25031" end="25043" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997772" start="25070" end="25092" title="Midland Regional Hockey Association" label="Midlands Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="25125" end="25134" title="Formula 1" label="Formula 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q173415" start="25147" end="25160" title="Ensign Racing" label="Ensign Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087254" start="25214" end="25223" title="Chasetown" label="Chasetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q17990767" start="25248" end="25267" title="horse racing course" label="horse racing course"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326214" start="25362" end="25378" title="Earl of Bradford" label="Earl of Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341285" start="25477" end="25486" title="billiards" label="billiards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360565" start="25647" end="25657" title="Michaelmas" label="Michaelmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308100" start="25731" end="25742" title="High Street" label="High Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q297410" start="26843" end="26854" title="Asda Living" label="Asda Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063852" start="26990" end="26998" title="New Look (company)" label="New Look"/>
<link wikidata="Q664543" start="27000" end="27009" title="Heinrich Deichmann-Schuhe GmbH" label="Deichmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866331" start="27011" end="27014" title="USC (clothing retailer)" label="USC"/>
<link wikidata="Q137023" start="27019" end="27026" title="Primark" label="Primark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397768" start="27171" end="27186" title="Saddlers Centre" label="Saddlers Centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27409" end="27421" title="Wilko&amp;#x27;s" label="Wilko&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753511" start="27557" end="27576" title="Walsall Art Gallery" label="Walsall Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108626" start="27607" end="27618" title="Premier Inn" label="Premier Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225038" start="27659" end="27676" title="The Light Cinemas" label="The Light Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30280852" start="27871" end="27893" title="Walsall Manor Hospital" label="Walsall Manor Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963765" start="28649" end="28666" title="Walsall Arboretum" label="Walsall Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="28718" end="28725" title="sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q800253" start="28733" end="28738" title="Bahla" label="Bahla"/>
<link wikidata="Q79815" start="28759" end="28767" title="Mulhouse" label="Mulhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="28791" end="28799" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424266" start="28809" end="28814" title="Kobar" label="Kobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="28827" end="28836" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258944" wikidata="Q28301" url="?curid=258944" title="Olinda">
<text>Olinda () is a historic city in Pernambuco, Brazil, in the Northeast Region. It is located on the country&#x27;s northeastern Atlantic Ocean coast, in the Metropolitan Region of Recife, the state capital. It has a population of 349,976 people, covers , and has a population density of . It is noted as one of the best-preserved colonial cities in Brazil and has been inhabited since 1535.

As the former capital of the Captaincy of Pernambuco during the colonial era, Olinda has many historical buildings—the center was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1982—and a rich culture. The Carnaval of Olinda, a popular street party, is very similar to traditional Portuguese carnivals, with the addition of African influenced dances, reflecting the history of the Northeast. All the festivities are celebrated on the streets with no bleachers or roping, and, unlike in other cities, admission is free. There are hundreds of small musical groups (sometimes featuring a single performer) in many genres.

==History==
Several indigenous tribes occupied the coast of Northeastern Brazil for several thousand years, and the hills of the present day municipality of Olinda had settlements of Caetés and Tupinambá tribes, which were frequently at war. French mercenaries are thought to be the first Europeans to reach the region, but the Portuguese exploited intertribal rivalries and managed to build a stronghold on the former Caeté village on a high hill. Recent studies by the Federal University of Pernambuco have uncovered new evidence of the pre-colonial population of the area.

The settlement of Olinda was founded in 1535 by Duarte Coelho Pereira, from Portugal; it was elevated to a town on March 12, 1537. It was made the seat of the Roman Catholic Territorial Prelature of Pernambuco in 1614, becoming the Diocese of Olinda in 1676. The economy of the region was dominated by the production of sugarcane. This, combined with the importing of slaves from Africa to support cultivation made Olinda a colonial stronghold.

Olinda was the capital of the Portuguese hereditary captaincy of Pernambuco, but was burned by Dutch invaders. The Portuguese built their town on the hill, for practical purposes (eg, sewers) and to make it easier to defend. In the 17th century the Kingdom of Portugal was united with Spain (the 1580-1640 Iberian Union). Taking advantage of this period of Portuguese weakness, the area around Olinda and Recife was occupied by the Dutch who gained access to the Portuguese sugarcane plantations. John Maurice, Prince of Nassau-Siegen was appointed as the governor of the Dutch possessions in Brazil in 1637 by the Dutch West India Company on recommendation of Frederick Henry. He landed at Recife, the port of Pernambuco and the chief stronghold of the Dutch, in January 1637. By a series of successful expeditions, he gradually extended the Dutch possessions from Sergipe on the south to São Luís de Maranhão in the north. He likewise conquered the Portuguese possessions of Saint George del Mina, Saint Thomas, and Luanda, Angola, on the west coast of Africa. After the dissolution of the Iberian Union in 1640, Portugal would reestablish its authority over the lost territories of the Portuguese Empire, including the former Dutch Brazil. Sugarcane plantation slavery would continue to be a source of wealth in Olinda until the Lei Áurea (&quot;Golden Law&quot;) abolished slavery in an independent Brazil in 1888.

Olinda declined in importance after the Dutch invasion. Recife became the capital of Pernambuco in 1827, and Olinda is part of the greater Recife metropolitan area. Due to the historic position of the city, its cathedral, a World Heritage Site, called São Salvador do Mundo, remains the primary seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Olinda and Recife, with a co-cathedral in Recife. Olinda also has a Minor Basilica, again a World Heritage Site (Minor): Basílica Abacial do Mosteiro de São Bento de Olinda.

Besides its natural beauty, Olinda is also one of Brazil&#x27;s main cultural centers: in 1982 it was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. The city relives the magnificence of the past every year during the large Carnival, to the rhythms of &quot;frevo&quot;, &quot;maracatu&quot; and other northeast music and dances.

== Geography ==
Olinda is located on the coast of the state of Pernambuco, six kilometers north of the center of Recife. It is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the east, the municipality of Paulista to the north, and Recife to the south and west. It is part of the Metropolitan Region of Recife (RMR). 

The average elevation is 16 m above sea level. The landscapes is made of plains and hills, some of them steep. Olinda is mostly drained by the Paratibe River (55.13% of the territory), with the remainder drained by the Capibaribe River. The municipality is in the Atlantic Forest ecoregion.

Olinda has a tropical monsoon type climate (Köppen-Geiger: Am&quot;)&quot;, typical of the eastern section of the northeastern Brazilian coast, with average monthly temperatures consistently above 18 °C, little diurnal variation in temperature, abundant rainfall most of the year, and high relative humidity.

==Economy==


The main economic activities in Olinda are based in tourism, commerce, transportation industry and artcraft. The tourist sector has a boom every Carnival when thousands of people are in the old historic town center.

===Economic indicators===

Economy by Sector

== Gallery ==
=== Historic Center ===
== See also ==
* List of municipalities in Pernambuco
* List of museums in Pernambuco

==References==

==External links==
*Official website of the &quot;prefeitura&quot;
*Official website of the &quot;Câmara Municipal&quot;
*Explore the Historic Centre of the Town of Olinda in the UNESCO collection on Google Arts and Culture
*https://web.archive.org/web/20130407002251/http://olindavirtual.org/
*https://web.archive.org/web/20060614045202/http://www.olinda.com.br/ Commercial site
* Video Olinda, Pernambuco (PT) 
* Video Olinda street Carnival </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28301" start="0" end="6" title="Olinda" label="Olinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="32" end="42" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136194" start="59" end="75" title="Northeast Region, Brazil" label="Northeast Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="126" end="140" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549175" start="155" end="174" title="Recife metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="178" end="184" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745556" start="419" end="442" title="Captaincy of Pernambuco" label="Captaincy of Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088324" start="454" end="466" title="Colonial Brazil" label="colonial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="531" end="537" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="538" end="557" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390665" start="590" end="598" title="Brazilian Carnival" label="Carnaval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398013" start="1187" end="1193" title="Caeté people" label="Caetés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757881" start="1198" end="1207" title="Tupinambá people" label="Tupinambá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322256" start="1475" end="1507" title="Federal University of Pernambuco" label="Federal University of Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040483" start="1629" end="1650" title="Duarte Coelho Pereira" label="Duarte Coelho Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1740" end="1754" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149429" start="1755" end="1790" title="Territorial Prelature of Pernambuco" label="Territorial Prelature of Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="1901" end="1910" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649877" start="1949" end="1955" title="Slavery in Brazil" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745556" start="2079" end="2102" title="captaincy of Pernambuco" label="captaincy of Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="2276" end="2295" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Kingdom of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="2333" end="2346" title="Iberian Union" label="Iberian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="2432" end="2438" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2459" end="2464" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="2501" end="2510" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q321492" start="2524" end="2561" title="John Maurice, Prince of Nassau-Siegen" label="John Maurice, Prince of Nassau-Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="2718" end="2724" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302439" start="2730" end="2734" title="Recife port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q28441" start="2917" end="2937" title="São Luís, Maranhão" label="São Luís de Maranhão"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897" start="3045" end="3051" title="Luanda" label="Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="3053" end="3059" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="3119" end="3132" title="Iberian Union" label="Iberian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="3216" end="3233" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519167" start="3359" end="3368" title="Lei Áurea" label="Lei Áurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548600" start="3418" end="3436" title="Independence of Brazil" label="independent Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549175" start="3586" end="3610" title="Recife metropolitan area" label="Recife metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="3671" end="3690" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149429" start="3754" end="3801" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Olinda e Recife" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Olinda and Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577114" start="3810" end="3822" title="co-cathedral" label="co-cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846867" start="3852" end="3866" title="Minor Basilica" label="Minor Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="4072" end="4091" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="4095" end="4101" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="4177" end="4185" title="Carnival" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455932" start="4211" end="4216" title="frevo" label="frevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753071" start="4230" end="4238" title="maracatu" label="maracatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="4347" end="4357" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="4397" end="4403" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q949833" start="4475" end="4483" title="Paulista" label="Paulista"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549175" start="4550" end="4579" title="Recife metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Region of Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136154" start="4732" end="4746" title="Paratibe River" label="Paratibe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352970" start="4808" end="4824" title="Capibaribe River" label="Capibaribe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q477047" start="4853" end="4868" title="Atlantic Forest" label="Atlantic Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="4894" end="4910" title="Tropical monsoon climate" label="tropical monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="4925" end="4938" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen-Geiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="4940" end="4942" title="Tropical monsoon climate" label="Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283759" start="5092" end="5109" title="Diurnal temperature variation" label="diurnal variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="5171" end="5188" title="Humidity" label="relative humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840215" start="5523" end="5559" title="List of municipalities in Pernambuco" label="List of municipalities in Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629886" start="5562" end="5591" title="List of museums in Pernambuco" label="List of museums in Pernambuco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258945" wikidata="Q949833" url="?curid=258945" title="Paulista">
<text>Paulista is a municipality in Pernambuco, Brazil, with a population of 334,376 as of 2020. It has the highest Human Development Index (HDI) of the Recife metropolitan area. It is the birthplace of footballer Rivaldo and is also famous for its beaches, including Maria Farinha with the giant Veneza water park. It was incorporated as a city in 1935.

==History==

In 1535 Paulista was a village, with two parishes, Paratibe and Maranguape, and formed part of the then village of Olinda. In the mid-16th century, the lands of Paratibe were donated by Coelho to Jerônimo de Albuquerque, services rendered to the Dubuquerque colony. Jerônimo de Albuquerque, after a while, ceded the lands of Paratibe to Gonçalo Mendes Leitão, at the time of marrying his daughter. Later, with the death of Mendes Leitão, his heirs sold them as properties, dividing from then on into Paratibe de Cima and Paratibe de Baixo (Upper Paratibe and Lower Paratibe). In 1856, the parish of Maranguape was acquired by João Fernandes Vieira and at the end of this century, in the year 1689, the two parishes, Paratibe and Maranguape, were sold to the pioneer of São Paulo, Manoel Álvares de Morais Navarro, known as &quot;Paulista&quot;, giving rise to the current name of the city.

The later centuries were characterized by both political and economic growth for the city. Paulista was the second district of Olinda until 1935, which became an independent municipality and is currently formed by the districts of Paratibe, Arthur Lundgren I, Arthur Lundgren II, Jardim Paulista Baixo, Jardim Paulista Alto, Conceição, Janga, Pau Amarelo, Nobre, Maranguape I, Maranguape II, Jardim Maranguape, Alameda Paulista, Maria Farinha, Engenho Maranguape and Mirueira.

==Anthem==
It was made by Joel Andrade.

===Portuguese Lyrics===
O antigo Engenho de Manuel Navarro

Cresceu e para o mundo despontou

É hoje palco de um progresso imensurável

Paulista, símbolo da graça e do labor!

Em teu rico solo, o choro é riso

Doce paraíso encantador

Onde os dias têm mais luz

Onde as estrelas têm mais fulgor

Em cima, o céu é mais azul, é mais bonito

Em baixo, a brisa tem aroma de eucalipto

Teu povo é mais ordeiro e mais gentil

Paulista, fração linda do Brasil (BIS)

Qual grande lençol verde se agitando

Teu mar faz do teu leste atração

Enquanto o Sol que é bem mais Sol sobre teu solo

Esquenta o ar, esquenta a vida esquenta o chão

És o apogeu de um sonho lindo

Esplendor de um dia de verão

Onde a paz reside em paz

Onde as roseiras bem mais rosas dão

Em cima, o céu é mais azul e mais bonito

Embaixo, a brisa tem aroma de eucalipto

Teu povo é mais ordeiro e mais gentil

Paulista, fração linda do Brasil!

===English Lyrics===

The old Mill of Manuel Navaro

Grew and for the world it emerged

Is today an immeasurable progress stage

Paulista, symbol of grace and labor!

In your rich soil, the cry is laughter

Sweet charming paradise

Where the days have more light

Where the stars have more shine

Above, the sky is bluer, is more beautiful

Below, the wind has a eucalyptus scent

Your people are more orderly and kinder

Paulista, beautiful fraction of Brazil (BIS)

Which big green sheet shaking

Your east makes your sea attractive

While the sun is way more sun in your soil

Heat the air, heat the life heat the ground

Are the height of a beautiful dream

The splendor of a summer day

Where peace resides in peace

Where the rose bushes way more roses give

Above, the sky is bluer, is more beautiful

Below, the wind has a eucalyptus scent

Your people are more orderly and kinder

Paulista, beautiful fraction of Brazil

==Beaches==
*Conceição Beach - At long with many coconut trees, this beach has calm and very deep water. Also has many bars and tents.
*Janga Beach - an urban beach with artificial reefs
*Maria Farinha Beach - features quiet and shallow waters. At low tide, it is possible to see the reefs, and at this time, the beach has almost no waves.
*Pau Amarelo Beach - features quiet water and a formation of sand banks, which give rise to small sandbar islets and natural pools.

The beaches of Paulista are a nesting ground for endangered hawksbill sea turtles.

==Economy==
In the municipality of Paulista, activities related to services, commerce and industry predominate. Tourism is also responsible for attracting enterprises to the municipality with the implementation of hotels, restaurants, commercial points, and marinas. In Paulista, the industrial park of Paratibe is also located, which houses companies from different sectors, stimulating the region&#x27;s economy and generating employment for the population.

The municipality is part of the Metropolitan Region of Recife, which polarizes economic flows, with a predominance of the service sector and functions as a distribution center for goods. In addition to concentrating a greater number of processing industries in the State, another pillar of the metropolitan economy is the agro-industry, focused on the alcohol and sugar sectors. Also noteworthy is the cultivation of fruits and vegetables, such as bananas, coconuts, yams, manioc, among others.

===Economic Indicators===

Economy by Sector
===Health Indicators===

==Notable people==
*Heider Dias Sotero, footballer
*Jamesson Andrade de Brito, footballer 

== See also ==
* List of municipalities in Pernambuco

==References==
* Video Janga beach and Pernambuco folklore </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q949833" start="0" end="8" title="Paulista" label="Paulista"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184121" start="14" end="26" title="Municipalities of Brazil" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="30" end="40" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="42" end="48" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="110" end="133" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549175" start="147" end="171" title="Recife metropolitan area" label="Recife metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q483577" start="208" end="215" title="Rivaldo" label="Rivaldo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="291" end="308" title="Veneza water park" label="Veneza water park"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="404" end="410" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q28301" start="478" end="484" title="Olinda" label="Olinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10306800" start="559" end="582" title="Jeronimo de Albuquerque" label="Jerônimo de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="3663" end="3670" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q985843" start="3784" end="3799" title="artificial reef" label="artificial reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="3862" end="3870" title="low tide" label="low tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="3898" end="3902" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="4015" end="4024" title="sand bank" label="sand bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="4052" end="4059" title="sandbar" label="sandbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207524" start="4060" end="4065" title="islet" label="islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521187" start="4071" end="4084" title="tide pool" label="natural pools"/>
<link wikidata="Q203538" start="4147" end="4167" title="hawksbill sea turtle" label="hawksbill sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="4190" end="4202" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="4248" end="4256" title="commerce" label="commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="4261" end="4269" title="Factory" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="4283" end="4290" title="Tourism" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="4385" end="4390" title="hotel" label="hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="4393" end="4403" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="4664" end="4693" title="Recife" label="Metropolitan Region of Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="4984" end="4991" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="4996" end="5001" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="5105" end="5111" title="Cassava" label="manioc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698778" start="5218" end="5236" title="Heider Dias Sotero" label="Heider Dias Sotero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146147" start="5250" end="5275" title="Jamesson Andrade de Brito" label="Jamesson Andrade de Brito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840215" start="5307" end="5343" title="List of municipalities in Pernambuco" label="List of municipalities in Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="5384" end="5394" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258947" wikidata="Q483577" url="?curid=258947" title="Rivaldo">
<text>Rivaldo Vítor Borba Ferreira (; born 19 April 1972), known simply as Rivaldo, is a Brazilian former footballer who played mainly as an attacking midfielder but also as a second striker, and on occasion deployed as a wide midfielder or as a winger. Rivaldo is regarded as one of the greatest, most skillful, and most creative players of all time. He was renowned for his bending free kicks, bicycle kicks, feints, powerful ball striking from distance, and ability to both score and create goals. In 1999, he won the Ballon d&#x27;Or and was named FIFA World Player of the Year. In 2004, he was named by Pelé in the FIFA 100 list of the world&#x27;s greatest living players. With success at club and international level, he is one of nine players to have won the FIFA World Cup, the UEFA Champions League and the Ballon d&#x27;Or.

Rivaldo started his career in 1991 with Brazilian club Santa Cruz, going on to have spells at Mogi Mirim, a loan spell at Corinthians, and Palmeiras. In 1996, he moved to Europe with Spanish side Deportivo de La Coruña, where his performances in his only season there led him to sign for Barcelona in 1997. At Barcelona, he formed a successful partnership with Dutch international Patrick Kluivert, and won consecutive La Liga titles in 1998 and 1999, as well as the 1998 Copa del Rey. Rivaldo notably scored a hattrick against Valencia in June 2001 which qualified Barcelona for the 2001-02 UEFA Champions League; the last goal was a last minute 20-yard bicycle kick winner and the hattrick itself is often ranked as the greatest ever. During his five-year tenure there, he scored 130 goals, ranking him among Barcelona&#x27;s highest goalscorers of all time.

In 2002, Rivaldo signed for Italian club A.C. Milan, winning the Coppa Italia and the UEFA Champions League in his only season there, however, his performances were underwhelming and he cancelled his contract with Milan in late 2004. He went on to play for Cruzeiro, Olympiacos, AEK Athens, Bunyodkor, a loan spell at São Paulo, Kabuscorp and São Caetano. In March 2014, Rivaldo announced his retirement from professional football, however since June 2015 he made appearances for Mogi Mirim, before retiring again in August 2015.

From 1993 to 2003, Rivaldo played 74 matches and scored 35 goals for Brazil and is the seventh highest goalscorer for the country. He helped Brazil reach the final of the 1998 FIFA World Cup and won the 1999 Copa América where he was named player of the tournament. Rivaldo starred in an attacking trio with Ronaldo and Ronaldinho in the 2002 FIFA World Cup winning team. Scoring in five of Brazil&#x27;s seven games at the tournament, Rivaldo was named in the FIFA World Cup All-Star Team in 2002 having also previously been selected in 1998. He is an inductee to the Brazilian Football Museum Hall of Fame.

==Early life==
Born in Recife, Brazil, Rivaldo had a poor upbringing in the &quot;favelas&quot; of the city. His physical appearance still marks the poverty he experienced in his childhood: malnourishment-caused bowleggedness and the loss of several teeth. Predominantly left footed, Rivaldo began his professional career at the age of 16, when he signed with Paulistano Futebol Clube in 1989, despite the Paulistano coaches believing him too physically weak to succeed. Rivaldo&#x27;s father Romildo was killed in a road accident in 1989, but Rivaldo signed his first professional contract later that year.

==Club career==
===Santa Cruz, Mogi Mirim and Corinthians===
He went on to play for Santa Cruz in 1991. In 1992, he moved south to the state of São Paulo where he played for Mogi Mirim in the second tier of Brazilian football. In 1993, he moved to the state capital to play for Corinthians in the first division, on loan.

===Palmeiras===
In the next year, he switched local allegiances and moved to Palmeiras, helping the club successfully defend its league championship in 1994 and winning Campeonato Paulista in 1996. In both 1993 and 1994, he was honoured by the authoritative publication &quot;Placar Magazine&quot; with the Bola de Ouro for the best player in his position.

===Deportivo===
Before the 1996 Olympics, Parma announced that they had signed Rivaldo and his teammate Amaral from Palmeiras. After the Olympics, there was a dispute, and rather than Italy, Rivaldo moved to Spain as he joined Deportivo La Coruña in La Liga. He only stayed for one season, but nonetheless it proved to be a successful one for both him and the club. Rivaldo was the joint-fourth top goalscorer of the season, with 21 goals from 41 matches, as Deportivo finished third in the league.

===Barcelona===
Rivaldo switched to FC Barcelona in 1997 in a transfer deal securing Deportivo a 4 billion pesetas (around $26 million) transfer fee, with Sir Bobby Robson convincing Barcelona to sign Rivaldo ahead of Steve McManaman by saying that Rivaldo would guarantee the team many goals.
In his first season at Barcelona, Rivaldo was the second top goalscorer with 19 goals in 34 matches, as Barcelona won The Double of La Liga and Copa del Rey. In 1999, he won another La Liga title with Barcelona, and once again was the league&#x27;s second highest scorer with 24 goals. In 1999, Rivaldo was named FIFA World Player of the Year and he also received the Ballon d&#x27;Or. After Barcelona&#x27;s unsuccessful Champions League campaign, Rivaldo was linked with a move away from Camp Nou. Then Manchester United captain Roy Keane was reported stating Rivaldo was the player he most wanted United to sign.

In his third season at Barcelona, Rivaldo fell out with manager Louis van Gaal, when he insisted playing as a playmaker rather than on the left wing. Even though he had a strained relationship with Van Gaal, Rivaldo went on to score 10 goals in the season&#x27;s Champions League as the club reached the semi-finals. Van Gaal was fired in June 2000.

In the following 2000–01 season, Rivaldo was once again the second highest goalscorer of the league, with 23 goals. In the decisive last game of the season, against Champions League finalist Valencia CF, Rivaldo scored a hat-trick to win the game 3–2, pushing Barcelona ahead of Valencia to secure a place in the 2001–02 Champions League. Frequently ranked the greatest hat-trick ever, his first goal was a trademark bending free kick that curled into the bottom right corner, the second saw him send the Valencia player the wrong way with a feint before a strike with little back-lift from 25 yards swerved into the bottom left corner of the net, and his match-winning third occurred after Rivaldo controlled the ball with the chest from the edge of the 18-yard box and executed an overhead bicycle kick in the 89th minute, which he regards as the best goal of his career. An ecstatic Rivaldo ripped off his jersey and started swinging it over his head during his goal celebrations, while Barcelona club president Joan Gaspart broke with convention in the stadium&#x27;s VIP box by punching the air with both fists and yelling his delight next to the opposition delegation. After the game Rivaldo stated; &quot;What happened tonight has been incredible. I dedicate the winning goal to all the players who have fought so hard all season and all the supporters who have suffered so much. I&#x27;m delighted to have made them happy with my goals.&quot; He scored a total of 36 goals that season. During his five-year tenure at Barcelona, Rivaldo scored 130 goals, ranking him among the club&#x27;s highest goalscorers of all time.

===Milan===
Rivaldo signed a three-year deal with the Italian Serie A club A.C. Milan in 2002. With Milan, he won the Coppa Italia and the Champions League in the 2002–03 season. In August 2003, he also won the UEFA Super Cup before cancelling his contract with Milan in November that year. After leaving Milan, he briefly returned to Brazil, playing for Cruzeiro in Belo Horizonte. He came close to signing for Bolton Wanderers in 2004, though Bolton eventually pulled out of the deal. Due to his poor performances throughout the season, he won the Bidone d&#x27;Oro Award in 2003, which is given to the worst Serie A player during a particular season.

===Cruzeiro===
Rivaldo decided to return to Brazil in early 2004, by appointment of coach Vanderlei Luxemburgo who convinced him to play for the club, becoming Cruzeiro&#x27;s major signing for the Copa Libertadores. However, his time with the team was very short, only eleven games and two goals. As reported by CNN, Rivaldo left the club after just two months due to the firing of Luxemburgo, Rivaldo&#x27;s mentor earlier in his career. Rivaldo stated, &quot;When he left, I preferred to leave as well. It was my decision because I consider Luxemburgo to be a special person.&quot;

===Olympiacos===
On 22 July 2004, Rivaldo joined Olympiacos of Superleague Greece. During the 2004–05 season he scored some stand out goals, one of them coming in his first derby against Panathinaikos that arguably turned out to be his most famous in an Olympiacos shirt: a bending free kick to send Olympiacos to victory over their eternal rivals. Another notable goal by Rivaldo came the following week in Olympiacos&#x27;s matchday 6 UEFA Champions League group game in England against eventual champions Liverpool F.C. where he scored a deft free-kick in front of the Kop and put the Greek giants ahead. However Olympiacos were eliminated after Liverpool talisman Steven Gerrard scored with a 25-yard half volley 3 minutes from full-time. In the last game of Rivaldo&#x27;s first season at Olympiacos, the club needed a victory in order to win the Alpha Ethniki championship, with Panathinaikos just one point behind. Olympiacos went on to beat Iraklis 0–1 in an away match in Thessaloniki, thanks to Rivaldo&#x27;s goal, and secured the championship.

Rivaldo renewed his contract with Olympiacos for a third year, despite now being 34 years old. In July 2006, Rivaldo announced that the 2006–07 season with Olympiacos would be his last in Europe, before returning to Brazil. However, he quickly changed his decision and decided to stay for another year. The 2006–2007 season saw him score 17 goals in 27 Superleague matches. Rivaldo scored 43 goals in 81 games for Olympiacos.

===AEK Athens===
Rivaldo was released by Olympiacos after a dispute with the chairman of the club, Sokratis Kokkalis, who decided that he was too old to continue with the club. Later that summer, he signed for Super League club AEK Athens on 29 May 2007. His first Super League goal with the Athens&#x27; club came through a penalty in their 3–0 win against Panionios. Rivaldo had another great season and the team. After the winning match against Olympiacos with 4–0, Rivaldo showed his four fingers to the camera.

Rivaldo had stated his intention to leave Greece if the ruling went in favour of Olympiakos and AEK Athens were not declared champions. He stated: &quot;A team that was not good enough to win the title on the pitch does not deserve the trophy.&quot;

===Bunyodkor===
Rivaldo announced on 25 August 2008 to a Greek Sport Radio Station that he agreed to continue his career at Bunyodkor in Uzbekistan, effective immediately, after what he described as an &quot;extremely tempting contract offer&quot;.

Rivaldo signed a two-year contract worth €10.2 million and later signed an extension to extend the contract to 2011. On his debut for Bunyodkor, Rivaldo scored both goals in a 2–0 win. In 2009, Rivaldo became the first player in the world to score one, then two, then three, then four goals in four consecutive matches. He scored one goal in the first match and two goals in the second match against Navbahor. In the third match on 25 June 2009, Rivaldo scored a hat trick in a 4–0 win against Metallurg. In the fourth match Bunyodkor beat Sogdiana Jizzakh 5–0 and Rivaldo scored four in 17 minutes. After the end of the 2009 season, Rivaldo won UFF Topscorer award, having scored 20 league goals, and was runner up for UFF Player of the Year award. He scored 33 goals for the club in total. Rivaldo announced on 11 August 2010 on Twitter that he had cancelled his contract with Bunyodkor.

===Return to Mogi Mirim===
On 18 November 2010, he announced he would be returning to Mogi Mirim, the club that he had started his career in the early 1990s, through his Social Networking site, saying: &quot;After sorting out a lot of things outside of the country, I have decided to play the Paulista 2011 for Mogi Mirim, of whom I am President.&quot; However, he joined São Paulo in January 2011.

===São Paulo===
On 23 January 2011, Rivaldo joined São Paulo. He scored on his debut for them in the First Division against Linense with a wonderful goal. The ball was sent over from the left hand side of the pitch, before Rivaldo controlled the ball and took it over a defender using his left knee, and finished at the near post. He spent most part of March 2011 tending injury, but came back for following fixtures such as a 1–1 draw with Palmeiras and a 2–1 win over Corinthians.

Rivaldo stated on his Twitter account that he would leave São Paulo by the end of the season: &quot;I just want to inform everybody that on Saturday, it&#x27;s going to be my last training session at São Paulo. I&#x27;ve been told by the club&#x27;s official that this is going to be my last season here.&quot; He added: &quot;I&#x27;m not saying goodbye to football yet. I still have a lot to accomplish. I just wish I could hang up my boots at the end of 2012.&quot;

===Kabuscorp===
Rivaldo joined Angolan club Kabuscorp in January 2012. On 18 March, Rivaldo scored a hat-trick against Recreativo Caala. Rivaldo left Kabuscorp in November 2012 after the expiration of his contract.

===São Caetano===
In January 2013, Rivaldo joined São Caetano of Brazil&#x27;s Serie B, signing a deal that ran to December. He scored his first goal for his new club in his debut against Corinthians on 9 February. During the following match against Bragantino Rivaldo once again scored, although his team lost 2–1. In November 2013, he left the club due to knee problems.

=== Second return to Mogi Mirim ===
In December 2013, Rivaldo joined Mogi Mirim, signing a deal that ran until 2015. His son Rivaldinho played for the club. Rivaldo had only made one league appearance for the club when he retired in July 2015.

===Retirement===
In March 2014, the Brazilian icon officially retired from football after a career which spanned more than 20 years, and he decided to remain as the president of Mogi Mirim to help run the club and to look after his son, Rivaldinho. In a released statement, Rivaldo commented: &quot;My history as a player has come to the end. With tears in my eyes today I would like to thank God, my family and all the support, the affection that I received during those 24 years as a player.&quot; However, he returned to the team in June 2015. On 14 July 2015, Rivaldo and Rivaldinho scored goals in the same match for the first time as Mogi Mirim beat Macaé 3–1.

On 18 January 2019, SCC Mohammédia announced Rivaldo as their new technical director and coach for the following season. The player denied that a deal was made, as he signed a pre-contract in which the club must achieve promotion from National (third tier in the Moroccan league).

==International career==
In 1993, he debuted for the Brazil national football team, scoring the only goal in a friendly match against Mexico. He was selected to represent Brazil at the 1996 Summer Olympics. The Brazilian team won the bronze medal, but Rivaldo was not selected for the third place playoff.

Rivaldo returned to the Brazil national team for the 1998 FIFA World Cup, where he scored three goals en route to the final, including two in the 3–2 quarter-final win against Denmark. Brazil were defeated 3–0 by hosts France in final, failing to defend their 1994 title. Rivaldo had not been a part of the victorious Brazilian team at the 1997 Copa América tournament, but was part of the successful defence of that title at the 1999 Copa América. Rivaldo finished the tournament as the top scorer, with five goals; one being an equaliser from a free-kick in a 2–1 win over Argentina in the quarter-finals, and two in the 3–0 victory over Uruguay in the final. He was named the Most Valuable Player of the tournament.

Rivaldo had been the centre of criticism when Brazil did not win tournaments, ever since the 1996 Olympics. In the 1–0 win against Colombia in November 2000, Rivaldo was booed so heavily that he threatened to retire from playing for his country.

The zenith and nadir of Rivaldo&#x27;s national team career came at the 2002 FIFA World Cup, hosted in South Korea and Japan, where he was able to erase the disappointment of the previous World Cup Final defeat, helping Brazil win their fifth World Cup. Featuring in an attacking trio with Ronaldo and Ronaldinho, dubbed &quot;the three R&#x27;s&quot;, Rivaldo scored in the first five games while Ronaldo scored in four matches. Despite a successful tournament, Rivaldo was involved in a controversial incident against Turkey. Near the end of the match, with the ball out of play, Turkish defender Hakan Ünsal kicked a ball towards Rivaldo, who was waiting at the corner flag. The ball struck his thigh, but Rivaldo fell to the ground clutching his face. The referee sent the Turkish player off with a second yellow card. After a video review, Rivaldo was fined 11,670 Swiss francs by FIFA.

Rivaldo&#x27;s goal against Belgium in the second round prompted Belgian coach Robert Waseige to name him as the deciding factor. Ronaldinho assisted Rivaldo to score the equaliser against England in the quarter-finals before Ronaldinho scored the winning goal in a 2–1 victory. Brazil met Germany in the final, and went on to win the tournament with a 2–0 victory, courtesy of two goals by Ronaldo with Rivaldo involved in both goals. The first came after Rivaldo&#x27;s shot was saved by German goalkeeper Oliver Kahn with Ronaldo scoring the rebound, and the second saw Rivaldo fool the German defence with a dummy as the ball ran on to Ronaldo who finished. Rivaldo was named by Brazil coach Luiz Felipe Scolari as the best player of the tournament. Rivaldo along with Ronaldo and Ronaldinho were named in the FIFA World Cup All-Star Team.

Rivaldo&#x27;s last cap was on 19 November 2003 in Curitiba in a 3–3 draw with Uruguay. He played 79 minutes before being substituted for Luís Fabiano. He had scored his last goal just three days earlier from the penalty spot in a 1–1 draw with Peru. In his time with the national side, Rivaldo won 74 caps, and scored 35 goals.

==Style of play==
Regarded as one of the best players of his generation and also one of the greatest players of all time, Rivaldo was a skillful and creative player known for his dribbling ability, use of feints, balance, and close ball control. Despite his height, he was also extremely agile. A dead-ball specialist, Rivaldo was renowned for his bending free kicks and penalty taking, as well as his ability to score from distance with powerful strikes. Left footed and possessing excellent technique, he was also known for his ball striking from volleys, and for having a penchant for scoring from bicycle kicks.

Although he was not a true striker, Rivaldo was a prolific goalscorer, capable of playing in several creative and offensive positions: during the prime of his career, a period where he won the Ballon d&#x27;Or and was named FIFA World Player of the Year, he was often deployed in a playmaking attacking midfield role as a classic number 10, due to his vision and passing ability, which made him an excellent assist provider. He could also function as a second striker, or as a left winger, a position which he often occupied earlier in his career, due to his acceleration and crossing ability. Although predominantly left footed, he was capable of playing on either wing.

In 2002, John Carlin of &quot;The Guardian&quot; noted that Rivaldo &quot;combines to dazzling effect the two essential qualities of the ideal footballer: artistry and efficiency.&quot; His colleague, Rob Smyth, echoed his views in 2008, commenting: &quot;if you could marry British will with continental skill, you would have the perfect footballer. Such a mixed recipe was thrillingly in evidence in Diego Maradona. Since then, however, perhaps only Rivaldo has fused the two qualities,&quot; noting that like the Argentinian, the Brazilian had &quot;bronca&quot; (the word used repeatedly in Maradona&#x27;s autobiography to refer to &quot;anger, fury, hatred, resentment, bitter discontent). Former Dutch international Ruud Gullit believed that Rivaldo&#x27;s ability and qualities were often overlooked, as &quot;he played in the same era as Brazilian counterparts Ronaldo and Ronaldinho.&quot;

==Career statistics==

===Club===


===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list Brazil&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Rivaldo goal.&quot;

==Honours==

Santa Cruz
*Campeonato Pernambucano:1990

Palmeiras
* Brazilian Série A: 1994
* Campeonato Paulista: 1996
* Copa do Brasil runner-up: 1996

Barcelona
* La Liga: 1997–98, 1998–99
* Copa del Rey: 1997–98
* UEFA Super Cup: 1997

Milan
* Coppa Italia: 2002–03
* UEFA Champions League: 2002–03
* UEFA Super Cup: 2003

Cruzeiro
* Campeonato Mineiro: 2004

Olympiacos
* Alpha Ethniki/Super League Greece: 2004–05, 2005–06, 2006–07
* Greek Cup: 2004–05, 2005–06

Bunyodkor
* Uzbek League: 2008, 2009, 2010
* Uzbekistan Cup: 2008, 2010

Brazil U23
* Summer Olympics Bronze Medalist: 1996

Brazil
* FIFA World Cup: 2002; runner-up: 1998
* Copa América: 1999
* Confederations Cup: 1997
* Umbro Cup: 1995

Individual
* Brazilian Football Museum Hall of Fame
* Brazilian Bola de Prata (2): 1993, 1994
* La Liga Best Foreign Player: 1997–98
* La Liga top assist provider: 2000–01
* Copa del Rey Top scorer: 1997–98
* FIFA World Cup All-Star Team (2): 1998, 2002
* ESM Team of the Year (2): 1998–99, 1999–2000
* World Soccer Player of the Year: 1999
* Onze d&#x27;Or: 1999
* Ballon d&#x27;Or: 1999
* FIFA World Player of the Year: 1999
* Copa América Golden Boot: 1999
* Copa América Golden Ball: 1999
* Trofeo EFE: 1999
* UEFA Champions League Top scorer: 1999–2000
* IFFHS World&#x27;s Top Goal Scorer: 2000
* FIFA World Player of the Year: Bronze award 2000
* FIFA World Cup Silver Shoe: 2002
* FIFA XI: 2002
* FIFA 100
* Alpha Ethniki Best Foreign Player (2): 2006, 2007
* Alpha Ethniki top assist provider: 2008
* Uzbek League Top scorer: 2009
* Uzbek League top assist provider: 2009

== See also ==

* List of men&#x27;s footballers with the most official appearances
* List of association football families
==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q483577" start="0" end="28" title="Rivaldo" label="Rivaldo Vítor Borba Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q483577" start="69" end="76" title="Rivaldo" label="Rivaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="100" end="110" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="135" end="155" title="attacking midfielder" label="attacking midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="170" end="184" title="second striker" label="second striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="216" end="231" title="wide midfielder" label="wide midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="240" end="246" title="winger (association football)" label="winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756277" start="370" end="377" title="Curl (football)" label="bending"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="378" end="388" title="Free kick (association football)" label="free kicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q860430" start="390" end="402" title="bicycle kick" label="bicycle kick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="405" end="411" title="Dummy (football)#Association football" label="feints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141428" start="481" end="493" title="Assist (association football)" label="create goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="515" end="531" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q182529" start="546" end="575" title="FIFA World Player of the Year" label="FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="602" end="606" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="614" end="622" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="761" end="775" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="781" end="802" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="811" end="827" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q508440" start="885" end="895" title="Santa Cruz Futebol Clube" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419887" start="924" end="934" title="Mogi Mirim Esporte Clube" label="Mogi Mirim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35933" start="952" end="963" title="Sport Club Corinthians Paulista" label="Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q80964" start="969" end="978" title="Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras" label="Palmeiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q8760" start="1026" end="1048" title="Deportivo de La Coruña" label="Deportivo de La Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="1118" end="1127" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q189686" start="1211" end="1227" title="Patrick Kluivert" label="Patrick Kluivert"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="1249" end="1256" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q223368" start="1267" end="1271" title="1997–98 La Liga" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q644045" start="1276" end="1280" title="1998–99 La Liga" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593472" start="1297" end="1301" title="1998 Copa del Rey Final" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="1302" end="1314" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="1341" end="1349" title="Hattrick (football)" label="hattrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q10333" start="1358" end="1366" title="Valencia CF" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q727058" start="1414" end="1443" title="2001–02 UEFA Champions League" label="2001-02 UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386884" start="1658" end="1689" title="List of FC Barcelona records and statistics" label="highest goalscorers of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="1733" end="1743" title="A.C. Milan" label="A.C. Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169918" start="1757" end="1769" title="Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="1778" end="1799" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q188277" start="1949" end="1957" title="Cruzeiro Esporte Clube" label="Cruzeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q19628" start="1959" end="1969" title="Olympiacos F.C." label="Olympiacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q201584" start="1971" end="1981" title="AEK Athens F.C." label="AEK Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q628763" start="1983" end="1992" title="FC Bunyodkor" label="Bunyodkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38568" start="2010" end="2019" title="São Paulo FC" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q693297" start="2021" end="2030" title="Kabuscorp S.C.P." label="Kabuscorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q290940" start="2035" end="2046" title="Associação Desportiva São Caetano" label="São Caetano"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="2292" end="2298" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2310" end="2336" title="Brazil national football team#Top goalscorers" label="seventh highest goalscorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="2394" end="2413" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q633926" start="2426" end="2443" title="1999 Copa América" label="1999 Copa América"/>
<link wikidata="Q529207" start="2531" end="2538" title="Ronaldo (Brazilian footballer)" label="Ronaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39444" start="2543" end="2553" title="Ronaldinho" label="Ronaldinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="2561" end="2580" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q368974" start="2684" end="2712" title="FIFA World Cup All-Star Team" label="FIFA World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2792" end="2830" title="Brazil national football team#Brazilian Football Museum – Hall of Fame" label="Brazilian Football Museum Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q693827" start="2915" end="2922" title="favelas" label="favelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="3023" end="3037" title="malnutrition" label="malnourishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550742" start="3045" end="3058" title="Genu varum" label="bowleggedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9193794" start="3193" end="3217" title="Paulistano Futebol Clube" label="Paulistano Futebol Clube"/>
<link wikidata="Q508440" start="3526" end="3536" title="Santa Cruz Futebol Clube" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="3586" end="3595" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419887" start="3616" end="3626" title="Mogi Mirim Esporte Clube" label="Mogi Mirim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35933" start="3720" end="3731" title="Sport Club Corinthians Paulista" label="Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="3739" end="3753" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="first division"/>
<link wikidata="Q80964" start="3842" end="3851" title="Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras" label="Palmeiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348155" start="3934" end="3953" title="Campeonato Paulista" label="Campeonato Paulista"/>
<link wikidata="Q106611482" start="3957" end="3961" title="1996 Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras season" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q664707" start="4041" end="4056" title="Placar Magazine" label="Placar Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q833847" start="4072" end="4084" title="Bola de Ouro" label="Bola de Ouro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2693" start="4165" end="4170" title="Parma F.C." label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342612" start="4227" end="4233" title="Alexandre da Silva Mariano" label="Amaral"/>
<link wikidata="Q8760" start="4350" end="4369" title="Deportivo de La Coruña" label="Deportivo La Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="4373" end="4380" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q721283" start="4401" end="4411" title="1996–97 La Liga" label="one season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="4659" end="4671" title="FC Barcelona" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811518" start="4685" end="4698" title="transfer deal" label="transfer deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q189097" start="4730" end="4737" title="Spanish peseta" label="pesetas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189587" start="4782" end="4794" title="Bobby Robson" label="Bobby Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q294501" start="4841" end="4856" title="Steve McManaman" label="Steve McManaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="5035" end="5045" title="Double (association football)" label="The Double"/>
<link wikidata="Q223368" start="5049" end="5056" title="1997–98 La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q615973" start="5061" end="5073" title="1997–98 Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q644045" start="5078" end="5082" title="1998–99 La Liga" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q182529" start="5230" end="5259" title="FIFA World Player of the Year" label="FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628550" start="5285" end="5301" title="1999 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q279736" start="5339" end="5355" title="1998–99 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q159848" start="5407" end="5415" title="Camp Nou" label="Camp Nou"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="5422" end="5439" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q188632" start="5448" end="5457" title="Roy Keane" label="Roy Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488480" start="5541" end="5553" title="1999–2000 La Liga" label="third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q207431" start="5598" end="5612" title="Louis van Gaal" label="Louis van Gaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q330050" start="5797" end="5813" title="1999–2000 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q677224" start="5902" end="5916" title="2000–01 La Liga" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q456097" start="6050" end="6066" title="2000–01 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q10333" start="6076" end="6087" title="Valencia CF" label="Valencia CF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6106" end="6115" title="Hat-trick#Association football" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q727058" start="6198" end="6222" title="2001–02 UEFA Champions League" label="2001–02 Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756277" start="6302" end="6309" title="Curl (football)" label="bending"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6427" end="6432" title="Dummy (football)#Association football" label="feint"/>
<link wikidata="Q845769" start="6640" end="6651" title="Penalty area" label="18-yard box"/>
<link wikidata="Q860430" start="6677" end="6689" title="bicycle kick" label="bicycle kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444065" start="6850" end="6866" title="goal celebration" label="goal celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469442" start="6900" end="6912" title="Joan Gaspart" label="Joan Gaspart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386884" start="7481" end="7512" title="List of FC Barcelona records and statistics" label="highest goalscorers of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="7577" end="7584" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="7590" end="7600" title="A.C. Milan" label="A.C. Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q901380" start="7633" end="7645" title="2002–03 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q455978" start="7654" end="7670" title="2002–03 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857595" start="7678" end="7692" title="2002–03 A.C. Milan season" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q947567" start="7726" end="7740" title="2003 UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q188277" start="7870" end="7878" title="Cruzeiro EC" label="Cruzeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="7882" end="7896" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="7927" end="7943" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q857020" start="8065" end="8082" title="Bidone d&amp;#x27;Oro" label="Bidone d&amp;#x27;Oro"/>
<link wikidata="Q314281" start="8260" end="8280" title="Vanderlei Luxemburgo" label="Vanderlei Luxemburgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q184795" start="8368" end="8385" title="Copa Libertadores" label="Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q19628" start="8805" end="8815" title="Olympiacos F.C." label="Olympiacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q235114" start="8819" end="8837" title="Superleague Greece" label="Superleague Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="9038" end="9047" title="Direct free kick" label="free kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="9193" end="9214" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="9264" end="9278" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1891050" start="9328" end="9331" title="Spion Kop (stadiums)" label="Kop"/>
<link wikidata="Q459830" start="9424" end="9438" title="Steven Gerrard" label="Steven Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q592241" start="9705" end="9712" title="Iraklis Thessaloniki F.C." label="Iraklis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="9737" end="9749" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608516" start="9949" end="9963" title="2006–07 in Greek football" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670215" start="10339" end="10356" title="Sokratis Kokkalis" label="Sokratis Kokkalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201584" start="10468" end="10478" title="AEK Athens F.C." label="AEK Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933988" start="10505" end="10517" title="2007–08 Superleague Greece" label="Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="10532" end="10538" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q460494" start="10598" end="10607" title="Panionios F.C." label="Panionios"/>
<link wikidata="Q628763" start="11132" end="11141" title="FC Bunyodkor" label="Bunyodkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q621112" start="11904" end="11907" title="Uzbekistan Football Federation" label="UFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419887" start="12235" end="12245" title="Mogi Mirim Esporte Clube" label="Mogi Mirim"/>
<link wikidata="Q38568" start="12521" end="12530" title="São Paulo FC" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348155" start="12650" end="12664" title="Campeonato Paulista" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136479" start="12673" end="12680" title="Clube Atlético Linense" label="Linense"/>
<link wikidata="Q693297" start="13547" end="13556" title="Kabuscorp S.C." label="Kabuscorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q290940" start="13769" end="13780" title="Associação Desportiva São Caetano" label="São Caetano"/>
<link wikidata="Q610175" start="13798" end="13805" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="Serie B"/>
<link wikidata="Q35933" start="13907" end="13918" title="Sport Club Corinthians Paulista" label="Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q541744" start="13969" end="13979" title="Clube Atlético Bragantino" label="Bragantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419887" start="14162" end="14172" title="Mogi Mirim Esporte Clube" label="Mogi Mirim"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669370" start="14218" end="14228" title="Rivaldinho" label="Rivaldinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669370" start="14575" end="14585" title="Rivaldinho" label="Rivaldinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669370" start="14914" end="14924" title="Rivaldinho" label="Rivaldinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028538" start="14994" end="14999" title="Macaé Esporte Futebol Clube" label="Macaé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058221" start="15026" end="15040" title="SCC Mohammédia" label="SCC Mohammédia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2953225" start="15241" end="15249" title="Amateur National Championship (Moroccan football)" label="National"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="15341" end="15370" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="15399" end="15413" title="friendly match" label="friendly match"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="15422" end="15428" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="15473" end="15493" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q873364" start="15522" end="15534" title="bronze medal" label="bronze medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="15648" end="15667" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="15771" end="15778" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="15814" end="15820" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q622842" start="15935" end="15963" title="1997 Copa América" label="1997 Copa América tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q633926" start="16025" end="16042" title="1999 Copa América" label="1999 Copa América"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="16170" end="16179" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="16235" end="16242" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="16274" end="16294" title="Most Valuable Player" label="Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q212564" start="16446" end="16454" title="Colombia national football team" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="16634" end="16653" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="16665" end="16676" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q529207" start="16852" end="16859" title="Ronaldo (Brazilian footballer)" label="Ronaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39444" start="16864" end="16874" title="Ronaldinho" label="Ronaldinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q483856" start="17082" end="17088" title="Turkey national football team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378770" start="17161" end="17172" title="Hakan Ünsal" label="Hakan Ünsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="17432" end="17443" title="Swiss franc" label="Swiss franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="17483" end="17490" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q931437" start="17534" end="17548" title="Robert Waseige" label="Robert Waseige"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="17644" end="17651" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="17745" end="17752" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q131261" start="17963" end="17974" title="Oliver Kahn" label="Oliver Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313922" start="18067" end="18072" title="Dummy (football)" label="dummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191634" start="18151" end="18170" title="Luiz Felipe Scolari" label="Luiz Felipe Scolari"/>
<link wikidata="Q368974" start="18269" end="18297" title="FIFA World Cup All-Star Team" label="FIFA World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4361" start="18351" end="18359" title="Curitiba" label="Curitiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="18379" end="18386" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q192963" start="18438" end="18450" title="Luís Fabiano" label="Luís Fabiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q212166" start="18545" end="18549" title="Peru national football team" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18809" end="18818" title="Dribbling#Association football" label="dribbling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18835" end="18841" title="Dummy (football)#Association football" label="feints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756277" start="18978" end="18985" title="Curl (football)" label="bending"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="18986" end="18996" title="Direct free kick" label="free kicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q279532" start="19001" end="19008" title="Penalty kick (association football)" label="penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q860430" start="19231" end="19243" title="bicycle kick" label="bicycle kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="19440" end="19456" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q182529" start="19471" end="19500" title="FIFA World Player of the Year" label="FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19529" end="19539" title="Playmaker#Advanced playmakers" label="playmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="19540" end="19558" title="attacking midfield" label="attacking midfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581895" start="19569" end="19586" title="Squad number (association football)" label="classic number 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141428" start="19655" end="19661" title="Assist (association football)" label="assist"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="19700" end="19714" title="second striker" label="second striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="19724" end="19735" title="Winger (association football)" label="left winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427106" start="19823" end="19831" title="cross (football)" label="crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173972" start="20643" end="20654" title="Ruud Gullit" label="Ruud Gullit"/>
<link wikidata="Q628286" start="21026" end="21049" title="Campeonato Pernambucano" label="Campeonato Pernambucano"/>
<link wikidata="Q628286" start="21050" end="21054" title="Campeonato Pernambucano" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="21068" end="21085" title="Brazilian Série A" label="Brazilian Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q506977" start="21087" end="21091" title="1994 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348155" start="21094" end="21113" title="Campeonato Paulista" label="Campeonato Paulista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348155" start="21115" end="21119" title="Campeonato Paulista" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q843989" start="21122" end="21136" title="Copa do Brasil" label="Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648831" start="21148" end="21152" title="1996 Copa do Brasil" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="21166" end="21173" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q223368" start="21175" end="21182" title="1997–98 La Liga" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q644045" start="21184" end="21191" title="1998–99 La Liga" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="21194" end="21206" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q615973" start="21208" end="21215" title="1997–98 Copa del Rey" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="21218" end="21232" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q259310" start="21234" end="21238" title="1997 UEFA Super Cup" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q169918" start="21248" end="21260" title="Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q901380" start="21262" end="21269" title="2002–03 Coppa Italia" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="21272" end="21293" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q455978" start="21295" end="21302" title="2002–03 UEFA Champions League" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="21305" end="21319" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q947567" start="21321" end="21325" title="2003 UEFA Super Cup" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q731877" start="21338" end="21356" title="Campeonato Mineiro" label="Campeonato Mineiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q731877" start="21358" end="21362" title="Campeonato Mineiro" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q235114" start="21377" end="21410" title="Super League Greece" label="Alpha Ethniki/Super League Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q980822" start="21412" end="21419" title="2004–05 Alpha Ethniki" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720891" start="21421" end="21428" title="2005–06 Alpha Ethniki" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608516" start="21430" end="21437" title="2006–07 Super League Greece" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122820" start="21440" end="21449" title="Greek Football Cup" label="Greek Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q27917" start="21451" end="21458" title="2004–05 Greek Football Cup" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q28690" start="21460" end="21467" title="2005–06 Greek Football Cup" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q856855" start="21481" end="21493" title="Uzbek League" label="Uzbek League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2950078" start="21495" end="21499" title="2008 Uzbek League" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q973198" start="21501" end="21505" title="2009 Uzbek League" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857555" start="21507" end="21511" title="2010 Uzbek League" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508046" start="21514" end="21528" title="Uzbekistan Cup" label="Uzbekistan Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21530" end="21534" title="2008 Uzbekistan Cup" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618755" start="21536" end="21540" title="2010 Uzbekistan Cup" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="21555" end="21570" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q754575" start="21588" end="21592" title="Football at the 1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="21603" end="21617" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="21619" end="21623" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="21636" end="21640" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q178750" start="21643" end="21655" title="Copa América" label="Copa América"/>
<link wikidata="Q633926" start="21657" end="21661" title="1999 Copa América" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q171789" start="21664" end="21682" title="Confederations Cup" label="Confederations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q166551" start="21684" end="21688" title="1997 FIFA Confederations Cup" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999390" start="21691" end="21700" title="Umbro Cup" label="Umbro Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125632" start="21721" end="21759" title="Brazilian Football Museum Hall of Fame" label="Brazilian Football Museum Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q833847" start="21772" end="21785" title="Bola de Prata (Brazil)" label="Bola de Prata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232365" start="21804" end="21831" title="Don Balón Award" label="La Liga Best Foreign Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="21843" end="21850" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="21882" end="21894" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q615973" start="21907" end="21914" title="1997–98 Copa del Rey" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q368974" start="21917" end="21945" title="FIFA World Cup All-Star Team" label="FIFA World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q370379" start="21964" end="21984" title="ESM Team of the Year" label="ESM Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q729035" start="22011" end="22042" title="World Soccer Player of the Year" label="World Soccer Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049896" start="22051" end="22065" title="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="22074" end="22090" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628550" start="22092" end="22096" title="1999 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q182529" start="22099" end="22128" title="FIFA World Player of the Year" label="FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q961697" start="22130" end="22134" title="1999 FIFA World Player of the Year" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22137" end="22161" title="Copa América records and statistics#General statistics by tournament" label="Copa América Golden Boot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22163" end="22167" title="1999 Copa América#Awards" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473393" start="22203" end="22213" title="Trofeo EFE" label="Trofeo EFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304695" start="22222" end="22254" title="UEFA Champions League top goalscorer" label="UEFA Champions League Top scorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q330050" start="22256" end="22265" title="1999–2000 UEFA Champions League" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q104783694" start="22268" end="22302" title="IFFHS World&amp;#x27;s Top Goal Scorer" label="IFFHS World&amp;#x27;s Top Goal Scorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182529" start="22311" end="22340" title="FIFA World Player of the Year" label="FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q994941" start="22355" end="22359" title="2000 FIFA World Player of the Year" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q368974" start="22362" end="22388" title="FIFA World Cup Silver Shoe" label="FIFA World Cup Silver Shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="22397" end="22404" title="FIFA XI" label="FIFA XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="22413" end="22421" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22424" end="22457" title="Greek Footballer of the Year#Best foreign player" label="Alpha Ethniki Best Foreign Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720891" start="22463" end="22467" title="2005–06 Alpha Ethniki" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608516" start="22469" end="22473" title="2006–07 Superleague Greece" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q235114" start="22476" end="22489" title="Alpha Ethniki" label="Alpha Ethniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933988" start="22511" end="22515" title="2007–08 Super League Greece" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q856855" start="22518" end="22530" title="Uzbek League" label="Uzbek League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22543" end="22547" title="Uzbek League 2009#Season statistics" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q856855" start="22550" end="22562" title="Uzbek League" label="Uzbek League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22584" end="22588" title="Uzbek League 2009#Season statistics" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007841" start="22608" end="22673" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with the most official appearances" label="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with the most official appearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606291" start="22676" end="22713" title="List of association football families" label="List of association football families"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258949" wikidata="Q931483" url="?curid=258949" title="Legal fiction">
<text>A legal fiction is a construct used in the law where a thing is taken to be true, which is not in fact true, in order to achieve an outcome. Legal fictions can be employed by the courts or found in legislation.

Legal fictions are different from legal presumptions which assume a certain state of facts until the opposite is proved, such as the presumption of legitimacy.

The term &quot;legal fiction&quot; is sometimes used in a pejorative way. Jeremy Bentham was a famous historical critic of legal fictions. Proponents of legal fictions, particularly of their use historically, identify legal fictions as &quot;scaffolding around a building under construction&quot;.

==Common law examples==
===Adoption===
Child adoption is a legal fiction in that the adoptive parents become the legal parents, notwithstanding the lack of a biological relationship. Once an order or judgment of adoption is entered, the biological parents become legal strangers to the child, legally no longer related nor with any rights related to the child. Conversely, the adoptive parents are legally considered to be parents of the adopted child. A new birth certificate reflecting this is issued, which is a legal fiction.

=== Doctrine of survival ===

If two or more people die within a period of time or in a manner that renders it impossible to tell the order in which they died, the older of the two is considered to have died first. This is in order to safeguard the operation of certain general legal rules, e.g. in inheritance law, where the younger person will inherit the older, hence being able to pass on. If a parent dies alongside a child, who has a child of his/her own, the rule of the elder predeceasing the child will allow the grandchild (typically) to inherit both, the parent directly and grandparent indirectly, with the parent instantaneously inheriting and then bequeathing. 

The doctrine of survival, although still existing in England, has been abolished in many U.S. states by the Uniform Simultaneous Death Act.

=== Doe and Roe ===
The use of John Doe or Jane Roe to identify an undisclosed party in a lawsuit is a type of legal fiction.

The fiction of Doe and Roe being the guardians of undisclosed parties who wish to bring suit, or the names of parties unknown, remains in some jurisdictions although not in England. 

The fiction about Doe being left homeless by Roe, used often in property law, however, has been abolished in every common law jurisdiction. 

===Ejectment===

The common law had a procedure whereby title to land could be put in direct issue, called the &quot;writ of right&quot;. The defendant could insist on trial by &quot;wager of battle&quot;, that is trial by combat, a judicially sanctioned duel. To avoid the plaintiff staking life and limb, a tale was told in the pleadings about how one John Doe leased land from the plaintiff but was ousted by Richard Roe, who claimed a contrary lease from the defendant. Such events would lead to the &quot;mixed action in ejectment&quot;, a procedure to determine title via trial by jury. This is the origin of the names &quot;John Doe&quot; and &quot;Richard Roe&quot; for anonymous parties. The fiction of Doe, Roe, and the leases was not challenged by the parties unless they wished to stake their life on a trial by combat. Wager of battle fell into disuse by the end of the thirteenth century though it was not abolished in England until 1819.

=== Reasonable man ===
In cases where the court must determine whether a standard has been reached, such as whether a defendant has been negligent, the court frequently uses the legal fiction of the &quot;reasonable man&quot;. This is known as the &quot;objective test&quot;, and is far more common than the &quot;subjective test&quot; where the court seeks the viewpoint of the parties (or &quot;subjects&quot;). Sometimes, the court may apply a &quot;mixed test&quot;, as in the House of Lords&#x27; decision in &quot;DPP v Camplin&quot; 1978.

== English examples ==

===Jurisdiction of the Exchequer===

In England, a legal fiction extended the jurisdiction of the Court of the Exchequer to all types of cases involving debt. The Exchequer had a much lighter caseload than the King&#x27;s Bench and other courts in England. Litigants would commence an action in the Exchequer Court by pleading that they owed money to the King, which they could not pay because their debtor had in turn wrongfully withheld payment to them. The debt owed to the King became a legal fiction in that the original debtor was not entitled to controvert this allegation in order to oust the Exchequer from jurisdiction.

===Jurisdiction of the Court of King&#x27;s Bench===

The Bill of Middlesex was a legal fiction used by the Court of King&#x27;s Bench to gain jurisdiction over cases traditionally in the remit of the Court of Common Pleas. Hinging on the King&#x27;s Bench&#x27;s retaining criminal jurisdiction over the county of Middlesex, the Bill allowed it to take cases traditionally in the remit of other common law courts by claiming that the defendant had committed trespass in Middlesex. Once the defendant was in custody, the trespass complaint would be quietly dropped and other complaints (such as debt or detinue) would be substituted.

===Resignation from Parliament===

In 1623, a rule was declared that Members of Parliament were given a trust to represent their constituencies and, therefore, were not at liberty to resign. However, an MP who accepted an &quot;office of profit&quot; from the Crown (including appointment as a minister) was obliged to leave the House and seek re-election, because it was thought their independence might be compromised if they were in the monarch&#x27;s pay. 

The device was invented that the MP who wished to quit applied to the Crown for the post of &quot;Steward of the Chiltern Hundreds&quot; or &quot;Steward of the Manor of Northstead&quot; with no duties or income, but legally an office of profit in the monarch&#x27;s gift. The first MP to avail themself of the Chiltern Hundreds to leave Parliament was John Pitt in 1751. The requirement for ministerial re-election has been abolished, but the &quot;Chiltern Hundreds&quot; mechanism remains to enable MPs to resign.

=== 2019 prorogation controversy ===
The 2019 UK prorogation controversy was resolved through the use of legal fiction. Although the United Kingdom Supreme Court found that Prime Minister Boris Johnson&#x27;s prorogation of parliament had been unlawful, it lacked the authority to order the recall of Parliament. Instead, the legal fiction was maintained that Parliament had never been prorogued; any references to prorogation were expunged from the record, and Parliament was instead recorded as being adjourned, enabling it to reassemble the next day.

== Australian examples ==

=== Mabo v Queensland ===
Some legal fictions have been invalidated due to increased historical knowledge and changes in social norms, as in the &quot;Mabo&quot; case, where the High Court of Australia rejected previous authorities that held that Indigenous Australians were too &quot;low in the scale of social organization&quot; at the time of British settlement to be capable of holding title to land.

==Philosophical arguments==
William Blackstone defended legal fictions, observing that legislation is never free from the iron law of unintended consequences. Using the metaphor of an ancient castle, Blackstone opined:

Henry Maine, on the other hand, argued that legal fictions seem an ornate outgrowth of the law that ought to be removed by legislation. Jeremy Bentham sharply criticised the notion of legal fictions, saying that &quot;fictions are to law what fraud is to trade.&quot;

==Use in fiction==
In the novel &quot;Joan and Peter&quot; (1918) by H. G. Wells, Peter&#x27;s parents die in a sailing accident. As it is not known which parent dies first, a legal fiction is applied maintaining that the husband, being a man and therefore stronger, lived longer which results in the father&#x27;s will determining Peter&#x27;s legal guardian. Later in the novel a witness to the accident declares seeing the mother floundering some time after the father has disappeared, and so the legal fiction is overturned and the mother&#x27;s will is followed, providing Peter with a new legal guardian. Wells was in error as to the English law, which actually presumes that the older person died first.

In Act II, Scene 1 of Gilbert and Sullivan&#x27;s &quot;The Gondoliers&quot;, Giuseppe Palmieri (who serves jointly with his brother Marco as King of Barataria) requests that he and his brother be recognized individually, that they might receive individual portions of food as they have two independent appetites. He is turned down because the joint rule &quot;... is a legal fiction, and legal fictions are solemn things.&quot;

In the novel &quot;Lud-in-the-Mist&quot; (1926) by Hope Mirrlees, the concept of the legal fiction as a secular substitute for spiritual mysteries and magical illusions is a central theme. Legal fictions in the novel include referring to fairy fruit, mention of which is taboo, as woven silk fabric in order to allow the law to regulate it; and declaring members of the country&#x27;s Senate &quot;dead in the eyes of the law&quot; in order to remove them from office, since the senators serve for life.

==Limitations on use==

Legal fictions derive their legitimacy from tradition and precedent, rather than formal standing as a source of law. Historically, many legal fictions were created as ad hoc remedies forged to meet a harsh or an unforeseen situation. Conventions and practices over the centuries have imparted a degree of stability both to the institution of legal fictions and to specific legal fictions (such as adoptions and corporate personhood) that have been repeatedly invoked in judicial precedents. While judiciaries retain discretion in the use of legal fictions, some general propositions regarding the appropriateness of using legal fictions might be expressed as follows:

* A legal fiction should not be employed to defeat law or result in illegality: it has been always stressed that a legal fiction should not be employed where it would result in the violation of any legal rule or moral injunction. In &quot;Sinclair v. Brougham&quot; 1914 AC 378 the House of Lords refused to extend the juridical basis of a quasi-contract to a case of an borrowing by a limited company, since it would sanction the evasion of the rules of public policy forbidding an borrowing by a company. In general, if it appears that a legal fiction is being used to circumvent an existing rule, the courts are entitled to disregard that fiction and look at the real facts. The doctrine of &quot;piercing the corporate veil&quot; is applied under those circumstances.
* Legal fiction should operate for the purpose for which it was created and should not be extended beyond its legitimate field.

== Codified legal fictions ==
Some legal fictions are codified in statutory or regulatory law. A person having ordinary skill in the art is an example of such a legal fiction.

== See also ==
* &quot;Ad hoc&quot;
* Copyright traps
* &quot;De jure&quot;
* &quot;En ventre sa mere&quot;
* Fiction
* Person having ordinary skill in the art

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q931483" start="2" end="15" title="Legal fiction" label="legal fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132382" start="246" end="264" title="Presumption" label="legal presumptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q881281" start="345" end="370" title="presumption of legitimacy" label="presumption of legitimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="447" end="461" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q233320" start="615" end="626" title="scaffolding" label="scaffolding"/>
<link wikidata="Q41176" start="636" end="644" title="building" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="651" end="663" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="711" end="725" title="Adoption" label="Child adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q200303" start="1502" end="1517" title="inheritance law" label="inheritance law"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="1969" end="1979" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885082" start="1988" end="2018" title="Uniform Simultaneous Death Act" label="Uniform Simultaneous Death Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q302057" start="2163" end="2174" title="John Doe" label="Doe and Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2321" end="2328" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="2495" end="2505" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001059" start="2591" end="2595" title="writ" label="writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q788874" start="2688" end="2703" title="trial by combat" label="trial by combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="2729" end="2733" title="duel" label="duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="2748" end="2757" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q302057" start="2828" end="2836" title="John Doe" label="John Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="2937" end="2946" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350116" start="3000" end="3009" title="ejectment" label="ejectment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="3052" end="3057" title="trial (law)" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="3061" end="3065" title="jury" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q308859" start="3152" end="3161" title="Anonymity" label="anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3407" end="3414" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="3565" end="3574" title="negligence" label="negligent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900682" start="3633" end="3647" title="reasonable man" label="reasonable man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657183" start="3682" end="3696" title="objective test" label="objective test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058404" start="3909" end="3929" title="Judicial functions of the House of Lords" label="House of Lords&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711862" start="3948" end="3961" title="DPP v Camplin" label="DPP v Camplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4039" end="4046" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137765" start="4110" end="4119" title="Exchequer of Pleas" label="Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="4152" end="4156" title="debt" label="debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178387" start="4209" end="4226" title="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench (England)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911502" start="4688" end="4705" title="Bill of Middlesex" label="Bill of Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178387" start="4738" end="4764" title="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench (England)" label="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q206634" start="4831" end="4852" title="Court of Common Pleas (England)" label="Court of Common Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="4945" end="4954" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="5334" end="5355" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q659974" start="5369" end="5374" title="Trust (sociology)" label="trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797505" start="5825" end="5857" title="Steward of the Chiltern Hundreds" label="Steward of the Chiltern Hundreds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598455" start="5873" end="5907" title="Steward of the Manor of Northstead" label="Steward of the Manor of Northstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252982" start="6080" end="6089" title="John Pitt (of Encombe)" label="John Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q68544129" start="6286" end="6317" title="2019 British prorogation controversy" label="2019 UK prorogation controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="6378" end="6406" title="United Kingdom Supreme Court" label="United Kingdom Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11486474" start="6748" end="6757" title="Adjournment" label="adjourned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501525" start="6978" end="6982" title="Mabo v Queensland (No 2)" label="Mabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="7005" end="7028" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="7074" end="7096" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="7261" end="7279" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135789" start="7367" end="7389" title="unintended consequence" label="unintended consequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="7425" end="7431" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195523" start="7453" end="7464" title="Henry James Sumner Maine" label="Henry Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49371" start="7576" end="7587" title="legislation" label="legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="7589" end="7603" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100788" start="7760" end="7774" title="Joan and Peter" label="Joan and Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="7791" end="7802" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="8037" end="8041" title="Will (law)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q157509" start="8067" end="8081" title="legal guardian" label="legal guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="8456" end="8476" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987314" start="8490" end="8504" title="The Gondoliers" label="The Gondoliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698664" start="8883" end="8898" title="Lud-in-the-Mist" label="Lud-in-the-Mist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296277" start="8915" end="8928" title="Hope Mirrlees" label="Hope Mirrlees"/>
<link wikidata="Q192683" start="9560" end="9566" title="ad hoc" label="ad hoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376073" start="9804" end="9824" title="corporate personhood" label="corporate personhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q179050" start="10762" end="10789" title="piercing the corporate veil" label="piercing the corporate veil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170445" start="11060" end="11099" title="person having ordinary skill in the art" label="person having ordinary skill in the art"/>
<link wikidata="Q192683" start="11163" end="11169" title="Ad hoc" label="Ad hoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417174" start="11178" end="11193" title="Copyright traps" label="Copyright traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="11202" end="11209" title="De jure" label="De jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375114" start="11224" end="11241" title="En ventre sa mere" label="En ventre sa mere"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="11250" end="11257" title="Fiction" label="Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170445" start="11260" end="11299" title="Person having ordinary skill in the art" label="Person having ordinary skill in the art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258951" wikidata="Q4021423" url="?curid=258951" title="XLR">
<text>XLR may refer to:

* XLR connector, an electrical connector commonly used in audio equipment
* Cadillac XLR, a retractable hardtop convertible automobile
* &quot;Megas XLR&quot;, an American animated television series
* X-linked recessive inheritance
* XL programming language runtime
* A321XLR, a variant of the Airbus A321neo airliner

==XLR8 (&quot;accelerate&quot;)==
* XLR8, a Filipino boy band
* XLR8, a character in &quot;Ben 10&quot;
* &quot;XLR8&quot;, a song from Peter Andre&#x27;s 2010 album &quot;Accelerate&quot;
* XLR-8, a roller coaster
* &quot;XLR8R&quot;, a web magazine
* &quot;XLR8R&quot; (album), a 2001 album by Orbit
* XLR8er, a 1987 CPU board produced by H.I. Tech

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4021423" start="0" end="3" title="XLR" label="XLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q828468" start="21" end="34" title="XLR connector" label="XLR connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q545311" start="95" end="107" title="Cadillac XLR" label="Cadillac XLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q922258" start="162" end="171" title="Megas XLR" label="Megas XLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988987" start="220" end="250" title="X-linked recessive inheritance" label="X-linked recessive inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="253" end="284" title="XL (programming language)#Semantics" label="XL programming language runtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q30914140" start="287" end="294" title="A321XLR" label="A321XLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446374" start="374" end="378" title="XLR8" label="XLR8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="410" end="441" title="List of Ben 10 characters#XLR8" label="character in &amp;quot;Ben 10&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672270" start="510" end="520" title="Accelerate (Peter Andre album)" label="Accelerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448266" start="529" end="534" title="XLR-8" label="XLR-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570402" start="561" end="566" title="XLR8R" label="XLR8R"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100031" start="591" end="616" title="XLR8R (album)" label="&amp;quot;XLR8R&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747073" start="642" end="648" title="XLR8er" label="XLR8er"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258953" wikidata="Q187424" url="?curid=258953" title="Candas Jane Dorsey">
<text>Candas Jane Dorsey (born November 16, 1952) is a Canadian poet and science fiction novelist who resides in her hometown of Edmonton, Alberta. Dorsey became a writer from an early age and works across genre boundaries, writing poetry, fiction, mainstream and speculative, short and long form, arts journalism and arts advocacy. Dorsey has also written television and stage scripts, magazine and newspaper articles, and reviews.

Dorsey currently teaches and holds workshops and readings. She has served on the executive board of the Writers Guild of Alberta and is a founder of SF Canada. In 1998, Dorsey received the Aurora Award.

Dorsey was editor-in-chief of The Books Collective (River, Slipstream and Tesseract Books) from 1992 through 2005.

In 1994 she edited one issue of Prairie Fire magazine, along with With G.N. Louise Jonasson, that focused on Canadian speculative fiction.

== Bibliography ==
===Novels===
*&quot;Results of the Ring Toss&quot; - 1976
*&quot;Hardwired Angel&quot; - 1987
*&quot;Leaving Marks&quot; - 1992
*&quot;Black Wine&quot; - 1997 (winner, James Tiptree, Jr. Award, Crawford Award, Aurora Award)
*&quot;A Paradigm of Earth&quot; - 2001
*&quot;The Story of My Life Ongoing by CS Cobb&quot; - 2022

====&quot;Epitome Apartments&quot; series ====
*&quot;The Adventures of Isabel: A Postmodern Mystery, By the Numbers&quot; - 2020
*&quot;What&#x27;s the Matter with Mary Jane? &quot; - 2021
*&quot;He Wasn’t There Again Today&quot; - 2023

===Collections===
*&quot;Machine Sex and Other Stories&quot; - 1988
*&quot;Vanilla and Other Stories&quot; - 2000
*&quot;Ice &amp; Other Stories&quot; - 2018

===Anthologies===
*&quot;Tesseracts 3&quot; with Gerry Truscott (1990) 
*&quot;Tesseracts 8&quot; with John Clute (1999)
*&quot;Land/Space: An Anthology of Prairie Speculative Fiction&quot; with Judy McCrosky (2002)
*&quot;Food of My People&quot; with Ursula Pflug (2021)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q187424" start="0" end="18" title="Candas Jane Dorsey" label="Candas Jane Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="58" end="62" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136807" start="67" end="91" title="List of science-fiction authors" label="science fiction novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="123" end="131" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="133" end="140" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038457" start="532" end="556" title="Writers Guild of Alberta" label="Writers Guild of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390016" start="577" end="586" title="SF Canada" label="SF Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404447" start="617" end="629" title="Aurora Awards" label="Aurora Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681198" start="1075" end="1099" title="Otherwise Award" label="James Tiptree, Jr. Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182823" start="1101" end="1115" title="Crawford Award" label="Crawford Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404447" start="1117" end="1129" title="Aurora Awards" label="Aurora Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258957" wikidata="Q6902035" url="?curid=258957" title="Negative responsiveness">
<text>In social choice, the negative response, perversity, or additional support paradox is a pathological behavior of some voting rules where a candidate loses as a result of having too much support (or wins because of increased opposition). In other words, increasing (decreasing) a candidate&#x27;s ranking or rating causes that candidate to lose (win), respectively. Electoral systems that do not exhibit perversity are sometimes said to satisfy the [[Negative responsiveness|monotonicity]] criterion.

Perversity is often described by social choice theorists as an exceptionally severe kind of electoral pathology, as such rules can have &quot;backwards&quot; responses to voters&#x27; opinions, where popularity causes defeat while unpopularity leads to a win. Similar rules treat the well-being of some voters as &quot;less than worthless&quot;. These issues have led to constitutional prohibitions on such systems as violating the right to equal and direct suffrage. Negative response is often cited as an example of a perverse incentive, as rules with perverse response can incentivize politicians to take extreme or unpopular positions in an attempt to shed excess votes.

Most ranked methods (including Borda and all common round-robin rules) satisfy positive response, as do all common rated voting methods (including approval, highest medians, and score). 

Negative responsiveness occurs in instant-runoff voting (IRV), the single transferable vote, and the two-round system. Some quota-based apportionment methods also violate the rule, as can the randomized Condorcet method in cases of cyclic ties.

The participation criterion is closely-related, but different. While positive responsiveness deals with a voter changing their opinion (or vote), participation deals with situations where a voter choosing to cast a ballot at all has a backwards effect on the election.

==Definition==
Miller defined two main classes of monotonicity failure in 2012, which have been repeated in later papers:

In simpler terms, an upward failure occurs when a winner loses from more support, and a downward failure occurs when a loser wins with less support.

=== Views ===
Social choice theorists generally agree that negative responsiveness is an especially severe issue for a voting rule. Some have argued the mere possibility should be enough to disqualify runoff-based electoral methods, while others argue this is only true if it occurs in &quot;easy&quot; or &quot;common&quot; cases.

Gallagher notes some political scientists are less concerned, arguing we should not worry about negative response because voters will not notice it, making it appear random from their perspective and preventing exploitation by strategic voters. By contrast, other researchers have argued voters will easily predict negative response and respond by strategically down-ranking their preferred candidates, keeping negative response from affecting the results.

== By method ==
=== Runoff voting ===

Runoff-based voting systems such as ranked choice voting (RCV) are typically vulnerable to perverse response. A notable example is the 2009 Burlington mayoral election, the United States&#x27; second instant-runoff election in the modern era, where Bob Kiss won the election as a result of 750 ballots ranking him in last place. Another example is given by the 2022 Alaska at-large special election.

An example with three parties (Top, Center, Bottom) is shown below. In this scenario, the Bottom party initially loses. However, they are &quot;elected&quot; after running an &quot;un&quot;successful campaign and adopting an &quot;un&quot;popular platform, which pushes their supporters away from the party and into the Top party.

This election is an example of a center-squeeze, a class of elections where instant-runoff and plurality have difficulties electing the majority-preferred candidate. Here, the loss of support for Bottom policies makes the Top party more popular, allowing it to defeat the Center party in the first round.

=== Proportional rules ===
Some proportional representation systems can exhibit negative responsiveness. These include the single transferable vote and some implementations of mixed-member proportional representation, generally as a result of poorly-designed overhang rules. An example can be found in the 2005 German federal election, where CDU supporters in Dresden were instructed to vote for the FDP, a strategy that allowed the CDU to win an additional seat. This led the Federal Constitutional Court to rule that negative responsiveness violates the German constitution&#x27;s guarantee of equal and direct suffrage.

== Frequency of violations ==
The frequency of negative response will depend on the electoral method, the candidates, and the distribution of outcomes.
===Empirical analysis===
In the US, a 2021 analysis of instant-runoff elections in California between 2008 and 2016, as well as the 2009 Burlington, Vermont mayoral election, found an upward monotonicity anomaly rate of 0.74% (1/135) in all elections, 2.71% (1/37) when limited to elections going to a second round of counting and 7.7% (1/13) of elections with three competitive candidates. A more comprehensive 2023 survey of 182 American IRV elections where no candidate was ranked first by a majority of voters found seven total examples of non-monotonicity (3.8%), broken down into 2.2% (4/182) examples of upward monotonicity, 1.6% (3/182) of downward montonicity and 0.5% (1/182) of no-show or truncation (one example was both an upward and downward monotonicity failure). Two of those elections are also noted as specific examples below.

====Semi-empirical====
Some empirical research do not have access to full ballot preference data, and thus make probabilistic estimates of transfer patterns. A 2013 survey of Irish elections using IRV and PR-STV found plausible non-monotonicity in 20 out of 1326 elections between 1922 and 2011.

Data from the five UK general elections between 1992 and 2010 showed 2642 three candidate elections in English constituencies. With second preferences imputed from survey data, 1.7% of all elections appeared vulnerable to monotonicity anomalies (1.4% upward, 0.3% downward), significantly lower than simulated datasets from the same paper. However, when limited to the 4.2% of elections considered three-way competitive, 40.2% appeared vulnerable (33% upward, 7.1% downward), and further increasing with closer competition, a result closer to the simulations.

A 2022 analysis out of the 10 French presidential elections (conducted under the two-round system) 2 had results where monotonicity violations were not mathematically possible, another 6 where violations were unlikely given the evidence, leaving 2 elections (2002 and 2007) where an upward monotonicity violation was probable and likely respectively.

=== Theoretical models===
Results using the impartial culture model estimate about 15% of elections with 3 candidates; however, the true probability may be much higher, especially when restricting observation to close elections.

A 2013 study using a two-dimensional spatial model of voting estimated at least 15% of IRV elections would be nonmonotonic in the best-case scenario (with only three equally-competitive candidates). The researchers concluded that &quot;three-way competitive races will exhibit unacceptably frequent monotonicity failures&quot; and &quot;In light of these results, those seeking to implement a fairer multi-candidate election system should be wary of adopting IRV.&quot;

=== Specific examples ===
==== Alaska 2022 ====
Alaska&#x27;s first-ever instant-runoff election resulted in a victory for Democrat Mary Peltola, but had many voters for Republican Sarah Palin instead ranked Peltola first, Peltola would have lost.

==== Burlington, Vermont ====
In Burlington&#x27;s second IRV election, incumbent Bob Kiss was re-elected, despite losing in a head-to-head matchup with Democrat Andy Montroll (the Condorcet winner). However, if Kiss had gained more support from Wright voters, Kiss would have lost.

==== 2005 German Election in Dresden ====
Some proportional representation systems can exhibit negative responsiveness. These include the single transferable vote and some implementations of mixed-member proportional representation, generally as a result of poorly-designed overhang rules. An example can be found in the 2005 German federal election, where CDU supporters in Dresden were instructed to vote for the FDP, a strategy that allowed the CDU to win an additional seat. This led the Federal Constitutional Court to rule that negative responsiveness violates the German constitution&#x27;s guarantee of equal and direct suffrage.

== See also ==

* Participation criterion, a closely-related concept
* Voting system
* Voting system criterion
* Monotone preferences in consumer theory
* Monotonicity (mechanism design)
* Maskin monotonicity

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1971461" start="3" end="16" title="Social choice theory" label="social choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902035" start="22" end="39" title="Negative responsiveness" label="negative response"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902035" start="40" end="40" title="Negative responsiveness" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q6902035" start="41" end="51" title="Negative responsiveness" label="perversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902035" start="56" end="82" title="Negative responsiveness" label="additional support paradox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88" end="109" title="Pathological (mathematics)#In voting and social choice" label="pathological behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q182985" start="118" end="130" title="Electoral system" label="voting rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078003" start="296" end="303" title="Ranked voting" label="ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038645" start="307" end="313" title="Rated voting" label="rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q194404" start="448" end="488" title="Monotonic function" label="[[Negative responsiveness|monotonicity]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902035" start="489" end="498" title="Negative responsiveness" label="criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971461" start="534" end="557" title="Social choice theory" label="social choice theorists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="593" end="612" title="Pathological (mathematics)#In voting and social choice" label="electoral pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="942" end="967" title="One man, one vote" label="equal and direct suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169419" start="1021" end="1039" title="perverse incentive" label="perverse incentive"/>
<link wikidata="Q128133956" start="1109" end="1116" title="Center squeeze" label="extreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078003" start="1182" end="1196" title="Ranked voting" label="ranked methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q576578" start="1208" end="1213" title="Borda count" label="Borda"/>
<link wikidata="Q124655506" start="1229" end="1246" title="Round-robin voting" label="round-robin rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038645" start="1292" end="1304" title="rated voting" label="rated voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q526530" start="1324" end="1332" title="Approval voting" label="approval"/>
<link wikidata="Q105424621" start="1334" end="1349" title="Highest median voting rules" label="highest medians"/>
<link wikidata="Q852733" start="1355" end="1360" title="Score voting" label="score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="1399" end="1420" title="instant-runoff voting" label="instant-runoff voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="1432" end="1456" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="1466" end="1482" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q116243" start="1489" end="1522" title="Quota method" label="quota-based apportionment methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q30754308" start="1557" end="1584" title="Maximal lotteries" label="randomized Condorcet method"/>
<link wikidata="Q745768" start="1597" end="1608" title="Condorcet cycle" label="cyclic ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140429" start="1615" end="1638" title="participation criterion" label="participation criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830492" start="2487" end="2496" title="Michael Gallagher (academic)" label="Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="2508" end="2527" title="political scientist" label="political scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141155" start="2714" end="2730" title="strategic voting" label="strategic voters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="2984" end="3003" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="Runoff-based voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="3020" end="3046" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="ranked choice voting (RCV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999304" start="3119" end="3151" title="2009 Burlington mayoral election" label="2009 Burlington mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="3184" end="3207" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="instant-runoff election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933043" start="3233" end="3241" title="Bob Kiss" label="Bob Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q111458242" start="3345" end="3382" title="2022 Alaska&amp;#x27;s at-large congressional district special election" label="2022 Alaska at-large special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128133956" start="3750" end="3764" title="center-squeeze" label="center-squeeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="3812" end="3821" title="Plurality voting" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="4055" end="4082" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="4146" end="4170" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="4199" end="4239" title="mixed-member proportional representation" label="mixed-member proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q571928" start="4282" end="4296" title="Overhang seat" label="overhang rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q165999" start="4329" end="4357" title="2005 German federal election" label="2005 German federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="4365" end="4368" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="CDU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="4383" end="4390" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="4423" end="4426" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q56025" start="4500" end="4528" title="Federal Constitutional Court" label="Federal Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="4579" end="4598" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="German constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="4619" end="4644" title="One man, one vote" label="equal and direct suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="4854" end="4868" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="instant-runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999304" start="4931" end="4972" title="2009 Burlington, Vermont mayoral election" label="2009 Burlington, Vermont mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="5850" end="5856" title="PR-STV" label="PR-STV"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="6584" end="6600" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129306" start="6762" end="6766" title="2002 French presidential election" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q245238" start="6771" end="6775" title="2007 French presidential election" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q65076165" start="6899" end="6916" title="impartial culture" label="impartial culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q109767647" start="7122" end="7145" title="spatial model of voting" label="spatial model of voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q111458242" start="7604" end="7652" title="2022 Alaska&amp;#x27;s at-large congressional district special election" label="Alaska&amp;#x27;s first-ever instant-runoff election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7679" end="7687" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562231" start="7688" end="7700" title="Mary Peltola" label="Mary Peltola"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7726" end="7736" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q43144" start="7737" end="7748" title="Sarah Palin" label="Sarah Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999304" start="7838" end="7875" title="2009 Burlington, Vermont mayoral election" label="Burlington&amp;#x27;s second IRV election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933043" start="7887" end="7895" title="Bob Kiss" label="Bob Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q831304" start="7986" end="8002" title="Condorcet winner" label="Condorcet winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="8136" end="8163" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="8227" end="8251" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="8280" end="8320" title="mixed-member proportional representation" label="mixed-member proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q571928" start="8363" end="8377" title="Overhang seat" label="overhang rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q165999" start="8410" end="8438" title="2005 German federal election" label="2005 German federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="8446" end="8449" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="CDU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="8464" end="8471" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="8504" end="8507" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q56025" start="8581" end="8609" title="Federal Constitutional Court" label="Federal Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="8660" end="8679" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="German constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="8700" end="8725" title="One man, one vote" label="equal and direct suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140429" start="8746" end="8769" title="Participation criterion" label="Participation criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q182985" start="8799" end="8812" title="Voting system" label="Voting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324505" start="8815" end="8838" title="Voting system criterion" label="Voting system criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301873" start="8841" end="8861" title="Monotone preferences" label="Monotone preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340379" start="8883" end="8914" title="Monotonicity (mechanism design)" label="Monotonicity (mechanism design)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135916" start="8917" end="8936" title="Maskin monotonicity" label="Maskin monotonicity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258958" wikidata="Q923917" url="?curid=258958" title="Balanced audio">
<text>Balanced audio is a method of interconnecting audio equipment using balanced interfaces. This type of connection is very important in sound recording and production because it allows the use of long cables while reducing susceptibility to external noise caused by electromagnetic interference. The balanced interface guarantees that induced noise appears as common-mode voltages at the receiver which can be rejected by a differential device.

Balanced connections typically use shielded twisted-pair cable and three-conductor connectors. The connectors are usually three-pin XLR or TRS phone connectors. When used in this manner, each cable carries one channel, therefore stereo audio (for example) would require two of them.

A common misconception is that balanced audio requires the signal source to deliver equal waveforms of opposite polarity to the two signal conductors of the balanced line. However, many balanced devices actively drive only one side of the line, but do so at an impedance that is equal to the impedance of the non-driven side of the line. This impedance balance permits the balanced line receiver (input stage of the next device) to reject common-mode signals introduced to the two conductors by electromagnetic coupling.

== Applications ==

Many microphones operate at low voltage levels and some with high output impedance (hi-Z), which makes long microphone cables especially susceptible to electromagnetic interference. Microphone interconnections are therefore a common application for a balanced interconnection, which allows the receiver to reject most of this induced noise. If the power amplifiers of a public address system are located at any distance from the mixing console, it is also normal to use balanced lines for the signal paths from the mixer to these amplifiers. Many other components, such as graphic equalizers and effects units, have balanced inputs and outputs to allow this. In recording and for short cable runs in general, a compromise is necessary between the noise reduction given by balanced lines and the cost introduced by the extra circuitry they require.

Some devices, usually with a transformer output, provide a balanced output that is &quot;floating&quot; with respect to ground; the impedance to ground from each side of the output is high. More commonly, devices drive one or both sides of the balanced interface with a signal referenced to ground. When one side is not driven, care is taken to assure that the impedance to ground is equal to the impedance of the driven side.

== Interference reduction ==

Balanced audio connections use a number of techniques to reduce noise. 

A typical balanced cable contains two identical wires, which are twisted together and then wrapped with a third conductor (foil or braid) that acts as a shield. The two wires form a circuit that can carry an audio signal.

The term &quot;balanced&quot; comes from the method of &quot;balancing&quot; the impedance of each wire in the circuit; the line and all circuits directly connected to it (such as the driver and receiver) must have identical impedances with respect to some reference point. This means that much of the electromagnetic interference will induce an equal noise voltage in each wire. Since the differential device at the receiving end only responds to the difference in voltage between the two signal lines, noise that is identical on both wires is rejected. This method can be implemented with a differential amplifier. A transformer may also be used instead of an active input stage.

A twisted pair makes the loop area between the conductors as small as possible, and ensures that a magnetic field that passes equally through adjacent loops will induce equal levels of noise on both lines, which is canceled out by the differential device in the receiver. If the noise source is extremely close to the cable, then it is possible it will be induced on one of the lines more than the other, and it will not be canceled as well, but canceling will still occur to the extent of the amount of noise that is equal on both lines.

The separate shield that is commonly provided in a balanced audio cable also yields a noise rejection advantage over an unbalanced two-conductor arrangement (such as used in typical home stereos) where the shield must also act as the signal return wire. Therefore, any noise currents induced into a balanced audio shield will not be directly modulated onto the signal, whereas in a two-conductor system they will be. This also prevents ground loop problems, by separating the shield/chassis from signal ground.

== Differential signaling ==

Signals are often transmitted over balanced connections using the differential mode, meaning the wires carry signals that are equal in magnitude but of opposite polarity to each other (for instance, in an XLR connector, pin 2 carries the signal with normal polarity, and pin 3 carries an inverted version of the same signal). Despite popular belief, this arrangement is not necessary for noise rejection. As long as the impedances are balanced, noise will couple equally into the two wires (and be rejected by a differential amplifier), regardless of the signal that is present on them. A simple method of driving a balanced line is to inject the signal into the &quot;hot&quot; wire through a known source impedance, and connect the &quot;cold&quot; wire to the signal&#x27;s local ground reference through an identical impedance. Due to common misconceptions about differential signalling, this is often referred to as a quasi-balanced or impedance-balanced output, though it is, in fact, fully balanced and will reject common-mode interference. 

However, there are some minor benefits to driving the line with a fully differential output:
* Though the signal level would not be changed due to nominal level standardization, the maximum output from the differential drivers is twice as much, giving 6 dB extra headroom.
*Increasing cable capacitance over long cable runs decreases the signal level at which high frequencies are attenuated. If each wire carries half the signal voltage swing as in fully differential outputs then longer cable runs can be used without the loss of high frequencies.
* Noise that is correlated between the two amps (from imperfect power supply rejection, for instance), would be cancelled out.
* At higher frequencies, the output impedance of the output amplifier can change, resulting in a small imbalance. When driven in differential mode by two identical amplifiers, this impedance change will be the same for both lines, and thus cancelled out.

==Internally balanced audio design==

Professional audio products (recording, public address, etc.) generally provide balanced inputs and outputs, typically via XLR or TRS phone connectors. However, in most cases, the internal circuitry is entirely unbalanced.

A small number of audio products have been designed with an entirely balanced signal path from input to output; the circuitry maintains its impedance balance throughout the device. This design is achieved by providing identical (mirrored) internal signal paths for both the &quot;hot&quot; and &quot;cold&quot; conductors. In critical applications, a 100% balanced circuit design can offer better signal integrity by avoiding the extra amplifier stages or transformers required for front-end unbalancing and back-end rebalancing.

==Connectors==
Three-pin XLR connectors and quarter-inch (¼&quot; or 6.35mm) TRS phone connectors are commonly used for balanced audio interfaces. Many jacks are now designed to take either XLR or TRS phone plugs. Equipment intended for long-term installation sometimes uses terminal strips or Euroblock connectors.
Some balanced headphone connections also use a Pentaconn 4.4mm TRRRS connector.

With XLR connectors, pins 1, 2, and 3 are usually used for the shield (ideally connected to the chassis) and the two signal wires, respectively. (The phrase &quot;ground, live, return&quot;, corresponding to &quot;X, L, R&quot;, is often offered as a memory aid, although the second signal wire is not a &quot;return&quot; in the case of differential signaling) On TRS phone plugs, the tip is signal/non-inverting, the ring is return/inverting, and the sleeve is chassis ground. 

If a stereophonic or other binaural signal is plugged into such a jack, one channel (usually the right) will be subtracted from the other (usually the left), leaving an unlistenable L − R (left minus right) signal instead of normal monophonic L + R (left plus right). Reversing the polarity at any other point in a balanced audio system will also result in this effect at some point when it is later mixed-down with its other channel.

Telephone lines also carry audio through balanced circuitry, though this is generally now limited to the local loop. It is called this because the two wires form a balanced loop through which both sides of the telephone call travel. As telephones require DC power to operate and to allow simple on/off hook detection, extra circuitry was developed where one signal wire is fed from the exchange power bus, typically −50 volts, and the other grounded, both via equal value inductors which have about 400 ohms DC resistance, to avoid short-circuiting the wanted AC signal and to maintain impedance balance.

Digital audio connections in professional environments are also frequently balanced, normally following the AES3 (AES/EBU) standard. This uses XLR connectors and twisted-pair cable with 110-ohm impedance. By contrast, the coaxial S/PDIF interface commonly seen on consumer equipment is unbalanced.

==Converters==
Balanced and unbalanced circuits can be interfaced by the use of a balun, often through a DI unit (also called a &quot;DI box&quot; or &quot;direct box&quot;). 

As a last resort a balanced audio line can be fed into an unbalanced input and vice versa as long as the electronic design used for the output stage is known. In the case of balanced output to unbalanced input, the negative output can be tied to ground, but in certain cases the negative output should be left disconnected.

== See also ==
*Differential signaling
*AES3
*Phantom power

== References ==
== External links ==
* UK Sound And Lighting Community — Article On Balanced Lines
* Ray Rayburn: &quot;Balanced-to-Unbalanced; How to Do it Right&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q923917" start="0" end="14" title="Balanced audio" label="Balanced audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="134" end="149" title="sound recording" label="sound recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530371" start="358" end="369" title="Common-mode signal" label="common-mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q828468" start="576" end="579" title="XLR connector" label="XLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="583" end="592" title="Phone connector (audio)" label="TRS phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928527" start="804" end="848" title="Differential signalling" label="deliver equal waveforms of opposite polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="989" end="998" title="electrical impedance" label="impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="1275" end="1285" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q631203" start="1336" end="1352" title="output impedance" label="output impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474513" start="1422" end="1450" title="electromagnetic interference" label="electromagnetic interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q758907" start="1618" end="1633" title="power amplifier" label="power amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="1640" end="1661" title="public address system" label="public address system"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="1699" end="1713" title="mixing console" label="mixing console"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="2094" end="2103" title="Electronic circuit" label="circuitry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506009" start="2803" end="2809" title="Shielded cable" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650799" start="2858" end="2870" title="audio signal" label="audio signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="2954" end="2963" title="electrical impedance" label="impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q40754" start="3325" end="3335" title="subtraction" label="difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056298" start="3466" end="3488" title="differential amplifier" label="differential amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="3492" end="3503" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192808" start="3558" end="3570" title="twisted pair" label="twisted pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q581861" start="4182" end="4197" title="noise rejection" label="noise rejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q992463" start="4532" end="4543" title="ground loop (electricity)" label="ground loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928527" start="4704" end="4721" title="differential signaling" label="differential mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="4799" end="4807" title="Electrical polarity" label="polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q828468" start="4843" end="4856" title="XLR connector" label="XLR connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q631203" start="5338" end="5354" title="source impedance" label="source impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048579" start="5835" end="5848" title="nominal level" label="nominal level"/>
<link wikidata="Q780653" start="5951" end="5959" title="headroom (audio signal processing)" label="headroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482413" start="6302" end="6324" title="power supply rejection ratio" label="power supply rejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q828468" start="6782" end="6785" title="XLR connector" label="XLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="6789" end="6808" title="Phone connector (audio)" label="TRS phone connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849986" start="7239" end="7255" title="balanced circuit" label="balanced circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503810" start="7280" end="7296" title="signal integrity" label="signal integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="7339" end="7350" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q828468" start="7439" end="7452" title="XLR connector" label="XLR connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="7491" end="7510" title="Phone connector (audio)" label="TRS phone connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504023" start="7689" end="7704" title="Screw terminal" label="terminal strips"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411700" start="7708" end="7717" title="Euroblock" label="Euroblock"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="7777" end="7786" title="Pentaconn" label="Pentaconn"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="7793" end="7808" title="TRRRS connector" label="TRRRS connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="8297" end="8309" title="stereophonic" label="stereophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612967" start="8319" end="8327" title="binaural recording" label="binaural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="8524" end="8534" title="Monaural" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="8574" end="8582" title="Electrical polarity" label="polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373572" start="8728" end="8742" title="Telephone line" label="Telephone line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117061" start="8833" end="8843" title="local loop" label="local loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296401" start="8938" end="8952" title="telephone call" label="telephone call"/>
<link wikidata="Q173114" start="9334" end="9347" title="Digital audio" label="Digital audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929514" start="9442" end="9446" title="AES3" label="AES3"/>
<link wikidata="Q214738" start="9564" end="9570" title="S/PDIF" label="S/PDIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q805838" start="9715" end="9720" title="balun" label="balun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153621" start="9738" end="9745" title="DI unit" label="DI unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928527" start="10151" end="10173" title="Differential signaling" label="Differential signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929514" start="10175" end="10179" title="AES3" label="AES3"/>
<link wikidata="Q429451" start="10181" end="10194" title="Phantom power" label="Phantom power"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258959" wikidata="Q394226" url="?curid=258959" title="Phone connector (audio)">
<text>A phone connector is a family of cylindrically-shaped electrical connectors primarily for analog audio signals. Invented in the late 19th century for tele&quot;phone&quot; switchboards, the phone connector remains in use for interfacing wired audio equipment, such as head&quot;phones&quot;, speakers, micro&quot;phones&quot;, mixing consoles, and electronic musical instruments (e.g. electric guitars, keyboards, and effects units). A &quot;male&quot; connector (a plug), is mated into a &quot;female&quot; connector (a socket), though other terminology is used. 

Plugs have 2 to 5 electrical contacts. The tip contact is indented with a groove. The sleeve contact is nearest the (conductive or insulated) handle. Contacts are insulated from each other by a band of non-conductive material. Between the tip and sleeve are 0 to 3 ring contacts. Since phone connectors have many uses, it is common to simply name the connector according to its number of rings:

The sleeve is &quot;usually&quot; a common ground reference voltage or return current for signals in the tip and any rings. Thus, the number of transmittable signals is less than the number of contacts.

The outside diameter of the sleeve is for full-sized connectors, for &quot;mini&quot; connectors, and only for &quot;sub-mini&quot; connectors. Rings are typically the same diameter as the sleeve.

== Other terms ==
The 1902 &quot;International Library of Technology&quot; simply uses &quot;jack&quot; for the female and &quot;plug&quot; for the male connector. The 1989 &quot;Sound Reinforcement Handbook&quot; uses &quot;phone jack&quot; for the female and &quot;phone plug&quot; for the male connector. Robert McLeish, who worked at the BBC, uses &quot;jack&quot; or &quot;jack socket&quot; for the female and &quot;jack plug&quot; for the male connector in his 2005 book &quot;Radio Production&quot;. The American Society of Mechanical Engineers, as of 2007, says the more fixed electrical connector is the jack, while the less fixed connector is the plug, &quot;without regard&quot; to the gender of the connector contacts. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in 1975 also made a standard that was withdrawn in 1997.

The intended application for a phone connector has also resulted in names such as &quot;audio jack&quot;, &quot;headphone jack&quot;, &quot;stereo plug&quot;, &quot;microphone jack&quot;, &quot;aux input&quot;, etc. Among audio engineers, the connector may often simply be called a &quot;quarter-inch&quot; to distinguish it from XLR, another frequently-used audio connector. These naming variations are also used for the 3.5 mm connectors, which have been called &quot;mini-phone&quot;, &quot;mini-stereo&quot;, &quot;mini jack&quot;, etc.

RCA connectors are differently-shaped, but confusingly are similarly-named as &quot;phono&quot; plugs and &quot;phono&quot; jacks (or in the UK, &quot;phono&quot; sockets). 3.5 mm connectors are sometimes—counter to the connector manufacturers&#x27; nomenclature—referred to as &quot;mini phonos&quot;.

Confusion also arises because phone jack and phone plug may sometimes refer to the RJ11 and various older telephone sockets and plugs that connect wired telephones to wall outlets.

== Historical development ==
The original version descends from as early as 1877 in Boston when the first telephone switchboard was installed or 1878, when an early switchboard was used for the first commercial manual telephone exchange in New Haven created by George W. Coy.
Charles E. Scribner filed a patent in 1878 to facilitate switchboard operation using his &quot;spring-jack switch&quot;. In it, a conductive lever pushed by a spring is normally connected to one contact. But when a cable with a conductive plug is inserted into a hole and makes contact with that lever, the lever pivots and breaks its normal connection. The receptacle was called a jack-knife because of its resemblance to a pocket . This is said to be the origin of calling the receptacle a &quot;jack&quot;. Scribner filed a patent in 1880 which removes the lever and resembles the modern connector and made improvements to switchboard design in subsequent patents filed in 1882. 


Henry P. Clausen filed a patent in 1901 for improved construction of the &quot;telephone switchboard-plug&quot; with today&#x27;s inch TS form still used on audio equipment.

Western Electric was the manufacturing arm of the Bell System, and thus originated or refined most of the engineering designs, including the telephone jacks and plugs which were later adopted by other industries, including the US military.

By 1907, Western Electric had designed a number of models for different purposes, including:

By 1950, the two main plug designs were:

* WE-309 (compatible with -inch jacks, such as 246 jack), for use on high-density jack panels such as the 608A
* WE-310 (compatible with -inch jacks, such as the 242)

Several modern designs have descended from those earlier versions:

* B-Gauge standard BPO316 (not compatible with EIA RS-453)
* EIA RS-453: &quot;Dimensional, Mechanical and Electrical Characteristics Defining Phone Plugs &amp; Jacks&quot; standard of diameter, also found in IEC 60603-11:1992 &quot;Connectors for frequencies below 3 MHz for use with printed boards – Part 11: Detail specification for concentric connectors (dimensions for free connectors and fixed connectors)&quot;.

=== Military variants ===
U.S. military versions of the Western Electric plugs were initially specified in Amendment No.1, MIL-P-642, and included:

* M642/1-1
* M642/1-2
* M642/2-1
* M642/2-2
* M642/4-1
* M642/4-2
* MIL-P-642/2, also known as PJ-051. (Similar to Western Electric WE-310, and thus not compatible with EIA RS-453)
* MIL-P-642/5A: Plug, Telephone (TYPE PJ-068) and Accessory Screws (1973), and MIL-DTL-642F: Plugs, Telephone, and Accessory Screws (2015), with diameter, also known by the earlier Signal Corps PL-68 designation. These are commonly used as the microphone jack for aviation radios, and on Collins S-line and many Drake amateur radios. MIL-DTL-642F states, &quot;This specification covers telephone plugs used in telephone (including telephone switchboard consoles), telegraph, and teletype circuits, and for connecting headsets, handsets, and microphones into communications circuits.&quot;

=== Miniature size ===
The 3.5 mm or &quot;miniature&quot; size was originally designed in the 1950s as two-conductor connectors for earpieces on transistor radios, and remains a standard still used today. This roughly half-sized version of the original, popularized by the Sony EFM-117J radio (released in 1964), is still commonly used in portable applications and has a length of . The three-conductor version became very popular with its application on the Walkman in 1979, as unlike earlier transistor radios, these devices had no speaker of their own; the usual way to listen to them was to plug in headphones. There is also an EIA standard for 0.141-inch miniature phone jacks.

The 2.5 mm or &quot;sub-miniature&quot; sizes were similarly popularized on small portable electronics. They often appeared next to a 3.5 mm microphone jack for a remote control on-off switch on early portable tape recorders; the microphone provided with such machines had the on-off switch and used a two-pronged connector with both the 3.5 and 2.5 mm plugs. They were also used for low-voltage DC power input from wall adapters. In the latter role, they were soon replaced by coaxial DC power connectors. 2.5 mm phone jacks have also been used as headset jacks on mobile telephones (see ).

The  in and  in sizes, approximately 3.5 mm and 2.5 mm respectively in mm, though those dimensions are only approximations. All sizes are now readily available in two-conductor (unbalanced mono) and three-conductor (balanced mono or unbalanced stereo) versions.

Four-conductor versions of the 3.5 mm plug and jack are used for certain applications. A four-conductor version is often used in compact camcorders and portable media players, providing stereo sound and composite analog video. It is also used for a combination of stereo audio, a microphone, and controlling media playback, calls, volume and/or a virtual assistant on some laptop computers and most mobile phones, and some handheld amateur radio transceivers from Yaesu. Some headphone amplifiers have used it to connect balanced stereo headphones, which require two conductors per audio channel as the channels do not share a common ground.

=== Broadcast usage ===
By the 1940s, broadcast radio stations were using Western Electric Code No. 103 plugs and matching jacks for patching audio throughout studios. This connector was used because of its use in AT&amp;T&#x27;s Long Line circuits for the distribution of audio programs over the radio networks&#x27; leased telephone lines. Because of the large amount of space these patch panels required, the industry began switching to 3-conductor plugs and jacks in the late 1940s, using the WE Type 291 plug with WE type 239 jacks. The type 291 plug was used instead of the standard type 110 switchboard plug because the location of the large bulb shape on this TRS plug would have resulted in both audio signal connections being shorted together for a brief moment while the plug was being inserted and removed. The Type 291 plug avoids this by having a shorter tip.

=== Patch bay connectors ===
Professional audio and the telecommunication industry use a diameter plug, associated with trademarked names including , TT, Tini-Telephone, and Tini-Tel. They are not compatible with standard EIA RS-453/IEC 60603-11 -inch jacks. In addition to a slightly smaller diameter, they have a slightly different geometry. The three-conductor TRS versions are capable of handling balanced signals and are used in professional audio installations. Though unable to handle as much power, and less reliable than a jack, Bantam connectors are used for mixing console and outboard patchbays in recording studio and live sound applications, where large numbers of patch points are needed in a limited space. The slightly different shape of Bantam plugs is also less likely to cause shorting as they are plugged in.

=== Less common ===
A two-pin version, known to the telecom industry as a &quot;310 connector&quot;, consists of two -inch phone plugs at a centre spacing of . The socket versions of these can be used with normal phone plugs provided the plug bodies are not too large, but the plug version will only mate with two sockets at  inches centre spacing, or with line sockets, again with sufficiently small bodies. These connectors are still used today in telephone company central offices on &quot;DSX&quot; patch panels for DS1 circuits. A similar type of 3.5 mm connector is often used in the armrests of older aircraft, as part of the on-board in-flight entertainment system. Plugging a stereo plug into one of the two mono jacks typically results in the audio coming into only one ear. Adapters are available.

A short-barrelled version of the phone plug was used for 20th-century high-impedance mono headphones, and in particular those used in World War II aircraft. These have become rare. It is physically possible to use a normal plug in a short socket, but a short plug will neither lock into a normal socket nor complete the tip circuit.

Less commonly used sizes, both diameters and lengths, are also available from some manufacturers, and are used when it is desired to restrict the availability of matching connectors, such as inside diameter jacks for fire safety communication in public buildings.

=== Decline of phone connector sockets in consumer goods ===
While phone connectors remain a standard connector type in some fields, such as desktop computers, musical instrument amplification, and live audio and recording equipment, they have been removed from many smartphones.

Digital audio is now common and may be transmitted via USB sound cards, USB headphones, Bluetooth, display connectors with integrated sound (e.g. DisplayPort and HDMI). Digital devices may also have internal speakers and mics. Thus the phone connector is sometimes considered redundant and a waste of space, particularly on thinner mobile devices. And while low-profile surface-mount sockets waterproofed up to 1 meter exist, removing the socket entirely facilitates waterproofing.

Chinese phone manufacturers were early in not using a phone socket: first with Oppo&#x27;s Finder in July 2012 (which came packaged with micro-USB headphones and supported Bluetooth headphones), followed by Vivo&#x27;s X5Max in 2014 and LeEco in April 2016 and Lenovo&#x27;s Moto Z in September 2016. Apple&#x27;s September 2016 announcement of the iPhone 7 was initially mocked for removing the socket by other manufacturers like Samsung and Google who eventually followed suit. The socket is also not present in some tablets and thin laptops (e.g. Lenovo Duet Chromebook and Asus ZenBook 13 in 2020).

== Aviation and US military connectors ==


The US military uses a variety of phone connectors including -inch (0.281-inch, 7.14 mm) and -inch (0.25 inch, 6.35 mm) diameter plugs.

Commercial and general aviation (GA) civil aircraft headsets often use a pair of phone connectors. A standard -inch (6.3 mm) 2 or 3-conductor plug, type PJ-055, is used for headphones. For the microphone, a smaller -inch (0.206 inch / 5.23 mm) diameter 3-conductor plug, type PJ-068, is used.

Military aircraft and civil helicopters have another type termed the U-174/U (Nexus TP-101), also known as U-93A/U (Nexus TP-102) and Nexus TP-120. These are also known as &quot;US NATO&quot; plugs. These have a diameter shaft with four conductors, allowing two for the headphones, and two for the microphone. Also used is the U-384/U (Nexus TP-105), which has the same diameter as the U-174/U but is slightly longer and has 5 conductors instead of 4.

There is a confusingly similar four-conductor British connector, Type 671 (10H/18575), with a slightly larger diameter of used for headsets in many UK military aircraft and often referred to as a &quot;UK NATO&quot; or &quot;European NATO&quot; connector.

== General use ==


In the most common arrangement, consistent with the original intention of the design, the male plug is connected to a cable, and the female socket is mounted in a piece of equipment. A considerable variety of line plugs and panel sockets is available, including plugs suiting various cable sizes, right-angle plugs, and both plugs and sockets in a variety of price ranges and with current capacities up to 15 amperes for certain heavy-duty  in versions intended for loudspeaker connections.

Common uses of phone plugs and their matching sockets include:

*Headphone and earphone jacks on a wide range of equipment. 6.35 mm ( in) plugs are common on home and professional audio equipment, while 3.5 mm plugs are nearly universal for portable audio equipment and headphones. 2.5 mm plugs are not as common, but are used on communication equipment such as cordless phones, mobile phones, and two-way radios, especially in the earliest years of the 21st century before the 3.5 mm became standard on mobile phones. The use of headphone jacks in smartphones is declining in favor of USB-C connectors and wireless Bluetooth solutions.
* Consumer electronics devices such as digital cameras, camcorders, and portable DVD players use 3.5 mm connectors for composite video and audio output. Typically, a TRS connection is used for mono unbalanced audio plus video, and a TRRS connection for stereo unbalanced audio plus analog video. Cables designed for this use are often terminated with RCA connectors on the other end. A combined video/audio jack is also present on some computers; several generations of the Raspberry Pi have analog audio and video from the same jack, and Sony also used this style of connection as the TV-out on some models of Vaio laptop.
* Hands-free sets and headsets often use 3.5 mm or 2.5 mm connectors. TRS connectors are used for mono audio out and an unbalanced microphone (with a shared ground). Four-conductor TRRS phone connectors add an additional audio channel for stereo output. TRRS connectors used for this purpose are sometimes interoperable with TRS connectors, depending on how the contacts are used.
*Microphone inputs on tape and cassette recorders, sometimes with remote control switching on the ring, on early, monaural cassette recorders mostly a dual-pin version consisting of a 3.5 mm TS for the microphone and a 2.5 mm TS for remote control which switches the recorder&#x27;s power supply.
* Musical instruments, such as guitars, digital keyboards and electronic drum kits – along with associated audio equipment such as amplifiers and effects units – generally use 6.35mm TS connectors.
* Patching points (insert points) on a wide range of equipment. An unusual example is the Enigma machine, which featured a plugboard as part of its encryption system.

== Computer sound ==

Any number of 3.5 mm sockets for input and output may be found on personal computers, either from integrated sound hardware common on motherboards or from insertable sound cards. The 1999 PC System Design Guide&#x27;s color code for 3.5 mm TRS sockets is common, which assigns pink for &quot;microphone&quot;, light blue for &quot;line in&quot;, and lime for &quot;line level&quot;. AC&#x27;97 and its 2004 successor Intel High Definition Audio have been widely adopted specifications that, while not mandating physical sockets, do provide specifications for a front panel connector with pin assignments for two ports with jack detection. Front panels commonly have a stereo output socket for headphones and (slightly less commonly) a stereo input socket for a mic. The back panel may have additional sockets, most commonly for &quot;line out&quot;, &quot;mic&quot;, &quot;line in&quot;, and less commonly for multiple surround sound outs. Laptops and tablets tend to have fewer sockets than desktops due to size constraints.

=== Microphone power ===
Some computers include a 3.5 mm TRS socket for mono microphone that delivers a 5 V bias voltage on the ring to power an electret microphone&#x27;s integrated buffer amplifier, though details depend on the manufacturer. The Apple PlainTalk microphone socket is a historical variant that accepts either a 3.5 mm line input or an elongated 3.5 mm TRS plug whose tip carries the amplifier&#x27;s power.

=== TRRS headset sockets ===
Some newer computers, especially laptops, have 3.5 mm TRRS headset sockets, which are compatible with phone headsets and may be distinguished by a headset icon instead of the usual headphones or microphone icons. These are particularly used for voice over IP.

=== Surround sound ===
Sound cards that output 5.1 surround sound have three sockets to accommodate six channels: front left and right; surround left and right; and center and subwoofer. 6.1 and 7.1 channel sound cards from Creative Labs, however, use a single three-conductor socket (for the &quot;front&quot; speakers) and two four-conductor sockets. This is to accommodate rear-center (6.1) or rear left and right (7.1) channels without the need for additional sockets on the sound card.

=== Combined TRS and TOSLINK ===
Some portable computers have a combined 3.5 mm TRS/TOSLINK jack, supporting stereo audio output using either a TRS connector or TOSLINK (stereo or 5.1 Dolby Digital/DTS) digital output using a suitable optical adapter. Most iMac computers have this digital/analog combo output feature as standard, with early MacBooks having two ports, one for analog/digital audio input and the other for output. Support for input was dropped on various later models

== Compatibility for different numbers of rings ==

The original application for the 6.35 mm ( in) phone jack was in manual telephone exchanges. Many different configurations of these phone plugs were used, some accommodating five or more conductors, with several tip profiles. Of these many varieties, only the two-conductor version with a rounded tip profile was compatible between different manufacturers, and this was the design that was at first adopted for use with microphones, electric guitars, headphones, loudspeakers, and other audio equipment.

When a three-conductor version of the 6.35 mm plug was introduced for use with stereo headphones, it was given a sharper tip profile to make it possible to manufacture jacks that would accept only stereo plugs, to avoid short-circuiting the right channel of the amplifier. This attempt has long been abandoned, and now the convention is that all plugs fit all sockets of the same size, regardless of whether they are balanced or unbalanced, mono or stereo. Most 6.35 mm plugs, mono or stereo, now have the profile of the original stereo plug, although a few rounded mono plugs are still produced. The profiles of stereo miniature and sub-miniature plugs have always been identical to the mono plugs of the same size.

The results of this physical compatibility are:

*If a 2-conductor &quot;plug&quot; is inserted into a 3-conductor &quot;socket&quot;, then the socket&#x27;s ring is shorted to ground, thus any signal sent from that socket&#x27;s ring is lost. Equipment not designed for this short might, for instance, damage an audio amplifier channel.
*If a 3-conductor &quot;plug&quot; is connected to a 2-conductor &quot;socket&quot;, normally the result is to leave the ring of the plug unconnected. This open circuit is potentially dangerous to equipment using vacuum tubes, but most solid-state devices will tolerate an open condition.
Equipment aware of this possible shorting allows, for instance:

*Mono equipment receiving stereo output will simply use the left (tip) channel as the mono input signal and lose the right (ring) channel of the stereo audio.
*The positive (tip) component of a balanced signal will be received, though without the full benefits of balanced audio, since the signal&#x27;s negative (ring) component will be lost.
Some devices for an even higher number of rings &quot;might possibly&quot; be backwards-compatible with an opposite-gendered device with fewer rings, or may cause damage. For example, 3.5 mm TRRS sockets that accept TRRS headsets (stereo headphones with a mic) are often compatible with standard TRS stereo headphones, whereby the contact that expects a mic signal will instead simply become shorted to ground and thus will provide a zero signal. Conversely, those TRRS headsets can plug into TRS sockets, in which case its speakers may still work even though its mic won&#x27;t work (the mic&#x27;s signal contact will be disconnected).

Because of a lack of standardization in the past regarding the dimensions (length) given to the ring conductor and the insulating portions on either side of it in 6.35 mm ( in) phone connectors and the width of the conductors in different brands and generations of sockets, there are occasional issues with compatibility between differing brands of plug and socket. This can result in a contact in the socket bridging (shorting) the ring and sleeve contacts on a phone connector.

== Video ==
Equipment requiring video with stereo audio input or output sometimes uses 3.5 mm TRRS connectors. Two incompatible variants exist, of and length, and using the wrong variant may either simply not work, or could cause physical damage.

Attempting to fully insert the longer (17 mm) plug into a receptacle designed for the shorter (15 mm) plug may damage the receptacle, and may damage any electronics located immediately behind the receptacle. However, partially inserting the plug will work as the tip/ring/ring distances are the same for both variants.

A shorter plug in a socket designed for the longer connector may not be retained firmly and may result in wrong signal routing or a short circuit inside the equipment (e.g. the plug tip may cause the contacts inside the receptacle – tip/ring 1, etc. – to short together).

The shorter 15 mm TRRS variant is more common and physically compatible with standard 3.5 mm TRS and TS connectors.

== Recording equipment ==
Many small video cameras, laptops, recorders and other consumer devices use a 3.5 mm microphone connector for attaching a microphone to the system. These fall into three categories:
* Devices that use an unpowered microphone: usually a cheap dynamic or piezoelectric microphone. The microphone generates its own voltage and needs no power.
* Devices that use a self-powered microphone: usually a condenser microphone with an internal battery-powered amplifier.
* Devices that use a &quot;plug-in powered&quot; microphone: an electret microphone containing an internal FET amplifier. These provide a good quality signal in a very small microphone. However, the internal FET needs a DC power supply, which is provided as a bias voltage for an internal preamp transistor. Plug-in power is supplied on the same line as the audio signal, using an RC filter. The DC bias voltage supplies the FET amplifier (at a low current), while the capacitor decouples the DC supply from the AC input to the recorder. Typically, V=1.5 V, R=1 kΩ, C=47 μF. If a recorder provides plug-in power, and the microphone does not need it, everything will usually work well. In the converse case (recorder provides no power; microphone needs power), no sound will be recorded.

== Mobile devices ==
Three- or four-conductor (TRS or TRRS) 2.5 mm and 3.5 mm sockets were common on older cell phones and smartphones respectively, providing mono (three-conductor) or stereo (four-conductor) sound and a microphone input, together with signaling (e.g., push a button to answer a call). These are used both for handsfree headsets and for stereo headphones.

3.5 mm TRRS (stereo-plus-mic) sockets became particularly common on smartphones, and have been used by Nokia and others since 2006, and as mentioned in the compatibility section, they are often compatible with standard 3.5 mm stereo headphones. Many computers, especially laptops, also include a TRRS headset socket compatible with the headsets intended for smartphones.

The four conductors of a TRRS connector are assigned to different purposes by different manufacturers. Any 3.5 mm plug can be plugged mechanically into any socket, but many combinations are electrically incompatible. For example, plugging TRRS headphones into a TRS headset socket, a TRS headset into a TRRS socket, or plugging TRRS headphones from one manufacturer into a TRRS socket from another may not function correctly, or at all. Mono audio will usually work, but stereo audio or the microphone may not work, or the pause/play controls may be inactive, as is common when trying to use headphones with controls for iPhones on an Android device, or &quot;vice versa&quot;.

=== TRRS standards ===
Two different forms are frequently found. Both place left audio on the tip and right audio on the first ring, same as stereo connectors. They differ in the placement of the microphone and return contacts.

The OMTP standard places the ground return on the sleeve and the microphone on the second ring. It has been accepted as a national Chinese standard YDT 1885–2009. In the West, it is mostly used on older devices, such as older Nokia mobiles, older Samsung smartphones, and some Sony Ericsson phones. It is widely used in products meant for the Chinese market. Headsets using this wiring are sometimes indicated by black plastic separators between the rings.

The CTIA/AHJ standard reverses these contacts, putting the microphone on the sleeve. It is used by Apple&#x27;s iPhone line until the 6S and SE (1st). In the West, these products made it the de facto TRRS standard. It is now used by HTC devices, recent Samsung, Nokia, and Sony phones, among others. It has the disadvantage that the microphone gets shorted to ground if the device has a metal body and the sleeve has a flange, touching the body. Headsets using this wiring are sometimes indicated by white plastic separators between the rings.

If a CTIA headset is connected to an OMTP device, the missing ground effectively connects the speakers in series, out-of-phase. This removes the singer&#x27;s voice on typical popular music recordings, which place the singers in the center. If the main microphone button is held down, shorting across the microphone and restoring ground, the correct sound may be audible.

The 4-pole 3.5 mm connector is defined by the Japanese standard JEITA/EIAJ RC-5325A, &quot;4-Pole miniature concentric plugs and jacks&quot;, originally published in 1993. 3-pole 3.5 mm TRS connectors are defined in JIS C 6560. See also JIS C 5401 and IEC 60130-8.

Apple&#x27;s iPod Shuffle 2G reuses its TRRS socket not just for audio but also for charging and syncing over USB when docked.

====Interoperability====
The &quot;USB Type-C Cable and Connector Specification&quot; specifies a mapping from a USB-C jack to a 4-pole TRRS jack, for the use of headsets, and supports both CTIA and OMTP (YD/T 1885–2009) modes. Some devices transparently handle many jack standards, and there are hardware implementations of this available as components. This is accomplished in some cases by applying a voltage to the sleeve and second ring to detect the wiring. The last two conductors may then be switched to allow a device made to one standard to be used with a headset made to the other.

=== TRRRS standards ===
A TRRRS standard for 3.5 mm connectors was developed by ITU-T. The standard, called P.382 (formerly P.MMIC), outlines technical requirements and test methods for a 5-conductor socket and plug configuration. Compared to the TRRS standard, TRRRS provides one extra conductor that can be used for connecting a second microphone or providing power to or from the audio accessory.

P.382 requires compliant sockets and plugs to be backward compatible with legacy TRRS and TRS connectors. Therefore, P.382-compliant TRRRS connectors should allow for seamless integration when used on new products. TRRRS connectors enable the following audio applications: active noise canceling, binaural recording and others, where dual analog microphone lines can be directly connected to a host device. It was commonly found on Sony phones starting with the Xperia Z1, Xperis XZ1 and Xperia 1 II.

Another TRRRS standard for 4.4 mm connectors following JEITA RC-8141C was introduced in 2015 and is used for balanced audio connections, in particular for headphone cables. This connector is often called a connector, following the brand name of Nippon DICS (NDICS). It is used by some Sony products like the M1Z Walkman of their Signature series and by some Sennheiser products like the HD 820 headphone or the HDV 820 DAC headphone amplifier.

== Switch contacts ==
Panel-mounted jacks may include switch contacts. Most commonly, a mono jack is provided with one normally closed (NC) contact, which is connected to the tip (live) connection when no plug is in the socket, and disconnected when a plug is inserted. Stereo sockets commonly provide two such NC contacts, one for the tip (left channel) and one for the ring or collar (right channel). Some jacks also have such a connection on the sleeve. As this contact is usually ground, it is not much use for signal switching but could be used to indicate to electronic circuitry that the jack is in use. Less commonly, jacks may feature normally open (NO) or change-over contacts or the switch contacts may be isolated from the connector signals.

The original purpose of these contacts was for switching in telephone exchanges, for which there were many patterns. Two sets of change-over contacts, isolated from the connector contacts, were common. The more recent pattern of one NC contact for each signal path, internally attached to the connector contact, stems from their use as headphone jacks. In many amplifiers and equipment containing them, such as electronic organs, a headphone jack is provided that disconnects the loudspeakers when in use. This is done by means of these switch contacts. In other equipment, a dummy load is provided when the headphones are not connected. This is also easily provided by means of these NC contacts.

Other uses for these contacts have been found. One is to interrupt a signal path in a mixing console to insert an effects processor. This is accomplished by using one NC contact of a stereo jack to connect the tip and ring together to affect a bypass when no plug is inserted. A similar arrangement is used in patch panels for &quot;normalization&quot; (see ).

Where a 3.5 mm or 2.5 mm jack is used as a DC power inlet connector, a switch contact may be used to disconnect an internal battery whenever an external power supply is connected, to prevent incorrect recharging of the battery.

To eliminate the need for a separate power switch, a standard stereo jack is used on most battery-powered guitar effects pedals. The internal battery has its negative terminal wired to the sleeve contact of the jack. When the user plugs in a two-conductor (mono) plug, the resulting short circuit between the sleeve and ring connects an internal battery to the unit&#x27;s circuitry, ensuring that it powers up or down automatically whenever a signal lead is inserted or removed.

== Design ==

The connector assembly is usually made by one or more hollow and one solid pin. The jack is then assembled with pins separated by an insulating material. 

Connectors that are tarnished, or that were not manufactured within tight tolerances, are prone to cause poor connections. Depending upon the surface material of the connectors, tarnished ones can be cleaned with a burnishing agent (for solid brass contacts typical) or contact cleaner (for plated contacts).

== Audio signals ==
; Notes: 
=== Balanced audio ===
When a phone connector is used to make a balanced audio connection, the two active conductors are used for differential versions of a monaural signal. The ring, used for the right channel in stereo systems, is used instead for the inverting input.

==== Advantages ====
Where space is a premium, TRS connectors offer a more compact alternative to XLR connectors, and so are common in small audio mixing desks.

Another advantage offered by TRS connectors used for balanced microphone inputs is that a standard unbalanced signal lead using a TS phone jack can simply be plugged into such an input. The inverting input on the ring contact gets correctly grounded when it makes contact with the plug body.

==== Disadvantages ====
When using non-switching phone connectors to make balanced audio connections, the socket grounds the plug tip and ring when inserting or disconnecting the plug, and the ground mates last. This causes bursts of hum, cracks and pops and may stress some outputs as they will be short circuited briefly, or longer if the plug is left half in.

This problem does not occur with XLR or when using &quot;gauge B&quot; which although it is of 0.25 in (6.35 mm) diameter has a smaller tip and a recessed ring so that the ground contact of the socket never touches the tip or ring of the plug. This type was designed for balanced audio use, being the original telephone switchboard connector and is still common in broadcast, telecommunications and many professional audio applications where it is vital that permanent circuits being monitored are not interrupted by the insertion or removal of connectors. This same tapered shape used in the &quot;gauge B&quot; plug can be seen also in aviation and military applications on various diameters of jack connector including the PJ-068 and Bantam plugs. The more common straight-sided profile used in domestic and commercial applications and discussed in most of this article is known as &quot;gauge A&quot;.

Alternatively, some switched audio jacks contain built-in isolated switches that only activate when the plug is fully inserted. This can be used to avoid the insertion issue, for instance by wiring the connectors through a double pole, double throw switch that activates only upon full insertion. Or for instance by having the switch control a circuit that gracefully ramps up the audio once the plug is fully-inserted and mutes the audio when not fully-inserted.

=== Unbalanced audio ===
Phone connectors with three conductors are also commonly used as unbalanced audio &quot;patch points&quot; (or &quot;insert points&quot;, or simply &quot;inserts&quot;), with the output on many mixers found on the tip and the input on the ring. This is often expressed as &quot;tip send, ring return&quot;. Older mixers and some outboard gear have unbalanced insert points with &quot;ring send, tip return&quot;.

In many implementations, the switch contact within the panel socket is used to close the circuit between &quot;send&quot; and &quot;return&quot; when the patch point has no plug inserted. Combining &quot;send&quot; and &quot;return&quot; functions via single  in TRS connectors halves the space needed for insert jack fields which would otherwise require two jacks, one for &quot;send&quot; and one for &quot;return&quot;.

In some three-conductor TRS phone inserts, the concept is extended by using specially designed phone jacks that will accept a mono phone plug partly inserted &quot;to the first click&quot; and will then connect the tip to the signal path without breaking it. Standard TRS connectors may also be used in this way with varying success.

In some very compact equipment including modular synthesizers, 3.5 mm TS phone connectors are used for patch points.

== See also ==

*Banana connector
*Coaxial power connector
*Dual headphone adapter

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* The 19th Century plug that&#x27;s still being used—BBC News</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="2" end="17" title="Phone connector (audio)" label="phone connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="33" end="46" title="Cylinder" label="cylindrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119531" start="54" end="75" title="electrical connectors" label="electrical connectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q174948" start="90" end="96" title="Analog signal" label="analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650799" start="97" end="109" title="audio signal" label="audio signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q589666" start="150" end="184" title="Telephone switchboard" label="tele&amp;quot;phone&amp;quot; switchboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q15190726" start="243" end="258" title="audio equipment" label="audio equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="268" end="290" title="Headphone" label="head&amp;quot;phones&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="292" end="300" title="Loudspeaker" label="speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="302" end="325" title="Microphone" label="micro&amp;quot;phones&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="327" end="341" title="mixing console" label="mixing console"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327500" start="348" end="378" title="electronic musical instruments" label="electronic musical instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="385" end="401" title="electric guitars" label="electric guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343007" start="403" end="412" title="Electronic keyboard" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="418" end="431" title="effects units" label="effects units"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531000" start="436" end="462" title="Gender of connectors and fasteners" label="&amp;quot;male&amp;quot; connector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="537" end="554" title="#Other terms" label="other terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q394001" start="584" end="603" title="electrical contacts" label="electrical contacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="609" end="612" title="Phone connector (audio)" label="tip"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="652" end="658" title="Phone connector (audio)" label="sleeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q200266" start="708" end="714" title="handle" label="handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="729" end="738" title="Insulation (electric)" label="insulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="831" end="835" title="Phone connector (audio)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501125" start="998" end="1011" title="Ground (electricity)" label="common ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="1022" end="1029" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="1040" end="1047" title="Electric current" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808786" start="1067" end="1084" title="Tip and ring" label="tip and any rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="1120" end="1126" title="signal" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1241" end="1245" title="#Miniature size" label="mini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1283" end="1291" title="#2.5mm" label="sub-mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1706" end="1709" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q466950" start="1875" end="1915" title="American Society of Mechanical Engineers" label="American Society of Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119531" start="1949" end="1969" title="electrical connector" label="electrical connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531000" start="2061" end="2067" title="Gender of connectors and fasteners" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="2099" end="2148" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q828468" start="2537" end="2540" title="XLR connector" label="XLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q399653" start="2749" end="2762" title="RCA connector" label="RCA connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q595851" start="3136" end="3140" title="RJ11" label="RJ11"/>
<link wikidata="Q956085" start="3159" end="3186" title="Telephone jack and plug" label="telephone sockets and plugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3319" end="3325" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q589666" start="3446" end="3471" title="telephone switchboard" label="manual telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="3475" end="3484" title="New Haven" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508597" start="3496" end="3509" title="George W. Coy" label="George W. Coy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40164" start="3652" end="3657" title="lever" label="lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q102836" start="3670" end="3676" title="Spring (device)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="4371" end="4387" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="4421" end="4432" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="4598" end="4609" title="US military" label="US military"/>
<link wikidata="Q506260" start="6471" end="6487" title="transistor radio" label="transistor radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q622493" start="6785" end="6792" title="Walkman" label="Walkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000075" start="7496" end="7514" title="DC power connector" label="DC power connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q923917" start="7819" end="7827" title="balanced audio" label="balanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q335234" start="8003" end="8012" title="camcorder" label="camcorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467906" start="8213" end="8230" title="virtual assistant" label="virtual assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962" start="8239" end="8255" title="laptop computers" label="laptop computers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8265" end="8278" title="#PDAs and mobile phones" label="mobile phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="8298" end="8311" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165208" start="8330" end="8335" title="Yaesu (brand)" label="Yaesu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="8723" end="8731" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248058" start="9413" end="9431" title="Professional audio" label="Professional audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193887" start="9900" end="9908" title="reliability engineering" label="reliable"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="9953" end="9967" title="mixing console" label="mixing console"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570652" start="9981" end="9989" title="patchbay" label="patchbay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658081" start="10015" end="10025" title="live sound" label="live sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180989" start="10735" end="10747" title="Digital Signal 1" label="DS1 circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239480" start="10857" end="10880" title="in-flight entertainment" label="in-flight entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q715657" start="11159" end="11180" title="World War II aircraft" label="World War II aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q173114" start="11905" end="11918" title="Digital audio" label="Digital audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343" start="11960" end="11974" title="USB sound card" label="USB sound card"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="11993" end="12002" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12004" end="12044" title="Audio and video interfaces and connectors#Multiple signals" label="display connectors with integrated sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q753452" start="12051" end="12062" title="DisplayPort" label="DisplayPort"/>
<link wikidata="Q184292" start="12067" end="12071" title="HDMI" label="HDMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="12237" end="12251" title="mobile devices" label="mobile devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q191042" start="12275" end="12288" title="surface-mount" label="surface-mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q284700" start="12297" end="12323" title="IP67" label="waterproofed up to 1 meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326110" start="12372" end="12385" title="waterproofing" label="waterproofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084900" start="12467" end="12471" title="Oppo" label="Oppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796309" start="12525" end="12534" title="micro-USB" label="micro-USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193170" start="12560" end="12580" title="Bluetooth headphones" label="Bluetooth headphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q18301787" start="12595" end="12599" title="Vivo (technology company)" label="Vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506480" start="12625" end="12630" title="LeEco" label="LeEco"/>
<link wikidata="Q14799" start="12649" end="12655" title="Lenovo" label="Lenovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896113" start="12663" end="12669" title="Moto Z" label="Moto Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="12689" end="12694" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831164" start="12737" end="12745" title="iPhone 7" label="iPhone 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="12819" end="12826" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q14799" start="12938" end="12944" title="Lenovo" label="Lenovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q861508" start="12950" end="12960" title="Chromebook" label="Chromebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q152864" start="12965" end="12969" title="Asus" label="Asus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069022" start="12970" end="12977" title="ZenBook" label="ZenBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="13188" end="13204" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="14606" end="14612" title="ampere" label="ampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="14663" end="14674" title="loudspeaker" label="loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="14754" end="14763" title="Headphone" label="Headphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="14768" end="14776" title="earphone" label="earphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195934" start="15051" end="15065" title="cordless phone" label="cordless phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474418" start="15087" end="15100" title="two-way radio" label="two-way radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="15238" end="15248" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q20026619" start="15275" end="15280" title="USB-C" label="USB-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="15305" end="15314" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="15365" end="15380" title="digital cameras" label="digital cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q335234" start="15382" end="15392" title="camcorders" label="camcorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152231" start="15398" end="15417" title="portable DVD player" label="portable DVD player"/>
<link wikidata="Q185644" start="15445" end="15460" title="composite video" label="composite video"/>
<link wikidata="Q245" start="15800" end="15812" title="Raspberry Pi" label="Raspberry Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q849488" start="15937" end="15941" title="Vaio" label="Vaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="16332" end="16342" title="Microphone" label="Microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037359" start="16845" end="16858" title="Insert (effects processing)" label="insert points"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="16916" end="16930" title="Enigma machine" label="Enigma machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q844783" start="16949" end="16958" title="plugboard" label="plugboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="17082" end="17100" title="personal computers" label="personal computers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17114" end="17139" title="Sound card#Integrated sound hardware on PC motherboards" label="integrated sound hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321" start="17150" end="17162" title="motherboards" label="motherboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343" start="17182" end="17193" title="sound cards" label="sound cards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17199" end="17244" title="PC System Design Guide#Color-coding scheme for connectors and ports" label="1999 PC System Design Guide&amp;#x27;s color code"/>
<link wikidata="Q289839" start="17399" end="17409" title="AC&amp;#x27;97" label="AC&amp;#x27;97"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370273" start="17433" end="17460" title="Intel High Definition Audio" label="Intel High Definition Audio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17577" end="17598" title="Intel High Definition Audio#Front panel connector" label="front panel connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q569874" start="17935" end="17949" title="surround sound" label="surround sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962" start="17956" end="17963" title="Laptops" label="Laptops"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="17968" end="17975" title="Tablet computer" label="tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q56155" start="18008" end="18016" title="Desktop computer" label="desktops"/>
<link wikidata="Q719550" start="18151" end="18163" title="bias voltage" label="bias voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326477" start="18188" end="18207" title="electret microphone" label="electret microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q978470" start="18226" end="18242" title="buffer amplifier" label="buffer amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="18291" end="18296" title="Apple Inc" label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200603" start="18297" end="18306" title="PlainTalk" label="PlainTalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q854506" start="18378" end="18382" title="line-level" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="18742" end="18755" title="voice over IP" label="voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q238612" start="18805" end="18823" title="5.1 surround sound" label="5.1 surround sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410364" start="19334" end="19341" title="TOSLINK" label="TOSLINK"/>
<link wikidata="Q622624" start="19434" end="19447" title="Dolby Digital" label="Dolby Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299010" start="19448" end="19451" title="DTS (sound system)" label="DTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="20207" end="20217" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="20238" end="20248" title="headphones" label="headphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="20250" end="20261" title="loudspeaker" label="loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15190726" start="20274" end="20289" title="audio equipment" label="audio equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q206907" start="21176" end="21183" title="Short circuit" label="shorted"/>
<link wikidata="Q758907" start="21323" end="21338" title="audio amplifier" label="audio amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="21561" end="21572" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="22124" end="22144" title="backwards-compatible" label="backwards-compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="24392" end="24399" title="Dynamic microphone" label="dynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="24403" end="24427" title="piezoelectric microphone" label="piezoelectric microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="24546" end="24566" title="condenser microphone" label="condenser microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326477" start="24675" end="24694" title="electret microphone" label="electret microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425387" start="24718" end="24731" title="FET amplifier" label="FET amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q939318" start="24992" end="25001" title="RC filter" label="RC filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="25522" end="25532" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q28460" start="25726" end="25735" title="handsfree" label="handsfree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193170" start="25736" end="25744" title="Headset (audio)" label="headsets"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="25841" end="25852" title="smartphones" label="smartphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q20818976" start="27057" end="27061" title="OMTP" label="OMTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="27300" end="27307" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q376692" start="27330" end="27343" title="Sony Ericsson" label="Sony Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014574" start="27515" end="27519" title="CTIA (organization)" label="CTIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="27520" end="27523" title="American Headset Jack" label="AHJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="27610" end="27615" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="27623" end="27629" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962117" start="27645" end="27647" title="iPhone 6S" label="6S"/>
<link wikidata="Q23309966" start="27652" end="27660" title="iPhone SE (1st generation)" label="SE (1st)"/>
<link wikidata="Q186012" start="27744" end="27747" title="HTC" label="HTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="27764" end="27771" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="27773" end="27778" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q376692" start="27784" end="27795" title="Sony Mobile" label="Sony phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="28695" end="28700" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28708" end="28723" title="IPod Shuffle#2nd generation" label="iPod Shuffle 2G"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="28805" end="28808" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q20026619" start="28936" end="28941" title="USB-C" label="USB-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="30250" end="30254" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q14830132" start="30280" end="30289" title="Xperia Z1" label="Xperia Z1"/>
<link wikidata="Q41327031" start="30291" end="30301" title="Sony Xperia XZ1" label="Xperis XZ1"/>
<link wikidata="Q86265338" start="30306" end="30317" title="Xperia 1 II" label="Xperia 1 II"/>
<link wikidata="Q923917" start="30429" end="30443" title="balanced audio" label="balanced audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="30475" end="30484" title="headphone" label="headphone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30628" end="30631" title="M1Z" label="M1Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q167221" start="30678" end="30688" title="Sennheiser" label="Sennheiser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30707" end="30713" title="HD 820" label="HD 820"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037359" start="32323" end="32329" title="Insert (effects processing)" label="insert"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="32923" end="32936" title="effects pedal" label="effects pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="33438" end="33448" title="Insulator (electricity)" label="insulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q923917" start="33865" end="33879" title="balanced audio" label="balanced audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928527" start="33931" end="33943" title="Differential signaling" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q828468" start="34171" end="34184" title="XLR connector" label="XLR connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="34220" end="34231" title="mixing desk" label="mixing desk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320" start="36022" end="36047" title="double pole, double throw" label="double pole, double throw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037359" start="36443" end="36450" title="Insert (effects processing)" label="inserts"/>
<link wikidata="Q391640" start="37503" end="37522" title="modular synthesizer" label="modular synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q117266" start="37597" end="37613" title="Banana connector" label="Banana connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q879965" start="37615" end="37638" title="Coaxial power connector" label="Coaxial power connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310165" start="37640" end="37662" title="Dual headphone adapter" label="Dual headphone adapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="37780" end="37788" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258960" wikidata="Q640444" url="?curid=258960" title="Severians">
<text>The Severians, also Severyans, Siverians, or Siverianians (; ; ; ) were a tribe or tribal confederation of early East Slavs occupying areas to the east of the middle Dnieper River and southeast of the Danube River. They are mentioned by the Bavarian Geographer (9th century), Emperor Constantine VII (956–959), the Khazar ruler Joseph (c. 955), and in the Primary Chronicle (1113).

==Ethnonym==
The etymology of the name &quot;Severian&quot; is uncertain. The name of the Severia region originated from the Slavic tribes. One theory proposes derivation from the Slavic word for &quot;north&quot; (&quot;sěver&quot;; men of the north), but the Severians never were the northernmost tribe of Slavs. Another theory proposes an Iranic derivation, from the name of the Sarmatian &quot;Seuer&quot; tribe (&quot;seu&quot; meaning &quot;black&quot;). Some scholars have argued that Jews called this tribe the &quot;Sawarta,&quot; based on the &quot;Kievan Letter&quot; (c. 930), written in Hebrew as &quot;SWRTH&quot; (read either as &quot;Sur&#x27;ata&quot; or &quot;Sever&#x27;ata&quot;), derived from Slavic &quot;sirota&quot; (&quot;orphan&quot;; in the letter, possibly meaning &quot;convert&quot;); or that the name &quot;Severian&quot; comes from the Magyar &quot;Savarti&quot; (&quot;black&quot;; possibly borrowed from Proto-Germanic &quot;)&quot;. Based on the writings of the Bavarian Geographer, some scholars connect the ethnonym to the &quot;Zuierani&quot;, &quot;Zeriuani&quot;, or &quot;Sebbirozi&quot; (most probably the Sabirs).

==History==
The Severians are believed to have continued the East Slavic tribal union along the middle Dnieper valley, after the political disappearance of the Antae and Dulebes, either independently or under Khazar policy. It is presumed they inhabited the lower Desna and upper Sejm and Sula rivers. They were thought to have been centered in Chernihiv (&quot;black city&quot;). However, as the Severians in the historical sources inhabited both the Dnieper valley and a part of the Danube valley, and as the Zeriuani realm was said to be so great that all Slavs traced their origins to it, Henryk Łowmiański believed that the Ruthenian Severians were the Slavic mother tribe. Professor Traian Stoianovich described the Severian Slavs as mix of Slavs and Slavicized formerly Turkic speaking Huns.

Some Severians settled in the territory of present-day northeastern Bulgaria, (Moesia Inferior, and Scythia Minor). According to Theophanes the Confessor, the Bulgars subjugated the so-called Seven Slavic tribes. One of these tribes, the &quot;Severeis&quot;, were resettled in the east &quot;from the s before Veregava&quot; (), most likely the Rish Pass of the Balkan Mountains; while the other six tribes were resettled in the southern and western regions, as far the boundary with the Pannonian Avars. In 767, the Byzantines kidnapped the Severian prince Slavun, who had made trouble in Thrace, indicating they retained a tributary relationship with the Bulgars.

The other Severians had as neighbors the Radimichs, Krivichs, and Vyatichs in the north and the Derevlians and Polianians in the west. Those tribes had to pay tribute to the Khazars in 859 in the form of squirrel and beaver skins, which suggests they lived in or near the northern forests. In 884, Oleg of Novgorod annexed their territory to the Kievan Rus&#x27;. The Severians had to pay a &quot;light tribute.&quot; According to Oleg, he had acted not against the Severians but against the Khazars. It is possible that the Severians accepted Oleg&#x27;s rule because he imposed lower taxes on them.

Together with other East Slavic tribes, Severians participated in the Oleg&#x27;s campaign against Constantinople in 907. In the 10th century, in his &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot;, Constantine VII wrote that in winter, the Rus princes (&quot;archontes&quot;) moved to and were maintained in the lands of their Severian and Krivich tributaries. Eventually, Severian territory became part of the Grand Principality of Chernigov, and the last reference to them is from 1024, when they are mentioned as part of the troops recruited by Mstislav of Chernigov for his &quot;druzhina&quot;. They had a significant impact on the victory at the Battle of Listven (1024), especially against the Varangians.

Scholars disagree about the abovementioned dates. Some place Oleg&#x27;s conquest in the 920–930s; the Khazar ruler Joseph (c. 955) mentioned that his empire ruled over the &quot;&quot;Sever&quot;, &quot;Slaviun&quot;, and &quot;Ventit&quot;&quot;; while Constantine VII wrote that the Severians paid tribute to the Rus and not the Khazars c. 950.

The Severians eventually came to be known as the Chernihovians and gave their name to the region of Severia.

==Culture==
Archaeologists have found numerous rural settlements associated with the Severians, including burial mounds with cremated bodies, from the 8th–10th centuries. Like other East Slavs, the Severians were mostly engaged in agriculture; cattle breeding; hunting; and different handicrafts such as pottery, weaving, and metalworking. It is considered that trade was not very developed, and they offered honey, wax, furs, and slaves. According to Constantine VII, they provided not only tribute but also transport via boats dug out from single hollowed trees.

The Severians were a patriarchial culture ruled by clan or tribal leaders, who held political authority in the commune (&quot;zadruga&quot;) and convened tribal councils. The centers of political power were the fortified &quot;grady&quot;, which were built in forests or on elevations, around which villages developed. Some Saltovo-Mayaki forts were situated on Severian land.

In the &quot;Primary Chronicle&quot;, it is recorded that the Drevlians, Radimichs, Vyatichi, and Severians all lived violent lifestyles, and they did not enter monogamous marriages but practiced polygamy, specifically polygyny, instead.

==References==
==See also==
* List of Medieval Slavic tribes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q640444" start="4" end="13" title="Severians" label="Severians"/>
<link wikidata="Q640444" start="20" end="29" title="Severians" label="Severyans"/>
<link wikidata="Q640444" start="31" end="40" title="Severians" label="Siverians"/>
<link wikidata="Q640444" start="45" end="57" title="Severians" label="Siverianians"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="74" end="79" title="tribe" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="90" end="103" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211052" start="113" end="123" title="East Slavs" label="East Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="166" end="179" title="Dnieper River" label="Dnieper River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="201" end="207" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q646153" start="241" end="260" title="Bavarian Geographer" label="Bavarian Geographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="284" end="299" title="Constantine VII" label="Constantine VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q173282" start="315" end="321" title="Khazars" label="Khazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202883" start="328" end="334" title="Joseph (Khazar)" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q192551" start="356" end="373" title="Primary Chronicle" label="Primary Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="400" end="409" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481850" start="473" end="480" title="Severia" label="Severia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="725" end="731" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranic"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="765" end="774" title="Sarmatians" label="Sarmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="875" end="879" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q917637" start="942" end="955" title="Kievan Letter" label="Kievan Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="983" end="989" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q193279" start="1130" end="1136" title="orphan" label="orphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q770719" start="1251" end="1257" title="Magyar tribes" label="Magyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="1321" end="1335" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q646153" start="1380" end="1399" title="Bavarian Geographer" label="Bavarian Geographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390175" start="1471" end="1479" title="Zeriuani" label="Zeriuani"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349382" start="1496" end="1505" title="Sebbirozi" label="Sebbirozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q370957" start="1531" end="1537" title="Sabir people" label="Sabirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q571813" start="1701" end="1706" title="Antae" label="Antae"/>
<link wikidata="Q911056" start="1711" end="1718" title="Dulebes" label="Dulebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q202796" start="1805" end="1810" title="Desna (river)" label="Desna"/>
<link wikidata="Q738986" start="1821" end="1825" title="Seym River" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501150" start="1830" end="1834" title="Sula River" label="Sula"/>
<link wikidata="Q157053" start="1886" end="1895" title="Chernihiv" label="Chernihiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="2026" end="2032" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390175" start="2052" end="2060" title="Zeriuani" label="Zeriuani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157555" start="2134" end="2151" title="Henryk Łowmiański" label="Henryk Łowmiański"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147883" start="2170" end="2178" title="Ruthenia" label="Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832694" start="2230" end="2248" title="Traian Stoianovich" label="Traian Stoianovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="2288" end="2293" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467530" start="2298" end="2308" title="Slavicized" label="Slavicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="2318" end="2324" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="2334" end="2338" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="2409" end="2417" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="2420" end="2435" title="Moesia Inferior" label="Moesia Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196595" start="2441" end="2454" title="Scythia Minor (Roman province)" label="Scythia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q297584" start="2470" end="2494" title="Theophanes the Confessor" label="Theophanes the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q110117" start="2500" end="2507" title="Bulgars" label="Bulgars"/>
<link wikidata="Q221355" start="2533" end="2552" title="Seven Slavic tribes" label="Seven Slavic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141643" start="2687" end="2696" title="Rish Pass" label="Rish Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q170427" start="2704" end="2720" title="Balkan Mountains" label="Balkan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="2830" end="2845" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Pannonian Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2859" end="2869" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="2893" end="2899" title="prince" label="prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491574" start="2932" end="2938" title="Thrace (theme)" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q918815" start="3050" end="3059" title="Radimichs" label="Radimichs"/>
<link wikidata="Q48287" start="3061" end="3069" title="Krivichs" label="Krivichs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520835" start="3075" end="3083" title="Vyatichs" label="Vyatichs"/>
<link wikidata="Q32739" start="3105" end="3115" title="Derevlians" label="Derevlians"/>
<link wikidata="Q722913" start="3120" end="3130" title="Polans (eastern)" label="Polianians"/>
<link wikidata="Q173282" start="3183" end="3190" title="Khazars" label="Khazars"/>
<link wikidata="Q9482" start="3213" end="3221" title="squirrel" label="squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="3226" end="3232" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131983" start="3307" end="3323" title="Oleg of Novgorod" label="Oleg of Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="3355" end="3371" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707090" start="3681" end="3701" title="Rus&amp;#x27;-Byzantine War (907)" label="Oleg&amp;#x27;s campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="3710" end="3724" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q463903" start="3767" end="3791" title="De Administrando Imperio" label="De Administrando Imperio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="3799" end="3814" title="Constantine VII" label="Constantine VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q193379" start="3860" end="3866" title="archon" label="archon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322662" start="4012" end="4043" title="Grand Principality of Chernigov" label="Grand Principality of Chernigov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350272" start="4149" end="4170" title="Mstislav of Chernigov" label="Mstislav of Chernigov"/>
<link wikidata="Q782900" start="4185" end="4193" title="druzhina" label="druzhina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423998" start="4253" end="4270" title="Battle of Listven" label="Battle of Listven"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343" start="4302" end="4312" title="Varangians" label="Varangians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257426" start="4519" end="4526" title="Sclaveni" label="Slaviun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416201" start="4544" end="4550" title="Vistula Veneti" label="Ventit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481850" start="4764" end="4771" title="Severia" label="Severia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="4786" end="4799" title="Archaeologist" label="Archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="4880" end="4892" title="burial mound" label="burial mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="4899" end="4907" title="Cremation" label="cremated"/>
<link wikidata="Q211052" start="4956" end="4966" title="East Slavs" label="East Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="5005" end="5016" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="5018" end="5033" title="cattle breeding" label="cattle breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="5035" end="5042" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="5058" end="5068" title="handicraft" label="handicraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="5078" end="5085" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="5087" end="5094" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="5100" end="5112" title="metalworking" label="metalworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="5183" end="5188" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="5190" end="5193" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="5195" end="5199" title="furs" label="furs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="5205" end="5211" title="slaves" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q596073" start="5297" end="5337" title="Dugout canoe" label="boats dug out from single hollowed trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="5361" end="5373" title="patriarchy" label="patriarchial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753181" start="5466" end="5473" title="zadruga" label="zadruga"/>
<link wikidata="Q88598" start="5567" end="5572" title="Gord (archaeology)" label="grady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987770" start="5664" end="5678" title="Saltovo-Mayaki culture" label="Saltovo-Mayaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q192551" start="5731" end="5748" title="Primary Chronicle" label="Primary Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q32739" start="5780" end="5789" title="Drevlians" label="Drevlians"/>
<link wikidata="Q918815" start="5791" end="5800" title="Radimichs" label="Radimichs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520835" start="5802" end="5810" title="Vyatichi" label="Vyatichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184211" start="5879" end="5889" title="monogamy" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="5914" end="5922" title="polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q243688" start="5937" end="5945" title="polygyny" label="polygyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q159837" start="5987" end="6017" title="List of Medieval Slavic tribes" label="List of Medieval Slavic tribes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258961" wikidata="Q281914" url="?curid=258961" title="Assignat">
<text>An assignat () was a monetary instrument, an order to pay, used during the time of the French Revolution, and the French Revolutionary Wars.

== France ==
Assignats were paper money (fiat currency) authorized by the Constituent Assembly in France from 1789 to 1796, during the French Revolution, to address imminent bankruptcy. They were originally backed by the value of properties now held by the nation; those of the crown taken over on 7 October, and those of the Catholic Church, which were confiscated, on the motion of Mirabeau, by the Assembly on 2 November 1789. Credit was wrecked, according to Talleyrand; for Mirabeau &quot;the deficit was the treasure of the nation&quot;. In September the treasury was empty. Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord proposed &quot;national goods&quot; should be given back to the nation. Necker proposed to borrow from the Caisse d&#x27;Escompte, but his intention to change the private bank into a national bank similar to the Bank of England failed. A general bankruptcy seemed certain. On 21 December 1789 a first decree was voted through, ordering the issue (in April 1790) of 400,000 livres&#x27; worth of assignats, certificates of indebtedness, with an interest rate of 5%, secured and repayable based on the auctioning of the &quot;Biens nationaux&quot;. The assignats were immediately a source of political controversy. Constitutional monarchists such as Jean-Sifrein Maury, Jacques Antoine Marie de Cazalès, Nicolas Bergasse and Jean-Jacques Duval d&#x27;Eprémesnil opposed it. 
While their proponents, like other eighteenth-century advocates of &quot;land banks,&quot; argued that land was a more stable source of value than was gold or silver, the assignats&#x27; opponents saw them as based on an illegitimate seizure of property.

The assignats were first to be paid to the creditors of the state. With these the creditors could purchase national land, the assignats having, for this purpose, the preference over other forms of money. If the creditor did not care to purchase land, it was supposed that he could obtain the face value for them from those who desired land. Those assignats which were returned to the state as purchase-money were to be cancelled, and the whole issue, it was argued, would consequently disappear as the national lands were distributed.

Originally meant as bonds, the assignats were re-defined as legal tender (assignats-monnaie) in April 1790 to address the liquidity crisis provoked by the political, social, and cultural instability of the Revolution.

===1790–1792===

Étienne Clavière lobbied for large issues of assignats representing national wealth and operating as legal tender. On 17 April 1790, the notes were declared legal tender but their interest was reduced to 3%. For daily life smaller denominations of 200 and 300 livres were needed. The assignats would compensate for the scarcity of coin and would revive industry and trade. Once the assignats were paid, they had to be burnt. A surety was prepared for future issues of paper money. As soon as the assignats started to circulate, their value decreased by 5 percent. Du Pont de Nemours feared the emission of assignats would double the price of bread.

On 27 August 1790 the Assembly decided another issue of 1,9 billion assignats which would become legal tender before the end of the year for all actions, c.q. banknotes, which could be acquired by anyone and used for ordinary business transactions. Necker, suspected of reactionary tendencies, resolutely against the transformation of the assignat into paper currency, handed in his resignation on 3 September. The massive and dangerous issue of 1,9 billion he succeeded to get down to 800 million, but the attacks may have influenced his resignation. Necker was not backed by Comte de Mirabeau, his strongest opponent who called for &quot;national money&quot;.

Necker foretold that the paper money, with which the dividends were about to be paid, would soon be of no value. Since no one had truly the right to make assignats, everyone would soon begin to do so. Montesquiou-Fézensac, charged with the issue of assignats, feared stockjobbing and greed.

When the cost of reimbursing Old Regime venal office holders for their properties (judgeships, military ranks etc.) added yet more to the Revolution&#x27;s inherited debts, the National Assembly voted by a narrow margin to issue additional assignats in September 1790, initially of an additional 800 million francs. By September 1791, the value of the assignats had depreciated by 18–20 percent.

The properties backing the assignats were renamed &quot;biens nationaux&quot; (&quot;national goods&quot;) and auctioned by district-level authorities. On 10 March 1790, on the proposition Pétion, the administration of the church property was transferred to the municipalities. Through the sale of these properties, assignats were used to successfully retire a significant portion of the national debt. However, since these land sales were their original intent, the assignats were issued only in large denominations (50, 100, 200, and 1000 livres) that worked poorly as a daily medium of exchange. Moreover, the National Assembly never mandated that assignats and Old Regime coins (which remained in circulation) had to be exchanged on par. Already in fall 1790, the National Assembly itself was paying a 7.5% commission to exchange large denomination assignats for smaller coins. By the end of 1791, the discount rate was often 20% or more. These limits on the bills&#x27; practical use, and further issues eventually totalling 3.75 billion francs, coupled with the organized opposition of counter-revolutionaries, led to their losing value. On 1 February 1792 the assignats depreciated almost with 50%. Patriotic revolutionaries blamed the assignats&#x27; depreciation on foreign conspiracies. Clavière held the coalition of states responsible for the collapse of the assignat. Stephen D. Dillaye, an American politician who referred to monetary policy history, wrote that the British, Belgian, and Swiss counterfeited the currency industrially: &quot;Seventeen manufacturing establishments were in full operation in London, with a force of four hundred men devoted to the production of false and forged Assignats.&quot; On 17 October 1792, no less than 2,400 million assignations were in circulation.

===1793–1799===
After the outbreak of war, the fall of the monarchy, and the declaration of a Republic, the National Convention mandated that bills and coins exchange on par, but this law could never be enforced. Instead, the assignats continued depreciating. On 10 April 1793 Robespierre accused Dumouriez in a speech: &quot;Dumouriez and his supporters have brought a fatal blow to the public fortune, preventing circulation of assignats in Belgium&quot;.

Counterfeiting of assignats was widespread, both in France and abroad. Researchers have documented how French royalists worked with British authorities, including senior ministers and military commanders, to manufacture paper for counterfeit assignats at mills across England, after which the paper was distributed across various locations for printing. By August 1793 the amount of assignats in circulation had doubled to 5 billion. Rising prices and food shortages exacerbated public unrest in September. Bills such as the &quot;Maximum Price Act&quot; of 1793 aimed to address this situation.

On 8 November 1793 the director of the manufacture of assignats :fr:Simon-François Lamarche was executed. On 2 December Clavière was arrested; he committed suicide within a week. On 24 February 1794 the extension of the &quot;maximum&quot; to all commodities only increased the confusion. Trade was paralysed and all manufacturing establishments were closed down.

===June 1794===

By June 1794 the total number of assignats aggregated nearly 8 billion, of which only 2,464 million had returned to the treasury and been destroyed, after an emission of 1,205 million assignats on 19 June; the assignat was losing more and more value. In August, the Thermidorian Convention lifted the Maximum Price Act in the name of &quot;economic freedom&quot; and the assignats lost almost all value over the next year. Toward the end of 1794 seven billion in assignats were in circulation. The assignat fell from 31% of its face value in August 1794 to 24% in November, 17% in February, and 8% in April 1795. By the end of May, 1795, the circulation was increased to ten billion, at the end of July, to fourteen billion. By 1796 the issues had reached 45.5 billion francs, excluding counterfeits, and the Directoire issued Mandats, a currency in the form of land warrants to replace the assignats, although these too quickly failed and were received back by the state at a steep discount. Napoleon opposed all forms of fiat currency. By the 1830s–1840s, the assignats and other papers issued during the Revolution had become collectors&#x27; items.

==Italy==
Between 1798 and 1799, the revolutionary French forces established the Roman Republic, which also issued &quot;assignats&quot; (Italian: &quot;assegnati&quot;). They were issued by the law of 23 Fructidor VI (14 Sept 1798). The currency used was &quot;paolo&quot; or &quot;giulio&quot;, the older currency of the Papal States. Roman Republic also issued coins denominated in &quot;baiocco&quot; and &quot;scudo&quot;.
== Russia ==

The term &quot;assignat&quot; is similar to the Russian word &quot;assignatsia&quot; which means &quot;banknote&quot;. &quot;Assignatsionny rubl&quot; (assignation ruble) was used in Russia from 1769 until 1 January 1849. This had no connection to the French Revolution.
==See also==

*Warrant of payment

==References==
==Further reading==
*Fiat Money Inflation in France, How It Came, What It Brought, and How It Ended BY ANDREW DIGESON WHITE (1933). Mises Institute
*Bosher, John F. &quot;French Finances, 1770–1795: From Business to Bureaucracy&quot; (1970)
*Harris, Seymour E. &quot;The Assignats&quot; (1930)
*Spang, Rebecca L., &quot;Stuff and Money in the Time of the French Revolution&quot; (London and Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015).
* A Cursory View of the Assignats and Remaining Resources of French Finance ... by Francis d&#x27; Ivernois
* Cobbett&#x27;s Parliamentary History of England: From the Norman ..., Band 31

==External links==
* The Great French Inflation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q281914" start="3" end="11" title="Assignat" label="assignat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="87" end="104" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="114" end="139" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q240532" start="183" end="196" title="fiat currency" label="fiat currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q876424" start="216" end="236" title="National Constituent Assembly (France)" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="277" end="294" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q218747" start="526" end="534" title="Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, Comte de Mirabeau" label="Mirabeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q160499" start="723" end="761" title="Talleyrand" label="Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord"/>
<link wikidata="Q123062" start="834" end="840" title="Jacques Necker" label="Necker"/>
<link wikidata="Q806950" start="869" end="891" title="Caisse d&amp;#x27;Escompte" label="Caisse d&amp;#x27;Escompte"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="945" end="958" title="central bank" label="national bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="974" end="989" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478131" start="1286" end="1301" title="Biens nationaux" label="Biens nationaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q561729" start="1410" end="1428" title="Jean-Sifrein Maury" label="Jean-Sifrein Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677888" start="1430" end="1462" title="Jacques Antoine Marie de Cazalès" label="Jacques Antoine Marie de Cazalès"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090417" start="1464" end="1480" title="Nicolas Bergasse" label="Nicolas Bergasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166244" start="1485" end="1521" title="Jean-Jacques Duval d&amp;#x27;Eprémesnil" label="Jean-Jacques Duval d&amp;#x27;Eprémesnil"/>
<link wikidata="Q157165" start="1834" end="1842" title="creditor" label="creditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q931754" start="2083" end="2093" title="face value" label="face value"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="2347" end="2352" title="Bond (finance)" label="bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643989" start="2387" end="2399" title="legal tender" label="legal tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q289550" start="2563" end="2579" title="Étienne Clavière" label="Étienne Clavière"/>
<link wikidata="Q748845" start="2990" end="2996" title="surety" label="surety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643989" start="3310" end="3322" title="legal tender" label="legal tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q218747" start="3790" end="3807" title="Comte de Mirabeau" label="Comte de Mirabeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334744" start="4077" end="4097" title="François-Xavier-Marc-Antoine de Montesquiou-Fézensac" label="Montesquiou-Fézensac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618097" start="4143" end="4155" title="stockjobbing" label="stockjobbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478131" start="4621" end="4636" title="biens nationaux" label="biens nationaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q353464" start="4754" end="4760" title="Pétion" label="Pétion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="4953" end="4966" title="Government debt" label="national debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19564276" start="5946" end="5964" title="Stephen D. Dillaye" label="Stephen D. Dillaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="6409" end="6412" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154330" start="6430" end="6438" title="10 August (French Revolution)" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="6465" end="6473" title="French First Republic" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="6479" end="6498" title="National Convention" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q378572" start="6668" end="6677" title="Dumouriez" label="Dumouriez"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="6830" end="6844" title="Counterfeiting" label="Counterfeiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092643" start="7361" end="7378" title="Maximum Price Act" label="Maximum Price Act"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7491" end="7518" title=":fr:Simon-François Lamarche" label=":fr:Simon-François Lamarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q474757" start="8075" end="8098" title="Thermidorian Convention" label="Thermidorian Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092643" start="8110" end="8127" title="Maximum Price Act" label="Maximum Price Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="8618" end="8628" title="French Directory" label="Directoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747904" start="8636" end="8643" title="Mandats territoriaux" label="Mandats"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="8802" end="8810" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q240532" start="8832" end="8845" title="fiat currency" label="fiat currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342494" start="8938" end="8960" title="Collectable" label="collectors&amp;#x27; items"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="9000" end="9027" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="revolutionary French forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q175881" start="9044" end="9058" title="Roman Republic (18th century)" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q837284" start="9168" end="9177" title="Fructidor" label="Fructidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403484" start="9270" end="9298" title="Papal States scudo" label="currency of the Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778763" start="9557" end="9574" title="assignation ruble" label="assignation ruble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969954" start="9691" end="9709" title="Warrant of payment" label="Warrant of payment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258963" wikidata="Q175057" url="?curid=258963" title="Fernando de Noronha">
<text>Fernando de Noronha (), officially the State District of Fernando de Noronha () and formerly known as the Territory of Fernando de Noronha () until 1988, is an archipelago in the Atlantic Ocean, part of the State of Pernambuco, Brazil, and located off the Brazilian coast. It consists of 21 islands and islets, extending over an area of . Only the eponymous main island is inhabited; it has an area of and a population estimated at 3,101 in 2020. While most of the archipelago is relatively low-lying, there are parts reaching more than in elevation.

The islands are administratively unique in Brazil. They form a &quot;state district&quot; () that is administered directly by the government of the state of Pernambuco (despite being geographically closer to the state of Rio Grande do Norte). The state district&#x27;s jurisdiction also includes the very remote Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago, located northeast of Fernando de Noronha. Seventy percent of the islands&#x27; area was established in 1988 as a national marine park.

In 2001, UNESCO designated it as a World Heritage Site because of its importance as a feeding ground for tuna, sharks, sea turtles, and marine mammals. Its time zone is UTC−02:00 all year round.

==History==

=== Discovery ===


Fernando de Noronha&#x27;s occupation dates to the early 16th century. Due to its geographical position, the archipelago was one of the first lands sighted in the New World, being shown in a nautical chart in 1500 by the Spanish cartographer Juan de La Cosa, and in 1502 by the Portuguese Alberto Cantino, in the latter with the name &quot;Quaresma&quot;.

Based on the written record, Fernando de Noronha island was discovered on August 10, 1503, by a Portuguese expedition, organized and financed by a private commercial consortium headed by the Lisbon merchant Fernão de Loronha. The expedition was under the overall command of captain Gonçalo Coelho and carried the Italian adventurer Amerigo Vespucci, who wrote an account of it. The flagship of the expedition hit a reef and foundered near the island. On Coelho&#x27;s orders, Vespucci anchored at the island, and spent a week there, while the rest of the Coelho fleet went on south. In his letter to Soderini, Vespucci describes the uninhabited island and reports its name as the &quot;island of St. Lawrence&quot; (August 10 is the feast day of St. Lawrence; it was a custom of Portuguese explorations to name locations by the liturgical calendar).

The island&#x27;s existence was reported to Lisbon sometime between then and January 16, 1504, when King Manuel I of Portugal issued a charter granting the &quot;island of St. John&quot; (&quot;São João&quot;) as a hereditary captaincy to Fernão de Loronha. As Vespucci did not return to Lisbon until June 1504, historians have hypothesized that a stray ship of the Coelho fleet, under an unknown captain, may have returned to the island to collect Vespucci, did not find him or anyone else there, and went back to Lisbon by itself with the news. Vespucci, in his letter, claims that he left the island August 18, 1503, and upon his arrival in Lisbon a year later, on June 18, 1504, the people of Lisbon were surprised, as they &quot;had been told&quot; that his ship had been lost. The captain who returned to Lisbon with the news of the island and Vespucci&#x27;s ship&#x27;s loss is unknown. Some have speculated this captain was Loronha himself, the chief financier of this expedition.

This account, reconstructed from the written record, is challenged by the cartographic record. An island, named &quot;Quaresma&quot;, looking very much like Fernando de Noronha island, appears in the Cantino planisphere. The Cantino map was composed by an anonymous Portuguese cartographer, and completed before November 1502, well before the Coelho expedition even set out. This has led to speculation that the island was discovered by a previous expedition. However, there is no consensus on which expedition that might have been. The name &quot;Quaresma&quot; means Lent, suggesting it must have been discovered in March or early April, which does not correspond well with the known expeditions. There is also a red island to the west of Quaresma in the Cantino map that does not fit with Fernando de Noronha island. Some have explained these anomalies away by reading &quot;quaresma&quot; as &quot;anaresma&quot;, making the proposed Lent timing unnecessary, and proposing that the red island is just an accidental inkblot.
If Quaresma is indeed Fernando de Noronha, then it is not known who discovered it. One proposal is that it was discovered by a royal Portuguese mapping expedition that was sent out in May 1501, commanded by an unknown captain (possibly André Gonçalves) and also accompanied by Amerigo Vespucci. The 1501 mapping expedition is also known as the &quot;Third Voyage&quot; of Amerigo Vespucci (and his first under the Portuguese flag). Vespucci relates the account of this expedition twice - first in a letter to Lorenzo Pietro Francesco di Medici, written in early 1503 (see (account) in &quot;Letter do Medici&quot;), and then again in his letters to Piero Soderini, written 1504-05 ([account] in &quot;Letter to Soderini&quot;). In his account, Vespucci does not mention the name of the captain of this 1501 mapping expedition, and his identity has been widely speculated on. The 16th-century chronicler Gaspar Correia suggests that it was André Gonçalves (&quot;Lendas da India&quot;, p.152). Greenlee (1945) conjectures that it might be Fernão de Loronha himself (a hypothesis also suggested by Duarte Leite (1923)). However, this is strongly disputed by other authors, e.g. Roukema (1963), who argue that it would be highly unlikely for a wealthy merchant like Loronha to personally command vessels himself. Loronha&#x27;s support (if any) to the mapping expedition was probably limited to financing.

According to Vespucci, this expedition returned to Lisbon in September 1502, just in time to influence the final composition of the Cantino map. However, Vespucci does not report discovering this island then, instead stating that the first time he saw the island was on the 1503 Coelho expedition.

There is a letter written by Venetian emissary Pascualigo on October 12, 1502, saying that a ship arrived &quot;from the land of Parrots&quot; in Lisbon on July 22, 1502 (three months before Vespucci). This could be a stray ship from the mapping expedition that returned prematurely, or another expedition altogether, about which there is no information. The timing of its reputed arrival (July 1502), makes it possible that it stumbled on the island some time in March 1502, on the homeward voyage, well within Lent.

A third theory is that the island had already been discovered in 1500, shortly after the discovery of Brazil by the Second India Armada under Pedro Álvares Cabral. After his brief landfall at Porto Seguro, Cabral dispatched a supply ship under either Gaspar de Lemos or André Gonçalves (sources conflict) back to Lisbon, to report the discovery. This returning supply ship would have returned north along the Brazilian coast and might have come across Fernando de Noronha island, and reported its existence in Lisbon by July 1500. However, this contradicts the Quaresma name, since the returning supply ship was sailing well after Lent.

A fourth possibility is that it was discovered by the Third India Armada of João da Nova, which set out from Lisbon in March or April 1501, and returned in September 1502, also in time to influence the Cantino map. Chronicler Gaspar Correia asserts that on the outward voyage, the Third Armada made a stop on the Brazilian coast around Cape Santo Agostinho. Two other chroniclers (João de Barros and Damião de Góis) do not mention a landfall, but do report they discovered an island (which they believe to be identified as Ascension island, but this is not certain). It is thus possible that the Third Armada may have discovered Fernando de Noronha island on their outward leg. However, the timing is very tight: Easter landed on April 11, 1501, while the estimated departure date of the Third Armada from Lisbon ranges from March 5 to April 15, not leaving enough time to reach those environs within Lent.

As a result of these anomalies, some modern historians have proposed that Fernando de Noronha is not depicted on the 1502 Cantino map at all. Instead, they have proposed that Quaresma island and the accompanying red &quot;inkblot&quot; are in fact the Rocas Atoll, slightly misplaced on the map. This reserves the discovery of Fernando de Noronha island itself as indeed on August 10, 1503, by the Gonçalo Coelho expedition, as originally reported by Vespucci. Roukema concludes that it was the Rocas Atoll that was discovered by the returning stray ship or unrecorded expedition on March 16, 1502, well within Lent.

The name &quot;São João&quot; eventually gave way to the initially informal name of &quot;Fernando de Noronha&quot;. A royal letter dated May 20, 1559, to descendants of the Loronha family, still refers to the island by its official name of &quot;ilha de São João&quot;., but already in other places, e.g. the logbook of Martim Afonso de Sousa in the 1530s, it was referred to as the &quot;island of Fernão de Noronha&quot; (&quot;Noronha&quot; being a common misspelling of &quot;Loronha&quot;). The informal name eventually displaced the official name.

===1500–1700===

The Lisbon merchant Fernão de Loronha held not only Fernando de Noronha island as a hereditary captaincy but also (from 1503 to around 1512) a commercial monopoly on trade in Brazil. Between 1503 and 1512, Noronha&#x27;s agents set up a string of warehouses (&quot;feitorias&quot;) along the Brazilian coast, and engaged in trade with the indigenous peoples in Brazil for brazilwood, a native red dye wood highly valued by European clothmakers. Fernando de Noronha island was the central collection point of this network. Brazilwood, continuously harvested by the coastal Indians and delivered to the various coastal warehouses, was shipped to the central warehouse on Fernando de Noronha island, which was intermittently visited by a larger transport ship that would carry the collected loads back to Europe. After the expiration of Loronha&#x27;s commercial charter in 1512, the organization of the brazilwood enterprise was taken over by the Portuguese crown, but Loronha and his descendants retained private ownership of Fernando de Noronha island itself as a hereditary captaincy, at least down to the 1560s.

===1700–1900===

In July 1719, the Welsh pirate Bartholomew Roberts, also known as &quot;Black Bart,&quot; was present on the island for a total of nine weeks, before heading off in search of Portuguese ships in the West Indies.

====French occupation====
In 1736, the French East India Company sent an expedition commanded by Captain Lesquelin, with troops and resources to colonise the island. When finding out that the French had colonised the island, the Viceroy of Brazil, the Count of Galveias, sent scouts that verified the occupation, on 26 September 1736. King John V of Portugal determined that the French troops and colonisers were expelled, dispatching a royal charter on 26 May 1737 designating the Governor of Pernambuco, Henrique Luís Pereira Freire de Andrade, to comply with the resolution. At the same time, the Count of Galveias prepared an expedition with 250 soldiers, commanded by Colonel João Lobo de Lacerda, that sailed from Recife on 6 October 1737. Lacerda successfully expelled the French without resistance and returned to Recife on 11 July 1738.

Captain Henry Foster stopped at Fernando de Noronha during his scientific survey expedition as commander of HMS &quot;Chanticleer&quot;, which had set out in 1828. As well as surveying coasts and ocean currents, Foster used a Kater invariable pendulum to make observations on gravity. He took the island as the point of junction of his double line of longitudes setting out his survey. He was given considerable assistance by the Governor of Fernando Noronha who let Foster use part of his own house for the pendulum experiments. The longitude of Rio de Janeiro taken by Foster was among those on one side of a significant discrepancy, which meant that the charts of South America were in doubt.

To resolve this, the Admiralty instructed Captain Robert FitzRoy to command on a survey expedition. One of its essential tasks was a stop at Fernando Noronha to confirm its exact longitude, using the 22 chronometers on board the ship to give the precise time of observations. They arrived at the island in the late evening of 19 February 1832, anchoring at midnight. On 20 February FizRoy landed a small party to take the observations, despite difficulties caused by heavy surf, then sailed on for Bahia, Brazil that evening.

During the day, the island was visited by the naturalist Charles Darwin, who was one of the &quot;Beagle&quot;&#x27;s passengers. He took notes for his book on geology. He wrote about admiring the woods: 
&quot;The whole island is one forest, &amp; this is so thickly intertwined that it requires great exertion to crawl along. — The scenery was very beautiful, &amp; large Magnolias &amp; Laurels &amp; trees covered with delicate flowers ought to have satisfied me. — But I am sure all the grandeur of the Tropics has not yet been seen by me. — We had no gaudy birds, No humming birds. No large flowers&quot;.

His experiences on Fernando de Noronha were recorded in his journal, later published as &quot;The Voyage of the Beagle&quot;. He also included a short description of the island in his 1844 &quot;Geological Observations on the Volcanic Islands visited during the voyage of H.M.S. Beagle&quot;.

The island was also used as a penal colony in the 19th century.

===1900–present===


In the late 18th century, the first prisoners were sent to Fernando de Noronha. A prison was built. In 1897 the government of the state of Pernambuco took possession of the prison. Between 1938 and 1945, Fernando de Noronha was a political prison. In 1957 the prison was closed and the archipelago was visited by President Juscelino Kubitschek. However, in 1964 after a military coup, Miguel Arraes was incarcerated there for his refusal to resign as governor of Pernambuco.

At the beginning of the 20th century, the British arrived to provide technical cooperation in telegraphy (&quot;The South American Company&quot;). Later the French came with the &quot;French Cable&quot; and the Italians with &quot;Italcable&quot;.

In 1942, during World War II, the archipelago was made a Federal territory, which included Rocas Atoll and Saint Peter and Paul Rocks. The government sent political and ordinary prisoners to the local prison.

An airport was constructed in September 1942 by the United States Army Air Forces Air Transport Command for the Natal-Dakar air route. It provided a transoceanic link between Brazil and French West Africa for cargo, transiting aircraft and personnel during the Allies campaign in Africa. Brazil transferred the airport to the jurisdiction of the United States Navy on 5 September 1944. After the end of the war, the administration of the airport was transferred back to the Brazilian Government.
The geographic position of the airport averted a major air disaster on July 21, 1950. A BOAC Canadair C-4 Argonaut, with a crew of 7 and 12 passengers, en route to Natal from Dakar encountered severe engine problems which resulted, at one point, in both engines on the starboard wing being shut down. With only two functioning engines on the port wing, the reduction in power output caused the aircraft to steadily lose altitude from its normal cruising altitude of 20000 ft at a rate of 400 ft/min.A further difficulty was that the propeller on the inboard engine could not be feathered, which significantly increased aircraft drag. The crew also had to cope with a persistent fire on the same engine. As a result, the Captain ordered an SOS to be issued. The crew realised that they might not be able to reach Natal and would have to ditch in the South Atlantic. Consequently, the Captain decided to divert to Fernando de Noronha, 480 miles to the southwest. En-route the crew managed to restart the outboard engine and this enabled the aircraft to maintain an altitude of 9000 ft. Although there were problems with coolant temperature on the port wing engines plus difficulties in locating the small archipelago, the crew nursed the Argonaut to a safe landing at Fernando de Noronha, some four hours after their ordeal began.

Nowadays, Fernando de Noronha Airport is served by daily flights from Recife and Natal on the Brazilian coast.

In 1988, Brazil designated approximately 70% of the archipelago as a maritime national park, with the goal of preserving the land and sea environment. On October 5, 1988, the Federal Territory was dissolved and added to the state of Pernambuco (except Rocas Atoll, which was added to the state of Rio Grande do Norte).

Today Fernando de Noronha&#x27;s economy depends on tourism, restricted by the limitations of its delicate ecosystem. In addition to the historical interest noted above, the archipelago has been the subject of the attention of various scientists dedicated to the study of its flora, fauna, geology, etc. The jurisdiction is considered to be a separate &quot;entity&quot; by the DX Century Club, and so is visited rather often by amateur radio operators.

In 2001, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) declared Fernando de Noronha, with Rocas Atoll, a World Heritage Site. It cited the following reasons: 
:a) the island&#x27;s importance as a feeding ground for several species, including tuna, billfish, cetaceans, sharks, and marine turtles, 
:b) a high population of resident spinner dolphins and 
:c) protection for endangered species, such as the hawksbill sea turtle (critically endangered) and various birds.

In 2009, Air France Flight 447 crashed into the Atlantic Ocean off Fernando de Noronha. Rescue and recovery operations were launched from the island. Bodies and debris from the Airbus A330 operating the flight were recovered within five days. All 228 people on board were killed. The crash had been caused by the flight crew&#x27;s inappropriate response to inaccurate airspeed readings due to the pitot tubes being blocked, with the first officer (who was the pilot flying) pulling the nose up, which caused the aircraft to enter a stall and crash.

==Geography==

===Geology===
The islands of this archipelago are the visible parts of a range of submerged mountains. It consists of 21 islands, islets and rocks of volcanic origin. The main island has an area of , being long and wide at its maximum. The base of this enormous volcanic formation is below the surface. The volcanic rocks are of variable, though mainly silica-undersaturated, character with basanite, nephelinite and phonolite among the lava types found. The main island, from which the group gets its name, makes up 91% of the total area; the islands of Rata, Sela Gineta, Cabeluda and São José, together with the islets of Leão and Viúva make up the rest. The central upland of the main island is called the Quixaba.

===Flora===
The United Nations Environment Programme lists 15 possible endemic plant species, including species of the genera &quot;Capparis noronhae&quot; (two species), &quot;Ceratosanthes noronhae&quot; (three species), &quot;Cayaponia noronhae&quot; (two species), &quot;Moriordica noronhae,&quot; &quot;Cereus noronhae&quot;, &quot;Palicourea noronhae&quot;, &quot;Guettarda noronhae&quot;, &quot;Bumelia noronhae&quot;, &quot;Physalis noronhae&quot;, and &quot;Ficus noronhae&quot;.

===Fauna===
The islands have two endemic birds: the Noronha elaenia (&quot;Elaenia ridleyana&quot;) and the Noronha vireo (&quot;Vireo gracilirostris&quot;). Both are present on the main island; the Noronha vireo is also present on Ilha Rata. In addition there is an endemic subspecies of eared dove (&quot;Zenaida auriculata noronha&quot;). Subfossil remains of an extinct endemic rail have also been found. The archipelago is also an important site for breeding seabirds. An endemic sigmodontine rodent (&quot;Noronhomys vespuccii&quot;), mentioned by Amerigo Vespucci, is now extinct. The islands have two endemic reptiles, the Noronha wormlizard (&quot;Amphisbaena ridleyi&quot;) and the Noronha skink (&quot;Trachylepis atlantica&quot;).

===Marine life===
The life above and below sea is the main attraction of the island. Sea turtles, cetaceans (most common among these are spinner dolphins and humpback whales, followed by many others such as pantropical spotted dolphins, short-finned pilot whales, and melon-headed whales), albatrosses, and many other species are frequently observed.

===Climate===
Fernando de Noronha has a tropical wet and dry climate (&quot;Aw/As&quot;), with two well-defined seasons for rainfall, if not temperature. The rainy season lasts from February to July; the rest of the year sees little rain. The temperature ranges, both diurnal and monthly, are unusually slight.

===Conservation and environmental threats===
Most of the original large trees were cut down in the 19th century, when the island was used as a prison, for firewood and to keep the prisoners from hiding and making rafts.

Also, exotic species have been introduced:

* Linseed, intended for use as cattle feed.
* Tegu lizards (&quot;Tupinambis merianae&quot;, locally known as &quot;teju&quot;) introduced in the 1950s to control a rat infestation. It did not work because Tegus are diurnal and rats, nocturnal. The lizards are now considered a plague, feeding mostly on bird eggs.
* Rock cavies (&quot;Kerodon rupestris&quot;, locally known as &quot;mocó&quot;) introduced by the military in the 1960s as hunting game for soldiers.
* Domestic cats, introduced as pets, now they spread throughout the whole island and several acquired a feral status, surviving only by preying on native birds, rock cavies and synanthropic rodents.

From these, the domestic cat and the tegu lizard have become invasive.

The island is divided between the Fernando de Noronha Marine National Park and the Fernando de Noronha Environmental Protection Area. The latter covers the urban, tourist area.

==Economy==

Tourism including dolphin watching, diving, and charter fishing comprise the majority of the island&#x27;s economy.

===Economic indicators===
The archipelago of Fernando de Noronha in 2005 had a gross domestic product (GDP) of R$22,802,000 and a per capita income of R$10,001. In 2000, the United Nations Development Programme estimated the Fernando de Noronha state district&#x27;s Human Development Index (HDI) at 0.862. The only two banking centers in the archipelago are a branch of Banco Santander Brasil and a branch of Banco Bradesco. There are one or two additional automated teller machines (ATMs) around the main island.

==Tourism==
The beaches of Fernando de Noronha are promoted for tourism and recreational diving. The most popular ones include Baía do Sancho, Pig Bay, Dolphins Bay, Sueste Bay and Praia do Leão. Due to the South Equatorial Current that pushes warm water from Africa to the island, diving to depths of does not require a wetsuit. The visibility underwater can reach up to .

The part of the island facing the mainland has the beaches in the following order: Baía do Sancho, Baía dos Porcos, Praia da Cacimba do Padre, Praia do Bode, Praia dos Americanos, Praia do Boldró, Praia da Conceição, Praia do Meio and Praia do Cachorro. The part of the island facing the Atlantic Ocean has only three beaches: Praia do Leão, Praia do Sueste and Praia do Atalaia. A great way to get to know the island is to walk from Praia dos Americanos, pass by Praia do Boldró, Praia da Conceição, Praia do Meio and finish the walking at Praia do Cachorro.

The island is served by Governador Carlos Wilson Airport with regular flights to Natal and Recife.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* Noronha hotspot
* Politics of Pernambuco

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Duarte Leite (1923) &quot;O Mais antigo mapa do Brasil&quot; in &quot;História da Colonização Portuguesa do Brasil&quot;, vol.2, pp. 221–81.
* Greenlee, W.B. (1945) &quot;The Captaincy of the Second Portuguese Voyage to Brazil, 1501–1502&quot;, &quot;The Americas&quot;, Vol. 2, p. 3–13.
* Roukema, E. (1963) &quot;Brazil in the Cantino Map&quot;, &quot;Imago Mundi&quot;, Vol. 17, p. 7–26

==External links==
* Fernando de Noronha Official website
* Fernando de Noronha Much information about Fernando de Noronha (in Portuguese)

Tourism
* A photo tour of the island PVV.org
* Information provided by a local resident
* A recent Blog about Fernando de Noronha - In English
* Audio interview with Fernando de Noronha resident about life on Fernando de Noronha

Videos
* Fernando de Noronha National Park
* Noronha beaches and underwater
* Noronha scuba diving</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q175057" start="0" end="19" title="Fernando de Noronha" label="Fernando de Noronha"/>
<link wikidata="Q175057" start="39" end="76" title="Fernando de Noronha" label="State District of Fernando de Noronha"/>
<link wikidata="Q175057" start="106" end="138" title="Fernando de Noronha" label="Territory of Fernando de Noronha"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="160" end="171" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="179" end="193" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="207" end="226" title="Pernambuco" label="State of Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="228" end="234" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="291" end="297" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q207524" start="303" end="308" title="islet" label="islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q485258" start="700" end="705" title="States of Brazil" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="709" end="719" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q43255" start="773" end="792" title="Rio Grande do Norte" label="Rio Grande do Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q241357" start="864" end="902" title="Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago" label="Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185274" start="1017" end="1037" title="Marine park" label="national marine park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1049" end="1055" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1075" end="1094" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="1145" end="1149" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="1151" end="1156" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="1159" end="1169" title="sea turtle" label="sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="1176" end="1189" title="marine mammal" label="marine mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143" start="1196" end="1205" title="time zone" label="time zone"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1209" end="1218" title="UTC−02:00" label="UTC−02:00"/>
<link wikidata="Q728502" start="1460" end="1474" title="nautical chart" label="nautical chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q345620" start="1511" end="1526" title="Juan de la Cosa" label="Juan de La Cosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q568009" start="1558" end="1573" title="Cantino planisphere" label="Alberto Cantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="1722" end="1732" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365396" start="1833" end="1850" title="Fernão de Loronha" label="Fernão de Loronha"/>
<link wikidata="Q715344" start="1908" end="1922" title="Gonçalo Coelho" label="Gonçalo Coelho"/>
<link wikidata="Q47674" start="1958" end="1974" title="Amerigo Vespucci" label="Amerigo Vespucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q17590" start="2372" end="2384" title="St. Lawrence" label="St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q51617" start="2454" end="2473" title="liturgical calendar" label="liturgical calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="2582" end="2602" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365396" start="2716" end="2733" title="Fernão de Loronha" label="Fernão de Loronha"/>
<link wikidata="Q568009" start="3668" end="3687" title="Cantino planisphere" label="Cantino planisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="4037" end="4041" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q519046" start="4732" end="4747" title="André Gonçalves (explorer)" label="André Gonçalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q665235" start="5399" end="5413" title="Gaspar Correia" label="Gaspar Correia"/>
<link wikidata="Q519046" start="5435" end="5450" title="André Gonçalves (explorer)" label="André Gonçalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633859" start="6834" end="6853" title="2nd Portuguese India Armada (Cabral, 1500)" label="Second India Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q174432" start="6860" end="6880" title="Pedro Álvares Cabral" label="Pedro Álvares Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q499922" start="6910" end="6922" title="Porto Seguro" label="Porto Seguro"/>
<link wikidata="Q710683" start="6969" end="6984" title="Gaspar de Lemos" label="Gaspar de Lemos"/>
<link wikidata="Q519046" start="6988" end="7003" title="André Gonçalves (explorer)" label="André Gonçalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636916" start="7410" end="7428" title="3rd Portuguese India Armada (Nova, 1501)" label="Third India Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q435882" start="7432" end="7444" title="João da Nova" label="João da Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q665235" start="7582" end="7596" title="Gaspar Correia" label="Gaspar Correia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637538" start="7692" end="7712" title="Cabo de Santo Agostinho" label="Cape Santo Agostinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q703704" start="7737" end="7751" title="João de Barros" label="João de Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q567913" start="7756" end="7770" title="Damião de Góis" label="Damião de Góis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46197" start="7879" end="7895" title="Ascension island" label="Ascension island"/>
<link wikidata="Q241074" start="8516" end="8527" title="Rocas Atoll" label="Rocas Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q704141" start="9203" end="9225" title="Martim Afonso de Sousa" label="Martim Afonso de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365396" start="9475" end="9492" title="Fernão de Loronha" label="Fernão de Loronha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="9794" end="9822" title="indigenous peoples in Brazil" label="indigenous peoples in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42675898" start="9827" end="9837" title="brazilwood" label="brazilwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200068" start="10530" end="10539" title="captaincy" label="captaincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q313430" start="10618" end="10637" title="Bartholomew Roberts" label="Bartholomew Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10839" end="10864" title="French Indies Company" label="French East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q299650" start="11135" end="11158" title="King John V of Portugal" label="King John V of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="11237" end="11250" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="11520" end="11526" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365806" start="11655" end="11667" title="Henry Foster (scientist)" label="Henry Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631831" start="11755" end="11782" title="HMS Chanticleer (1808)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Chanticleer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891717" start="11873" end="11898" title="Kater&amp;#x27;s pendulum" label="Kater invariable pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="11998" end="12007" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="12194" end="12208" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="12365" end="12374" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q213756" start="12394" end="12408" title="Robert FitzRoy" label="Robert FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644377" start="12544" end="12559" title="List of chronometers on HMS Beagle" label="22 chronometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="12842" end="12847" title="Bahia, Brazil" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="12849" end="12855" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="12928" end="12942" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768515" start="13578" end="13602" title="The Voyage of the Beagle" label="The Voyage of the Beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535307" start="13679" end="13769" title="Geological Observations on the Volcanic Islands visited during the voyage of H.M.S. Beagle" label="Geological Observations on the Volcanic Islands visited during the voyage of H.M.S. Beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="14104" end="14110" title="prison" label="prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q155824" start="14187" end="14207" title="Juscelino Kubitschek" label="Juscelino Kubitschek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571496" start="14234" end="14247" title="1964 Brazilian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797190" start="14249" end="14262" title="Miguel Arraes" label="Miguel Arraes"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="14434" end="14444" title="telegraphy" label="telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395922" start="14524" end="14536" title="French Cable" label="French Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14605" end="14617" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214867" start="14646" end="14663" title="Federal territory" label="Federal territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q241074" start="14680" end="14691" title="Rocas Atoll" label="Rocas Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q241357" start="14696" end="14722" title="Saint Peter and Paul Rocks" label="Saint Peter and Paul Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="14851" end="14880" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828235" start="14881" end="14902" title="Air Transport Command (United States Air Force)" label="Air Transport Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="14917" end="14922" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="14985" end="15003" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="15145" end="15163" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q302439" start="15388" end="15409" title="Canadair C-4 Argonaut" label="Canadair C-4 Argonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="16144" end="16158" title="South Atlantic" label="South Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="16498" end="16509" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312795" start="16635" end="16662" title="Fernando de Noronha Airport" label="Fernando de Noronha Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="16695" end="16701" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q131620" start="16706" end="16711" title="Natal, Rio Grande do Norte" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="16815" end="16828" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="17164" end="17173" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="17333" end="17338" title="Flora (plants)" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="17340" end="17345" title="Fauna (animals)" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="17347" end="17354" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q455638" start="17435" end="17450" title="DX Century Club" label="DX Century Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="17486" end="17499" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="17591" end="17597" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="17649" end="17668" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="17787" end="17791" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620149" start="17793" end="17801" title="billfish" label="billfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="17803" end="17810" title="cetacea" label="cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="17814" end="17819" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="17826" end="17839" title="marine turtle" label="marine turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q649513" start="17877" end="17892" title="spinner dolphin" label="spinner dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203538" start="17950" end="17970" title="hawksbill sea turtle" label="hawksbill sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185380" start="18024" end="18045" title="Air France Flight 447" label="Air France Flight 447"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="18192" end="18203" title="Airbus A330" label="Airbus A330"/>
<link wikidata="Q56218" start="18413" end="18423" title="pitot tube" label="pitot tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q32805" start="18972" end="18980" title="basanite" label="basanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344173" start="18982" end="18993" title="nephelinite" label="nephelinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257550" start="18998" end="19007" title="phonolite" label="phonolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="19372" end="19379" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q157866" start="19433" end="19441" title="Capparis" label="Capparis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355631" start="19478" end="19491" title="Ceratosanthes" label="Ceratosanthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4269007" start="19530" end="19539" title="Cayaponia" label="Cayaponia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19576" end="19586" title="Moriordica" label="Moriordica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317148" start="19609" end="19615" title="Cereus (plant)" label="Cereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292003" start="19638" end="19648" title="Palicourea" label="Palicourea"/>
<link wikidata="Q652471" start="19671" end="19680" title="Guettarda" label="Guettarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067086" start="19703" end="19710" title="Bumelia" label="Bumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158663" start="19733" end="19741" title="Physalis" label="Physalis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19768" end="19782" title="Ficus noronhae" label="Ficus noronhae"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="19824" end="19837" title="Endemism in birds" label="endemic birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q930635" start="19843" end="19858" title="Noronha elaenia" label="Noronha elaenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q628749" start="19899" end="19912" title="Noronha vireo" label="Noronha vireo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006452" start="20080" end="20090" title="eared dove" label="eared dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="20165" end="20172" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26623" start="20173" end="20177" title="Rallidae" label="rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q133373" start="20276" end="20288" title="Sigmodontinae" label="sigmodontine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14550932" start="20303" end="20323" title="Noronhomys" label="Noronhomys vespuccii"/>
<link wikidata="Q47674" start="20345" end="20361" title="Amerigo Vespucci" label="Amerigo Vespucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711079" start="20448" end="20467" title="Amphisbaena ridleyi" label="Amphisbaena ridleyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938546" start="20504" end="20525" title="Noronha skink" label="Trachylepis atlantica"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="20620" end="20630" title="Sea turtle" label="Sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="20633" end="20641" title="cetacean" label="cetacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q649513" start="20672" end="20687" title="spinner dolphin" label="spinner dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="20693" end="20707" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q764242" start="20742" end="20769" title="pantropical spotted dolphin" label="pantropical spotted dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q735210" start="20772" end="20796" title="short-finned pilot whale" label="short-finned pilot whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q724349" start="20803" end="20821" title="melon-headed whale" label="melon-headed whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q55805" start="20825" end="20834" title="albatross" label="albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="20927" end="20955" title="tropical wet and dry climate" label="tropical wet and dry climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="21466" end="21473" title="Linseed" label="Linseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106822" start="21510" end="21514" title="Tupinambis" label="Tegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q24354290" start="21530" end="21549" title="Tupinambis merianae" label="Tupinambis merianae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769116" start="21781" end="21792" title="Rock cavy" label="Rock cavies"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="21932" end="21945" title="Domestic cats" label="Domestic cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q166242" start="22107" end="22119" title="synanthropic" label="synanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25039883" start="22236" end="22276" title="Fernando de Noronha Marine National Park" label="Fernando de Noronha Marine National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444996" start="22285" end="22334" title="Fernando de Noronha Environmental Protection Area" label="Fernando de Noronha Environmental Protection Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366963" start="22411" end="22427" title="whale watching" label="dolphin watching"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="22429" end="22435" title="Underwater diving" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q283534" start="22449" end="22456" title="Recreational fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="22589" end="22611" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="22640" end="22657" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="22684" end="22720" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="22777" end="22800" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882087" start="22881" end="22903" title="Santander Brasil" label="Banco Santander Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q806181" start="22920" end="22934" title="Banco Bradesco" label="Banco Bradesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="22968" end="22992" title="automated teller machine" label="automated teller machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072306" start="23233" end="23257" title="South Equatorial Current" label="South Equatorial Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312795" start="23986" end="24018" title="Fernando de Noronha Airport" label="Governador Carlos Wilson Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q131620" start="24043" end="24048" title="Natal, Rio Grande do Norte" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="24053" end="24059" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625406" start="24090" end="24105" title="Noronha hotspot" label="Noronha hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002750" start="24108" end="24130" title="Politics of Pernambuco" label="Politics of Pernambuco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258967" wikidata="Q4973567" url="?curid=258967" title="Brolly">
<text>Brolly may refer to:

;People:
* Anne Brolly, Sinn Féin politician and councillor on Limavady Borough Council in Northern Ireland
* Bob Brolly (born 1950), Northern Ireland-born broadcaster and singer
* Brian Brolly (1936–2006), English showbusiness entrepreneur
* Francie Brolly (born 1947), musician, retired teacher and republican politician from Dungiven, Northern Ireland
* Joe Brolly (born 1969), Irish barrister, Gaelic football analyst, and former player from Dungiven, County Londonderry, Northern Ireland
* Mike Brolly (born 1954), Scottish-born former professional footballer
* Sarah Buxton Brolly (born 1965), American actress
* Shane Brolly (born 1970), Northern Irish actor, writer, and director

;Other uses:
* Umbrella, colloquially
* Brolly, California, in Modoc County

==See also==
* Broly, fictional character in the &quot;Dragon Ball&quot; series</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4973567" start="0" end="6" title="Brolly" label="Brolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768185" start="33" end="44" title="Anne Brolly" label="Anne Brolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196977" start="132" end="142" title="Bob Brolly" label="Bob Brolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963208" start="203" end="215" title="Brian Brolly" label="Brian Brolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16114174" start="265" end="279" title="Francie Brolly" label="Francie Brolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208799" start="379" end="389" title="Joe Brolly" label="Joe Brolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846145" start="517" end="528" title="Mike Brolly" label="Mike Brolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982585" start="589" end="608" title="Sarah Buxton Brolly" label="Sarah Buxton Brolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q370942" start="641" end="653" title="Shane Brolly" label="Shane Brolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q41607" start="726" end="734" title="Umbrella" label="Umbrella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="751" end="769" title="Brolly, California" label="Brolly, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q109695" start="774" end="786" title="Modoc County" label="Modoc County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616813" start="803" end="808" title="Broly" label="Broly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020" start="843" end="854" title="Dragon Ball" label="Dragon Ball"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258979" wikidata="Q12167" url="?curid=258979" title="Malnutrition">
<text>Malnutrition occurs when an organism gets too few or too many nutrients, resulting in health problems. Specifically, it is a deficiency, excess, or imbalance of energy, protein and other nutrients which adversely affects the body&#x27;s tissues and form.

Malnutrition is a category of diseases that includes undernutrition and overnutrition. Undernutrition is a lack of nutrients, which can result in stunted growth, wasting, and underweight. A surplus of nutrients causes overnutrition, which can result in obesity or toxic levels of micronutrients. In some developing countries, overnutrition in the form of obesity is beginning to appear within the same communities as undernutrition. 

Most clinical studies use the term &#x27;malnutrition&#x27; to refer to undernutrition. However, the use of &#x27;malnutrition&#x27; instead of &#x27;undernutrition&#x27; makes it impossible to distinguish between undernutrition and overnutrition, a less acknowledged form of malnutrition. Accordingly, a 2019 report by The Lancet Commission suggested expanding the definition of malnutrition to include &quot;all its forms, including obesity, undernutrition, and other dietary risks.&quot; The World Health Organization and The Lancet Commission have also identified &quot;[t]he double burden of malnutrition&quot;, which occurs from &quot;the coexistence of overnutrition (overweight and obesity) alongside undernutrition (stunted growth and wasting).&quot;

==Prevalence==

It is estimated that nearly one in three persons globally has at least one form of malnutrition: wasting, stunting, vitamin or mineral deficiency, overweight, obesity, or diet-related noncommunicable diseases. Undernutrition is more common in developing countries. Stunting is more prevalent in urban slums than in rural areas. Studies on malnutrition have the population categorised into different groups including infants, under-five children, children, adolescents, pregnant women, adults and the elderly population. The use of different growth references in different studies leads to variances in the undernutrition prevalence reported in different studies. Some of the growth references used in studies include the
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) growth charts, WHO reference 2007, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) growth charts, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), WHO reference 1995, Obesity Task Force (IOTF) criteria and Indian Academy of Pediatrics (IAP) growth charts. In 2023, an estimated 28.9 percent of the global population – 2.33 billion people – were moderately or severely food insecure.

=== In children ===
The prevalence of undernutrition is highest among children under five. In 2021, 148.1 million children under five years old were stunted, 45 million were wasted, and 37 million were overweight or obese. The same year, an estimated 45% of deaths in children were linked to undernutrition. , the prevalence of wasting among children under five in South Asia was reported to be 16% moderately or severely wasted. , UNICEF reported this prevalence as having slightly improved, but still being at 14.8%. India has one of the highest burdens of wasting in Asia with over 20% wasted children. However, the burden of undernutrition among under-five children in African countries is much higher. A pooled analysis of the prevalence of chronic undernutrition among under-five children in East Africa was identified to be 33.3%. This prevalence of undernutrition among under-five children ranged from 21.9% in Kenya to 53% in Burundi.

In Tanzania, the prevalence of stunting, among children under five varied from 41% in lowland and 64.5% in highland areas. Undernutrition by underweight and wasting was 11.5% and 2.5% in lowland and 22.% and 1.4% in the highland areas of Tanzania respectively. In South Sudan, the prevalence of undernutrition explained by stunting, underweight and wasting in under-five children were 23.8%, 4.8% and 2.3% respectively. In 28 countries, at least 30% of children were still affected by stunting in 2022.

Vitamin A deficiency affects one third of children under age 5 around the world, leading to 670,000 deaths and 250,000–500,000 cases of blindness. Vitamin A supplementation has been shown to reduce all-cause mortality by 12 to 24%.

=== In adults ===
As of June 2021, 1.9 billion adults were overweight or obese, and 462 million adults were underweight. Globally, two billion people had iodine deficiency in 2017. In 2020, 900 million women and children had anemia, which is often caused by iron deficiency. More than 3.1 billion people in the world – 42% – were unable to afford a healthy diet in 2021.

Certain groups have higher rates of undernutrition, including elderly people and women (in particular while pregnant or breastfeeding children under five years of age). Undernutrition is an increasing health problem in people aged over 65 years, even in developed countries, especially among nursing home residents and in acute care hospitals. In the elderly, undernutrition is more commonly due to physical, psychological, and social factors, not a lack of food. Age-related reduced dietary intake due to chewing and swallowing problems, sensory decline, depression, imbalanced gut microbiome, poverty and loneliness are major contributors to undernutrition in the elderly population. Malnutrition is also attributed due to wrong diet plan adopted by people who aim to reduce their weight without medical practitioners or nutritionist advice.

=== Increase in 2020 ===

There has been a global increase in food insecurity and hunger between 2011 and 2020. In 2015, 795 million people (about one in ten people on earth) had undernutrition. It is estimated that between 691 and 783 million people in the world faced hunger in 2022. According to UNICEF, 2.4 billion people were moderately or severely food insecure in 2022, 391 million more than in 2019.

These increases are partially related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, which continues to highlight the weaknesses of current food and health systems. It has contributed to food insecurity, increasing hunger worldwide; meanwhile, lower physical activity during lockdowns has contributed to increases in overweight and obesity. In 2020, experts estimated that by the end of the year, the pandemic could have double the number of people at risk of suffering acute hunger. Similarly, experts estimated that the prevalence of moderate and severe wasting could increase by 14% due to COVID-19; coupled with reductions in nutrition and health services coverage, this could result in over 128,000 additional deaths among children under 5 in 2020 alone. Although COVID-19 is less severe in children than in adults, the risk of severe disease increases with undernutrition.

Other major causes of hunger include manmade conflicts, climate changes, and economic downturns.

==Type==
===Undernutrition===

Undernutrition can occur either due to protein-energy wasting or as a result of micronutrient deficiencies. It adversely affects physical and mental functioning, and causes changes in body composition and body cell mass. Undernutrition is a major health problem, causing the highest mortality rate in children, particularly in those under 5 years, and is responsible for long-lasting physiologic effects. It is a barrier to the complete physical and mental development of children.

Undernutrition can manifest as stunting, wasting, and underweight. If undernutrition occurs during pregnancy, or before two years of age, it may result in permanent problems with physical and mental development. Extreme undernutrition can cause starvation, chronic hunger, Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM), and/or Moderate Acute Malnutrition (MAM).

The signs and symptoms of micronutrient deficiencies depend on which micronutrient is lacking. However, undernourished people are often thin and short, with very poor energy levels; and swelling in the legs and abdomen is also common. People who are undernourished often get infections and frequently feel cold.

====Micronutrient undernutrition====
Micronutrient undernutrition results from insufficient intake of vitamins and minerals. Worldwide, deficiencies in iodine, Vitamin A, and iron are the most common. Children and pregnant women in low-income countries are at especially high risk for micronutrient deficiencies.

Anemia is most commonly caused by iron deficiency, but can also result from other micronutrient deficiencies and diseases. This condition can have major health consequences.

It is possible to have overnutrition simultaneously with micronutrient deficiencies; this condition is termed the double burden of malnutrition.

====Protein-energy malnutrition====
&#x27;Undernutrition&#x27; sometimes refers specifically to protein–energy malnutrition (PEM). This condition involves both micronutrient deficiencies and an imbalance of protein intake and energy expenditure. It differs from calorie restriction in that calorie restriction may not result in negative health effects. Hypoalimentation (underfeeding) is one cause of undernutrition.

Two forms of PEM are kwashiorkor and marasmus; both commonly coexist.
&quot;Kwashiorkor&quot; is primarily caused by inadequate protein intake. Its symptoms include edema, wasting, liver enlargement, hypoalbuminaemia, and steatosis; the condition may also cause depigmentation of skin and hair. The disorder is further identified by a characteristic swelling of the belly, and extremities which disguises the patient&#x27;s undernourished condition. &#x27;Kwashiorkor&#x27; means &#x27;displaced child&#x27; and is derived from the Ga language of coastal Ghana in West Africa. It means &quot;the sickness the baby gets when the next baby is born,&quot; as it often occurs when the older child is deprived of breastfeeding and weaned to a diet composed largely of carbohydrates.

&quot;Marasmus&quot; (meaning &#x27;to waste away&#x27;) can result from a sustained diet that is deficient in both protein and energy. This causes their metabolism to adapt to prolong survival. The primary symptoms are severe wasting, leaving little or no edema; minimal subcutaneous fat; and abnormal serum albumin levels. It is traditionally seen in cases of famine, significant food restriction, or severe anorexia. Conditions are characterized by extreme wasting of the muscles and a gaunt expression.

===Overnutrition===
Excessive consumption of energy-dense foods and drinks and limited physical activity causes overnutrition. It causes overweight, defined as a body mass index (BMI) of 25 or more, and can lead to obesity (a BMI of 30 or more). Obesity has become a major health issue worldwide. Overnutrition is linked to chronic non-communicable diseases like diabetes, certain cancers, and cardiovascular diseases. Hence identifying and addressing the immediate risk factors has become a major health priority. The recent evidence on the impact of diet-induced obesity in fathers and mothers around the time of conception is identified to negatively program the health outcomes of multiple generations.

According to UNICEF, at least 1 in every 10 children under five is overweight in 33 countries.

==Classifying malnutrition==
===Definition by Gomez and Galvan===
In 1956, Gómez and Galvan studied factors associated with death in a group of undernourished children in a hospital in Mexico City, Mexico. They defined three categories of malnutrition: first, second, and third degree. The degree of malnutrition is calculated based on a child&#x27;s body size compared to the median weight for their age. The risk of death increases with increasing degrees of malnutrition.

An adaptation of Gomez&#x27;s original classification is still used today. While it provides a way to compare malnutrition within and between populations, this classification system has been criticized for being &quot;arbitrary&quot; and for not considering overweight as a form of malnutrition. Also, height alone may not be the best indicator of malnutrition; children who are born prematurely may be considered short for their age even if they have good nutrition.

===Definition by Waterlow===
In the 1970s, John Conrad Waterlow established a new classification system for malnutrition. Instead of using just weight for age measurements, Waterlow&#x27;s system combines weight-for-height (indicating acute episodes of malnutrition) with height-for-age to show the stunting that results from chronic malnutrition. One advantage of the Waterlow classification is that weight for height can be calculated even if a child&#x27;s age is unknown.

The World Health Organization frequently uses these classifications of malnutrition, with some modifications.

==Effects==

Undernutrition weakens every part of the immune system. Protein and energy undernutrition increases susceptibility to infection; so do deficiencies of specific micronutrients (including iron, zinc, and vitamins). In communities or areas that lack access to safe drinking water, these additional health risks present a critical problem.

Undernutrition plays a major role in the onset of active tuberculosis. It also raises the risk of HIV transmission from mother to child, and increases replication of the virus. Undernutrition can cause vitamin-deficiency-related diseases like scurvy and rickets. As undernutrition worsens, those affected have less energy and experience impairment in brain functions. This can make it difficult (or impossible) for them to perform the tasks needed to acquire food, earn an income, or gain an education.

Undernutrition can also cause acute problems, like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). This condition can cause lethargy, limpness, seizures, and loss of consciousness. Children are particularly at risk and can become hypoglycemic after 4 to 6 hours without food. Dehydration can also occur in malnourished people, and can be life-threatening, especially in babies and small children.

===Signs===
There are many different signs of dehydration in undernourished people. These can include sunken eyes; a very dry mouth; decreased urine output and/or dark urine; increased heart rate with decreasing blood pressure; and altered mental status.

===Cognitive development===
Protein-calorie malnutrition can cause cognitive impairments. This most commonly occurs in people who were malnourished during a &quot;critical period ... from the final third of gestation to the first 2 years of life&quot;. For example, in children under two years of age, iron deficiency anemia is likely to affect brain function acutely, and probably also chronically. Similarly, folate deficiency has been linked to neural tube defects.

Iodine deficiency is &quot;the most common preventable cause of mental impairment worldwide.&quot; &quot;Even moderate [iodine] deficiency, especially in pregnant women and infants, lowers intelligence by 10 to 15 I.Q. points, shaving incalculable potential off a nation&#x27;s development.&quot; Among those affected, very few people experience the most visible and severe effects: disabling goiters, cretinism and dwarfism. These effects occur most commonly in mountain villages. However, 16 percent of the world&#x27;s people have at least mild goiter (a swollen thyroid gland in the neck).&quot;

==Causes and risk factors==

===Social and political===
Social conditions have a significant influence on the health of people. The social determinants of undernutrition mainly include poor education, poverty, disease burden and lack of women&#x27;s empowerment. Identifying and addressing these determinants can eliminate undernutrition in the long term. Identification of the social conditions that causes malnutrition in children under five has received significant research attention as it is a major public health problem.

Undernutrition most commonly results from a lack of access to high-quality, nutritious food. The household income is a socio-economic variable that influences the access to nutritious food and the probability of under and overnutrition in a community. In the study by Ghattas et al. (2020), the probability of overnutrition is significantly higher in higher-income families than in disadvantaged families. High food prices is a major factor preventing low income households from getting nutritious food For example, Khan and Kraemer (2009) found that in Bangladesh, low socioeconomic status was associated with chronic malnutrition since it inhibited purchase of nutritious foods (like milk, meat, poultry, and fruits).

Food shortages may also contribute to malnutritions in countries which lack technology. However, in the developing world, eighty percent of malnourished children live in countries that produce food surpluses, according to estimates from the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). The economist Amartya Sen observes that, in recent decades, famine has always been a problem of food distribution, purchasing power, and/or poverty, since there has always been enough food for everyone in the world.

There are also sociopolitical causes of malnutrition. For example, the population of a community might be at increased risk for malnutrition if government is poor and the area lacks health-related services. On a smaller scale, certain households or individuals may be at an even higher risk due to differences in income levels, access to land, or levels of education. Community plays a crucial role in addressing the social causes of malnutrition. For example, communities with high social support and knowledge sharing about social protection programs can enable better public service demands. Better public service demands and social protection programs minimise the risk of malnutrition in these communities.

It is argued that commodity speculators are increasing the cost of food. As the real-estate bubble in the United States was collapsing, it is said that trillions of dollars moved to invest in food and primary commodities, causing the 2007–2008 food price crisis.

The use of biofuels as a replacement for traditional fuels raises the price of food. The United Nations special rapporteur on the right to food, Jean Ziegler proposes that agricultural waste, such as corn cobs and banana leaves, should be used as fuel instead of crops.

In some developing countries, overnutrition (in the form of obesity) is beginning to appear in the same communities where malnutrition occurs. Overnutrition increases with urbanisation, food commercialisation and technological developments and increases physical inactivity. Variations in the health status of individuals in the same society are associated with the societal structure and an individual&#x27;s socioeconomic status which leads to income inequality, racism, educational differences and lack of opportunities.

===Diseases and conditions===
Infectious diseases which increase nutrient requirements, such as gastroenteritis, pneumonia, malaria, and measles, can cause malnutrition. So can some chronic illnesses, especially HIV/AIDS.

Malnutrition can also result from abnormal nutrient loss due to diarrhea or chronic small bowel illnesses, like Crohn&#x27;s disease or untreated coeliac disease. &quot;Secondary malnutrition&quot; can result from increased energy expenditure.

In infants, a lack of breastfeeding may contribute to undernourishment. Anorexia nervosa and bariatric surgery can also cause malnutrition.

===Dietary practices===
==== Undernutrition ====
Undernutrition due to lack of adequate breastfeeding is associated with the deaths of an estimated one million children annually. Illegal advertising of breast-milk substitutes contributed to malnutrition and continued three decades after its 1981 prohibition under the &quot;WHO International Code of Marketing Breast Milk Substitutes&quot;.

Maternal malnutrition can also factor into the poor health or death of a baby. Over 800,000 neonatal deaths have occurred because of deficient growth of the fetus in the mother&#x27;s womb.

Deriving too much of one&#x27;s diet from a single source, such as eating almost exclusively potato, maize or rice, can cause malnutrition. This may either be from a lack of education about proper nutrition, only having access to a single food source, or from poor healthcare access and unhealthy environments.

It is not just the total amount of calories that matters but specific nutritional deficiencies such as vitamin A deficiency, iron deficiency or zinc deficiency can also increase risk of death.

==== Overnutrition ====
Overnutrition caused by overeating is also a form of malnutrition. In the United States, more than half of all adults are now overweight—a condition that, like hunger, increases susceptibility to disease and disability, reduces worker productivity, and lowers life expectancy. Overeating is much more common in the United States, since most people have adequate access to food. Many parts of the world have access to a surplus of non-nutritious food. Increased sedentary lifestyles also contribute to overnutrition. Yale University psychologist Kelly Brownell calls this a &quot;toxic food environment&quot;, where fat- and sugar-laden foods have taken precedence over healthy nutritious foods.

In these developed countries, overnutrition can be prevented by choosing the right kind of food. More fast food is consumed per capita in the United States than in any other country. This mass consumption of fast food results from its affordability and accessibility. Fast food, which is low in cost and nutrition, is high in calories. Due to increasing urbanization and automation, people are living more sedentary lifestyles. These factors combine to make weight gain difficult to avoid.

Overnutrition also occurs in developing countries. It has appeared in parts of developing countries where income is on the rise. It is also a problem in countries where hunger and poverty persist. Economic development, rapid urbanisation and shifting dietary patterns have increased the burden of overnutrition in the cities of low and middle-income countries. In China, consumption of high-fat foods has increased, while consumption of rice and other goods has decreased.
Overeating leads to many diseases, such as heart disease and diabetes, that may be fatal.

===Agricultural productivity===

Local food shortages can be caused by a lack of arable land, adverse weather, and/or poorer farming skills (like inadequate crop rotation). They can also occur in areas which lack the technology or resources needed for the higher yields found in modern agriculture. These resources include fertilizers, pesticides, irrigation, machinery, and storage facilities. As a result of widespread poverty, farmers and governments cannot provide enough of these resources to improve local yields.

Additionally, the World Bank and some wealthy donor countries have pressured developing countries to use free market policies. Even as the United States and Europe extensively subsidized their own farmers, they urged developing countries to cut or eliminate subsidized agricultural inputs, like fertilizer. Without subsidies, few (if any) farmers in developing countries can afford fertilizer at market prices. This leads to low agricultural production, low wages, and high, unaffordable food prices. Fertilizer is also increasingly unavailable because Western environmental groups have fought to end its use due to environmental concerns. The Green Revolution pioneers Norman Borlaug and Keith Rosenberg cited as the obstacle to feeding Africa by .

===Future threats===
In the future, variety of factors could potentially disrupt global food supply and cause widespread malnutrition. According to UNICEF&#x27;s projections, it is projected that almost 600 million people will be chronically undernourished in 2030.

Global warming is of importance to food security. Almost all malnourished people (95%) live in the tropics and subtropics, where the climate is relatively stable. According to the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports, temperature increases in these regions are &quot;very likely.&quot; Even small changes in temperatures can make extreme weather conditions occur more frequently. Extreme weather events, like drought, have a major impact on agricultural production, and hence nutrition. For example, the 1998–2001 Central Asian drought killed about 80 percent of livestock in Iran and caused a 50% reduction in wheat and barley crops there. Other central Asian nations experienced similar losses. An increase in extreme weather such as drought in regions such as Sub-Saharan Africa would have even greater consequences in terms of malnutrition. Even without an increase of extreme weather events, a simple increase in temperature reduces the productivity of many crop species, and decreases food security in these regions.

Another threat is colony collapse disorder, a phenomenon where bees die in large numbers. Since many agricultural crops worldwide are pollinated by bees, colony collapse disorder represents a threat to the global food supply.

==Prevention==
Reducing malnutrition is key part of the United Nations&#x27; Sustainable Development Goal 2 (SDG2), &quot;Zero Hunger&quot;, which aims to reduce malnutrition, undernutrition, and stunted child growth. Managing severe acute undernutrition in a community setting has received significant research attention.

===Food security===

In the 1950s and 1960s, the Green Revolution aimed to bring modern Western agricultural techniques (like nitrogen fertilizers and pesticides) to Asia. Investments in agriculture, such as fund fertilizers and seeds, increased food harvests and thus food production. Consequently, food prices and malnutrition decreased (as they had earlier in Western nations).

The Green Revolution was possible in Asia because of existing infrastructure and institutions, such as a system of roads and public seed companies that made seeds available. These resources were in short supply in Africa, decreasing the Green Revolution&#x27;s impact on the continent.

For example, almost five million of the 13 million people in Malawi used to need emergency food aid. However, in the early 2000s, the Malawian government changed its agricultural policies, and implemented subsidies for fertilizer and seed introduced against World Bank strictures. By 2007, farmers were producing record-breaking corn harvests. Corn production leaped to 3.4 million in 2007 compared to 1.2 million in 2005, making Malawi a major food exporter. Consequently, food prices lowered and wages for farmworkers rose. Such investments in agriculture are still needed in other African countries like the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Despite the country&#x27;s great agricultural potential, the prevalence of malnutrition in the DRC is among the highest in the world. Proponents for investing in agriculture include Jeffrey Sachs, who argues that wealthy countries should invest in fertilizer and seed for Africa&#x27;s farmers.

Imported Ready to Use Therapeutic Food (RUTF) has been used to treat malnutrition in northern Nigeria. Some Nigerians also use &quot;soy&quot; &quot;kunu,&quot; a locally sourced and prepared blend consisting of peanut, millet and soybeans.

New technology in agricultural production has great potential to combat undernutrition. It makes farming easier, thus improving agricultural yields. By increasing farmers&#x27; incomes, this could reduce poverty. It would also open up area which farmers could use to diversify crops for household use.

The World Bank claims to be part of the solution to malnutrition, asserting that countries can best break the cycle of poverty and malnutrition by building export-led economies, which give them the financial means to buy foodstuffs on the world market.

===Economics===
Many aid groups have found that giving cash assistance (or cash vouchers) is more effective than donating food. Particularly in areas where food is available but unaffordable, giving cash assistance is a cheaper, faster, and more efficient way to deliver help to the hungry. In 2008, the UN&#x27;s World Food Program, the biggest non-governmental distributor of food, announced that it would begin distributing cash and vouchers instead of food in some areas, which Josette Sheeran, the WFP&#x27;s executive director, described as a &quot;revolution&quot; in food aid. The aid agency Concern Worldwide piloted a method of giving cash assistance using a mobile phone operator, Safaricom, which runs a money transfer program that allows cash to be sent from one part of a country to another.

However, during a drought, delivering food might be the most appropriate way to help people, especially those who live far from markets and thus have limited access to them. Fred Cuny stated that &quot;the chances of saving lives at the outset of a relief operation are greatly reduced when food is imported. By the time it arrives in the country and gets to people, many will have died.&quot; U.S. law requires food aid to be purchased at home rather than in the countries where the hungry live; this is inefficient because approximately half of the money spent goes for transport. Cuny further pointed out that &quot;studies of every recent famine have shown that food was available in-country—though not always in the immediate food deficit area&quot; and &quot;even though by local standards the prices are too high for the poor to purchase it, it would usually be cheaper for a donor to buy the hoarded food at the inflated price than to import it from abroad.&quot;
Food banks and soup kitchens address malnutrition in places where people lack money to buy food. A basic income has been proposed as a way to ensure that everyone has enough money to buy food and other basic needs. This is a form of social security in which all citizens or residents of a country regularly receive an unconditional sum of money, either from a government or some other public institution, in addition to any income received from elsewhere.

==== Successful initiatives ====
Ethiopia pioneered a program that later became part of the World Bank&#x27;s prescribed method for coping with a food crisis. Through the country&#x27;s main food assistance program, the Productive Safety Net Program, Ethiopia provided rural residents who were chronically short of food a chance to work for food or cash. Foreign aid organizations like the World Food Program were then able to buy food locally from surplus areas to distribute in areas with a shortage of food. Aid organizations now view the Ethiopian program as a model of how to best help hungry nations.

Successful initiatives also include Brazil&#x27;s recycling program for organic waste, which benefits farmers, the urban poor, and the city in general. City residents separate organic waste from their garbage, bag it, and then exchange it for fresh fruit and vegetables from local farmers. This reduces the country&#x27;s waste while giving the urban poor a steady supply of nutritious food.

===World population===
Restricting population size is a proposed solution to malnutrition. Thomas Malthus argues that population growth can be controlled by natural disasters and by voluntary limits through &quot;moral restraint.&quot; Robert Chapman suggests that government policies are a necessary ingredient for curtailing global population growth. The United Nations recognizes that poverty and malnutrition (as well as the environment) are interdependent and complementary with population growth. According to the World Health Organization, &quot;Family planning is key to slowing unsustainable population growth and the resulting negative impacts on the economy, environment, and national and regional development efforts&quot;. However, more than 200 million women worldwide lack adequate access to family planning services.

There are different theories about what causes famine. Some theorists, like the Indian economist Amartya Sen, believe that the world has more than enough resources to sustain its population. In this view, malnutrition is caused by unequal distribution of resources and under- or unused arable land. For example, Sen argues that &quot;no matter how a famine is caused, methods of breaking it call for a large supply of food in the Public Distribution System. This applies not only to organizing rationing and control, but also to undertaking work programmes and other methods of increasing purchasing power for those hit by shifts in exchange entitlements in a general inflationary situation.&quot;

===Food sovereignty===

Food sovereignty is one suggested policy framework to resolve access issues. In this framework, people (rather than international market forces) have the right to define their own food, agricultural, livestock, and fishery systems. Food First is one of the primary think tanks working to build support for food sovereignty. Neoliberals advocate for an increasing role of the free market.

===Health facilities===
Another possible long-term solution to malnutrition is to increase access to health facilities in rural parts of the world. These facilities could monitor undernourished children, act as supplemental food distribution centers, and provide education on dietary needs. Similar facilities have already proven very successful in countries such as Peru and Ghana.

===Breastfeeding===
In 2016, estimates suggested that more widespread breastfeeding could prevent about 823,000 deaths annually of children under age 5. In addition to reducing infant deaths, breast milk provides an important source of micronutrients - which are clinically proven to bolster children&#x27;s immune systems – and provides long-term defenses against non-communicable and allergic diseases. Breastfeeding may improve cognitive abilities in children, and correlates strongly with individual educational achievements. As previously noted, lack of proper breastfeeding is a major factor in child mortality rates, and is a primary determinant of disease development for children. The medical community recommends exclusively breastfeeding infants for 6 months, with nutritional whole food supplementation and continued breastfeeding up to 2 years or older for overall optimal health outcomes. Exclusive breastfeeding is defined as giving an infant only breast milk for six months as a source of food and nutrition. This means no other liquids, including water or semi-solid foods.

==== Barriers to breastfeeding ====
Breastfeeding is noted as one of the most cost-effective medical interventions benefiting child health. While there are considerable differences among developed and developing countries, there are universal determinants of whether a mother breastfeeds or uses formula; these include income, employment, social norms, and access to healthcare. Many newly made mothers face financial barriers; community-based healthcare workers have helped to alleviate these barriers, while also providing a viable alternative to traditional and expensive hospital-based medical care. Recent studies, based upon surveys conducted from 1995 to 2010, show that exclusive breastfeeding rates have risen globally, from 33% to 39%. Despite the growth rates, medical professionals acknowledge the need for improvement given the importance of exclusive breastfeeding.

===21st century global initiatives===
Starting around 2009, there was renewed international media and political attention focused on malnutrition. This resulted in part from spikes in food prices and the 2008 financial crisis. Additionally, there was an emerging consensus that combating malnutrition is one of the most cost-effective ways to contribute to development. This led to the 2010 launch of the UN&#x27;s &quot;Scaling up Nutrition&quot; movement (SUN).

In April 2012, a number of countries signed the Food Assistance Convention, the world&#x27;s first legally binding international agreement on food aid. The following month, the Copenhagen Consensus recommended that politicians and private sector philanthropists should prioritize interventions against hunger and malnutrition to maximize the effectiveness of aid spending. The Consensus recommended prioritizing these interventions ahead of any others, including the fights against malaria and AIDS.

In June 2015, the European Union and the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation launched a partnership to combat undernutrition, especially in children. The program was first implemented in Bangladesh, Burundi, Ethiopia, Kenya, Laos and Niger. It aimed to help these countries improve information and analysis about nutrition, enabling them to develop effective national nutrition policies.

Also in 2015, the UN&#x27;s Food and Agriculture Organization created a partnership aimed at ending hunger in Africa by 2025. The African Union&#x27;s Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) provided the framework for the partnership. It includes a variety of interventions, including support for improved food production, a strengthening of social protection, and integration of the right to food into national legislation.

The EndingHunger campaign is an online communication campaign whose goal is to raise awareness about hunger. The campaign has created viral videos depicting celebrities voicing their anger about the large number of hungry people in the world.

After the Millennium Development Goals expired in 2015, the Sustainable Development Goals became the main global policy focus to reduce hunger and poverty. In particular, Goal 2: Zero Hunger sets globally agreed-upon targets to wipe out hunger, end all forms of malnutrition, and make agriculture sustainable. The partnership Compact2025 develops and disseminates evidence-based advice to politicians and other decision-makers, with the goal of ending hunger and undernutrition by 2025. The International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) led the partnership, with the involvement of UN organisations, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and private foundations.

==Treatment==

=== Improving nutrition ===
Efforts such as infant and young child feeding practices to improve nutrition are some of the common forms of development aid. Interventions often promote breastfeeding to reduce rates of malnutrition and death in children. Some of these interventions have been successful. For example, interventions with commodities such as ready to use therapeutic foods, ready to use supplementary foods, micronutrient intervention and vitamin supplementation were identified to significantly improve nutrition, reduce stunting and prevent diseases in communities with severe acute malnutrition. In young children, outcomes improve when children between six months and two years of age receive complementary food (in addition to breast milk). There is also good evidence that supports giving supplemental micronutrients to pregnant women and young children in the developing world.

The United Nations has reported on the importance of nutritional counselling and support, for example in the care of HIV-infected persons, especially in &quot;resource-constrained settings where malnutrition and food insecurity are endemic&quot;. UNICEF provides nutritional counselling services for malnourished children in Afghanistan.

Sending food and money is a common form of development aid, aimed at feeding hungry people. Some strategies help people buy food within local markets. Simply feeding students at school is insufficient.

Longer-term measures include improving agricultural practices, reducing poverty, and improving sanitation.

=== Identifying malnourishment ===
Measuring children is crucial to identifying malnourishment. In 2000, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) established the International Micronutrient Malnutrition Prevention and Control (IMMPaCt) program. It tested children for malnutrition by conducting a three-dimensional scan, using an iPad or a tablet. Its objective was to help doctors provide more efficient treatments. There may be some chance of error when using this method. The Screening Tool for the Assessment of Malnutrition in Paediatrics (STAMPa) is another method for the identification and evaluation of malnutrition in young children. The assessment tool has fair to medium reliability in the identification of children at risk of malnutrition.

A systematic review of 42 studies found that many approaches to mitigating acute malnutrition are equally effective; thus, intervention decisions can be based on cost-related factors. Overall, evidence for the effectiveness of acute malnutrition interventions is not robust. The limited evidence related to cost indicates that community and outpatient management of children with uncomplicated malnutrition may be the most cost-effective strategy.

Regularly measuring and charting children&#x27;s growth and including activities to promote health (an intervention called growth monitoring and promotion, also known as GPM) is often considered by policy makers and is recommended by the World Health Organization. This program is often performed at the same time as a child has their regular immunizations. Despite widespread use of this type of program, further studies are needed to understand the impact of these programs on overall child health and how to better address faltering growth in a child and improve practices related to feeding children in lower to middle income countries.

=== Medical management ===
It is often possible to manage severe malnutrition within a person&#x27;s home, using ready-to-use therapeutic foods. In people with severe malnutrition complicated by other health problems, treatment in a hospital setting is recommended. In-hospital treatment often involves managing low blood sugar, maintaining adequate body temperature, addressing dehydration, and gradual feeding.

Routine antibiotics are usually recommended because malnutrition weakens the immune system, causing a high risk of infection. Additionally, broad spectrum antibiotics are recommended in all severely undernourished children with diarrhea requiring admission to hospital.

A severely malnourished child who appears to have dehydration, but has not had diarrhea, should be treated as if they have an infection.

Among malnourished people who are hospitalized, nutritional support improves protein intake, calorie intake, and weight.

==== Bangladeshi model ====
In response to child malnutrition, the Bangladeshi government recommends ten steps for treating severe malnutrition:

# Prevent or treat dehydration
# Prevent or treat low blood sugar
# Prevent or treat low body temperature
# Prevent or treat infection;
# Correct electrolyte imbalances
# Correct micronutrient deficiencies
# Start feeding cautiously
# Achieve catch-up growth
# Provide psychological support
# Prepare for discharge and follow-up after recovery

===Therapeutic foods===
Due in part to limited research on supplementary feeding, there is little evidence that this strategy is beneficial. A 2015 systematic review of 32 studies found that there are limited benefits when children under 5 receive supplementary feeding, especially among younger, poorer, and more undernourished children.

However, specially formulated foods do appear to be useful in treating moderate acute malnutrition in the developing world. These foods may have additional benefits in humanitarian emergencies, since they can be stored for years, can be eaten directly from the packet, and do not have to be mixed with clean water or refrigerated. In young children with severe acute malnutrition, it is unclear if ready-to-use therapeutic food differs from a normal diet.

Severely malnourished individuals can experience refeeding syndrome if fed too quickly. Refeeding syndrome can result regardless of whether food is taken orally, enterally or parenterally. It can present several days after eating with potentially fatal heart failure, dysrhythmias, and confusion.

Some manufacturers have fortified everyday foods with micronutrients before selling them to consumers. For example, flour has been fortified with iron, zinc, folic acid, and other B vitamins like thiamine, riboflavin, niacin and vitamin B12. Baladi bread (Egyptian flatbread) is made with fortified wheat flour. Other fortified products include fish sauce in Vietnam and iodized salt.

===Micronutrient supplementation===
According to the World Bank, treating malnutrition – mostly by fortifying foods with micronutrients – improves lives more quickly than other forms of aid, and at a lower cost. After reviewing a variety of development proposals, The Copenhagen Consensus, a group of economists who reviewed a variety of development proposals, ranked micronutrient supplementation as its number-one treatment strategy.

In malnourished people with diarrhea, zinc supplementation is recommended following an initial four-hour rehydration period. Daily zinc supplementation can help reduce the severity and duration of the diarrhea. Additionally, continuing daily zinc supplementation for ten to fourteen days makes diarrhea less likely to recur in the next two to three months.

Malnourished children also need both potassium and magnesium. Within two to three hours of starting rehydration, children should be encouraged to take food, particularly foods rich in potassium like bananas, green coconut water, and unsweetened fresh fruit juice. Along with continued eating, many homemade products can also help restore normal electrolyte levels. For example, early during the course of a child&#x27;s diarrhea, it can be beneficial to provide cereal water (salted or unsalted) or vegetable broth (salted or unsalted). If available, vitamin A, potassium, magnesium, and zinc supplements should be added, along with other vitamins and minerals.

Giving base (as in Ringer&#x27;s lactate) to treat acidosis without simultaneously supplementing potassium worsens low blood potassium.

===Treating diarrhea===
==== Preventing dehydration ====
Food and drink can help prevent dehydration in malnourished people with diarrhea. Eating (or breastfeeding, among infants) should resume as soon as possible. Sugary beverages like soft drinks, fruit juices, and sweetened teas are not recommended as they may worsen diarrhea.

Malnourished people with diarrhea (especially children) should be encouraged to drink fluids; the best choices are fluids with modest amounts of sugar and salt, like vegetable broth or salted rice water. If clean water is available, they should be encouraged to drink that too. Malnourished people should be allowed to drink as much as they want, unless signs of swelling emerge.

Babies can be given small amounts of fluids via an eyedropper or a syringe without the needle. Children under two should receive a teaspoon of fluid every one to two minutes; older children and adults should take frequent sips of fluids directly from a cup. After the first two hours, fluids and foods should be alternated, rehydration should be continued at the same rate or more slowly, depending on how much fluid the child wants and whether they are having ongoing diarrhea.

If vomiting occurs, fluids can be paused for 5–10 minutes and then restarted more slowly. Vomiting rarely prevents rehydration, since fluids are still absorbed and vomiting is usually short-term.

==== Oral rehydration therapy ====
If prevention has failed and dehydration develops, the preferred treatment is rehydration through oral rehydration therapy (ORT). In severely undernourished children with diarrhea, rehydration should be done slowly, according to the World Health Organization.

Oral rehydration solutions consist of clean water mixed with small amounts of sugars and salts. These solutions help restore normal electrolyte levels, provide a source of carbohydrates, and help with fluid replacement.

Reduced-osmolarity ORS is the current standard of care for oral rehydration therapy, with reasonably wide availability. Introduced in 2003 by WHO and UNICEF, reduced-osmolarity solutions contain lower concentrations of sodium and glucose than original ORS preparations. Reduced-osmolarity ORS has the added benefit of reducing stool volume and vomiting while simultaneously preventing dehydration. Packets of reduced-osmolarity ORS include glucose, table salt, potassium chloride, and trisodium citrate. For general use, each packet should be mixed with a liter of water. However, for malnourished children, experts recommend adding a packet of ORS to two liters of water, along with an extra 50 grams of sucrose and some stock potassium solution.

People who have no access to commercially available ORS can make a homemade version using water, sugar, and table salt. Experts agree that homemade ORS preparations should include one liter (34 oz.) of clean water and 6 teaspoons of sugar; however, they disagree about whether they should contain half a teaspoon of table salt or a full teaspoon. Most sources recommend using half a teaspoon of salt per liter of water. However, people with malnutrition have an excess of body sodium. To avoid worsening this symptom, ORS for people with severe undernutrition should contain half the usual amount of sodium and more potassium.

Patients who do not drink may require fluids by nasogastric tube. Intravenous fluids are recommended only in those who have significant dehydration due to their potential complications, including congestive heart failure. 

===Low blood sugar===
Hypoglycemia, whether known or suspected, can be treated with a mixture of sugar and water. If the patient is conscious, the initial dose of sugar and water can be given by mouth. Otherwise, they should receive glucose by intravenous or nasogastric tube. If seizures occur (and continue after glucose is given), rectal diazepam may be helpful. Blood sugar levels should be re-checked on two-hour intervals.

===Hypothermia===
Hypothermia (dangerously low core body temperature) can occur in malnutrition, particularly in children. Mild hypothermia causes confusion, trembling, and clumsiness; more severe cases can be fatal. Keeping malnourished children warm can prevent or treat hypothermia. Covering the child (including their head) in blankets is one method. Another method is to warm the child through direct skin-to-skin contact with their mother or father, then covering both parent and child.

Warming methods are usually most important at night. Prolonged bathing or prolonged medical exams can further lower body temperature and are not recommended for malnourished children at high risk of hypothermia.

==Epidemiology==


The figures provided in this section on epidemiology all refer to &quot;undernutrition&quot; even if the term malnutrition is used which, by definition, could also apply to too much nutrition.

The Global Hunger Index (GHI) is a multidimensional statistical tool used to describe the state of countries&#x27; hunger situation. The GHI measures progress and failures in the global fight against hunger. The GHI is updated once a year. The data from the 2015 report shows that Hunger levels have dropped 27% since 2000. Fifty two countries remain at serious or alarming levels. In addition to the latest statistics on Hunger and Food Security, the GHI also features different special topics each year. The 2015 report include an article on conflict and food security.

===People affected===
The United Nations estimated that there were 821 million undernourished people in the world in 2017. This is using the UN&#x27;s definition of &#x27;undernourishment&#x27;, where it refers to insufficient consumption of raw calories, and so does not necessarily include people who lack micro nutrients. The undernourishment occurred despite the world&#x27;s farmers producing enough food to feed around 12 billion people—almost double the current world population.

Malnutrition, as of 2010, was the cause of 1.4% of all disability adjusted life years.

===Mortality===

In 2010 protein-energy malnutrition resulted in 600,000 deaths down from 883,000 deaths in 1990. Other nutritional deficiencies, which include iodine deficiency and iron deficiency anemia, result in another 84,000 deaths. In 2010 malnutrition caused about 1.5 million deaths in women and children.

According to the World Health Organization, malnutrition is the biggest contributor to child mortality, present in half of all cases. Six million children die of hunger every year. Underweight births and intrauterine growth restrictions cause 2.2 million child deaths a year. Poor or non-existent breastfeeding causes another 1.4 million. Other deficiencies, such as lack of vitamin A or zinc, for example, account for 1 million. Malnutrition in the first two years is irreversible. Malnourished children grow up with worse health and lower education achievement. Their own children tend to be smaller. Malnutrition was previously seen as something that exacerbates the problems of diseases such as measles, pneumonia and diarrhea, but malnutrition actually causes diseases, and can be fatal in its own right.

==History==

Hunger has been a perennial human problem. However, until the early 20th century, there was relatively little awareness of the qualitative aspects of malnutrition.

Throughout history, various peoples have known the importance of eating certain foods to prevent symptoms now associated with malnutrition. Yet such knowledge appears to have been repeatedly lost and then re-discovered. For example, the ancient Egyptians reportedly knew the symptoms of scurvy. Much later, in the 14th century, Crusaders sometimes used anti-scurvy measures – for example, ensuring that citrus fruits were planted on Mediterranean islands, for use on sea journeys. However, for several centuries, Europeans appear to have forgotten the importance of these measures. They rediscovered this knowledge in the 18th century, and by the early 19th century, the Royal Navy was issuing frequent rations of lemon juice to every crewman on their ships. This massively reduced scurvy deaths among British sailors, which in turn gave the British a significant advantage in the Napoleonic Wars. Later on in the 19th century, the Royal Navy replaced lemons with limes (unaware at the time that lemons are far more effective at preventing scurvy).

According to historian Michael Worboys, malnutrition was essentially discovered, and the science of nutrition established, between World War I and World War II. Advances built on prior works like Casimir Funk&#x27;s 1912 formulisation of the concept of vitamins. Scientific study of malnutrition increased in the 1920s and 1930s, and grew even more common after World War II.

Non-governmental organizations and United Nations agencies began to devote considerable energy to alleviating malnutrition around the world. The exact methods and priorities for doing this tended to fluctuate over the years, with varying levels of focus on different types of malnutrition like Kwashiorkor or Marasmus; varying levels of concern on protein deficiency compared to vitamins, minerals and lack of raw calories; and varying priorities given to the problem of malnutrition in general compared to other health and development concerns. The green Revolution of the 1950s and 1960s saw considerable improvement in capability to prevent malnutrition.

One of the first official global documents addressing Food security and global malnutrition was the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights(UDHR). Within this document it stated that access to food was part of an adequate right to a standard of living. The Right to food was asserted in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, a treaty adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 16, 1966. The Right to food is a human right for people to feed themselves in dignity, be free from hunger, food insecurity, and malnutrition. As of 2018, the treaty has been signed by 166 countries, by signing states agreed to take steps to the maximum of their available resources to achieve the right to adequate food.

However, after the 1966 International Covenant the global concern for the access to sufficient food only became more present, leading to the first ever World Food Conference that was held in 1974 in Rome, Italy. The Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition was a UN resolution adopted November 16, 1974 by all 135 countries that attended the 1974 World Food Conference. This non-legally binding document set forth certain aspirations for countries to follow to sufficiently take action on the global food problem. Ultimately this document outline and provided guidance as to how the international community as one could work towards fighting and solving the growing global issue of malnutrition and hunger.

Adoption of the right to food was included in the Additional Protocol to the American Convention on Human Rights in the area of Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, this 1978 document was adopted by many countries in the Americas, the purpose of the document is, &quot;to consolidate in this hemisphere, within the framework of democratic institutions, a system of personal liberty and social justice based on respect for the essential rights of man.&quot;

A later document in the timeline of global initiatives for malnutrition was the 1996 Rome Declaration on World Food Security, organized by the Food and Agriculture Organization. This document reaffirmed the right to have access to safe and nutritious food by everyone, also considering that everyone gets sufficient food, and set the goals for all nations to improve their commitment to food security by halving their number of undernourished people by 2015. In 2004 the Food and Agriculture Organization adopted the Right to Food Guidelines, which offered states a framework of how to increase the right to food on a national basis.

==Special populations==
Undernutrition is an important determinant of maternal and child health, accounting for more than a third of child deaths and more than 10 percent of the total global disease burden according to 2008 studies.

===Children===
Undernutrition adversely affects the cognitive development of children, contributing to poor earning capacity and poverty in adulthood. The development of childhood undernutrition coincides with the introduction of complementary weaning foods which are usually nutrient deficient. The World Health Organization estimates that malnutrition accounts for 54 percent of child mortality worldwide, about 1 million children. There is a strong association between undernutrition and child mortality. Another estimate also by WHO states that childhood underweight is the cause for about 35% of all deaths of children under the age of five years worldwide. Over 90% of the stunted children below five years of age live in sub-Saharan Africa and South Central Asia. Although access to adequate food and improving nutritional intake is an obvious solution to tackling undernutrition in children, the progress in reducing children undernutrition is disappointing.

===Women===


In 2022, more than 1 billion adolescent girls and women suffered from undernutrition, according to UNICEF&#x27;s 2023 report &quot;Undernourished and Overlooked: A Global Nutrition Crisis in Adolescent Girls and Women&quot;. The gender gap in food insecurity more than doubled between 2019 (49 million) and 2021 (126 million). The report shows that globally, 30% of women aged 15–49 years are living with anaemia while 10 per cent of women aged 20–49 years suffer from underweight. South Asia, West and Central Africa and Eastern and Southern Africa are home to 60% of women with anaemia and 65% of women being underweight. In contrast, overweight is affecting more than 35% of women aged 20–49 years, of which 13% are living with obesity. Middle East and North Africa has the highest prevalence of overweight with 61% affected. North America closely follows at 60%. Fewer than 1 in 3 adolescent girls and women have diets meeting the minimum dietary diversity in the Sudan (10%), Burundi (12%), Burkina Faso (17%) and Afghanistan (26%). In Niger, the percentage of women accessing a minimally diverse diet fell from 53% to 37% between 2020 and 2022.

Researchers from the Centre for World Food Studies in 2003 found that the gap between levels of undernutrition in men and women is generally small, but that the gap varies from region to region and from country to country. These small-scale studies showed that female undernutrition prevalence rates exceeded male undernutrition prevalence rates in South/Southeast Asia and Latin America and were lower in Sub-Saharan Africa. Datasets for Ethiopia and Zimbabwe reported undernutrition rates between 1.5 and 2 times higher in men than in women; however, in India and Pakistan, datasets rates of undernutrition were 1.5–2 times higher in women than in men. Intra-country variation also occurs, with frequent high gaps between regional undernutrition rates. Gender inequality in nutrition in some countries such as India is present in all stages of life.

Studies on nutrition concerning gender bias within households look at patterns of food allocation, and one study from 2003 suggested that women often receive a lower share of food requirements than men. Gender discrimination, gender roles, and social norms affecting women can lead to early marriage and childbearing, close birth spacing, and undernutrition, all of which contribute to malnourished mothers.

Within the household, there may be differences in levels of malnutrition between men and women, and these differences have been shown to vary significantly from one region to another, with problem areas showing relative deprivation of women. Samples of 1000 women in India in 2008 demonstrated that malnutrition in women is associated with poverty, lack of development and awareness, and illiteracy. The same study showed that gender discrimination in households can prevent a woman&#x27;s access to sufficient food and healthcare. How socialization affects the health of women in Bangladesh, Najma Rivzi explains in an article about a research program on this topic. In some cases, such as in parts of Kenya in 2006, rates of malnutrition in pregnant women were even higher than rates in children.

Women in some societies are traditionally given less food than men since men are perceived to have heavier workloads. Household chores and agricultural tasks can in fact be very arduous and require additional energy and nutrients; however, physical activity, which largely determines energy requirements, is difficult to estimate.

====Physiology====
Women have unique nutritional requirements, and in some cases need more nutrients than men; for example, women need twice as much calcium as men.

====Pregnancy and breastfeeding====
During pregnancy and breastfeeding, women must ingest enough nutrients for themselves and their child, so they need significantly more protein and calories during these periods, as well as more vitamins and minerals (especially iron, iodine, calcium, folic acid, and vitamins A, C, and K). In 2001 the FAO of the UN reported that iron deficiency affected 43 percent of women in developing countries and increased the risk of death during childbirth. A 2008 review of interventions estimated that universal supplementation with calcium, iron, and folic acid during pregnancy could prevent 105,000 maternal deaths (23.6 percent of all maternal deaths). Malnutrition has been found to affect three-quarters of UK women aged 16–49 indicated by them having less folic acid than the WHO recommended levels.

Frequent pregnancies with short intervals between them and long periods of breastfeeding add an additional nutritional burden.

====Educating children====
&quot;Action for Healthy Kids&quot; has created several methods to teach children about nutrition. They introduce 2 different topics, self-awareness which teaches children about taking care of their own health and social awareness, which is how culinary arts vary from culture to culture. As well as its importance when it comes to nutrition. They include eBooks, tips, cooking clubs. including facts about vegetables and fruits.

Team Nutrition has created &quot;MyPlate eBooks&quot; this includes 8 different eBooks to download for free. These eBooks contain drawings to color, audio narration, and a large number of characters to make nutrition lessons entertaining for children.

According to the FAO, women are often responsible for preparing food and have the chance to educate their children about beneficial food and health habits, giving mothers another chance to improve the nutrition of their children.

===Elderly===

Malnutrition and being underweight are more common in the elderly than in adults of other ages. If elderly people are healthy and active, the aging process alone does not usually cause malnutrition. However, changes in body composition, organ functions, adequate energy intake and ability to eat or access food are associated with aging, and may contribute to malnutrition. Sadness or depression can play a role, causing changes in appetite, digestion, energy level, weight, and well-being. A study on the relationship between malnutrition and other conditions in the elderly found that malnutrition in the elderly can result from gastrointestinal and endocrine system disorders, loss of taste and smell, decreased appetite and inadequate dietary intake. Poor dental health, ill-fitting dentures, or chewing and swallowing problems can make eating difficult. As a result of these factors, malnutrition is seen to develop more easily in the elderly.

Rates of malnutrition tend to increase with age with less than 10 percent of the &quot;young&quot; elderly (up to age 75) malnourished, while 30 to 65 percent of the elderly in home care, long-term care facilities, or acute hospitals are malnourished. Many elderly people require assistance in eating, which may contribute to malnutrition. However, the mortality rate due to undernourishment may be reduced. Because of this, one of the main requirements of elderly care is to provide an adequate diet and all essential nutrients. Providing the different nutrients such as protein and energy keeps even small but consistent weight gain. Hospital admissions for malnutrition in the United Kingdom have been related to insufficient social care, where vulnerable people at home or in care homes are not helped to eat.

In Australia malnutrition or risk of malnutrition occurs in 80 percent of elderly people presented to hospitals for admission. Malnutrition and weight loss can contribute to sarcopenia with loss of lean body mass and muscle function. Abdominal obesity or weight loss coupled with sarcopenia lead to immobility, skeletal disorders, insulin resistance, hypertension, atherosclerosis, and metabolic disorders. A paper from the &quot;Journal of the American Dietetic Association&quot; noted that routine nutrition screenings represent one way to detect and therefore decrease the prevalence of malnutrition in the elderly.

== See also ==
* Action Against Hunger
* &quot;A Place at the Table&quot;
* Agrobiodiversity
* Child health and nutrition in Africa
* Childhood obesity
* Community Therapeutic Care
* Deficiency (medicine)
* Eating disorder
* Economic issues
* Famine scales
* Fome Zero (Zero Hunger)
* Food Donation Connection
* Homelessness
* Hunger in the United Kingdom
* Hunger in the United States
* Hunger marches
* The Hunger Project
* Income inequality
* Integrated Food Security Phase Classification
* List of global issues
* Malnutrition in India
* Malnutrition in South Africa
* Malnutrition in Peru
* Malnutrition in Zimbabwe
* NutritionDay
* Nutrition and Education International
* Muselmann
* National Security Study Memorandum 200 (1974)
* Oxfam
* Poverty trap
* Project Open Hand
* Social programs
* Starvation response
* Sustainable fishery
* United Nations Millennium Declaration
* Vitamin deficiency
== Sources ==
== References ==
== External links ==


* United Nation 2007 report
* World Food Programme | WFP
* UN
* WFP</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="0" end="12" title="Malnutrition" label="Malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="28" end="36" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="62" end="70" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q63645073" start="125" end="135" title="Deficiency (medicine)" label="deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="169" end="176" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q194435" start="181" end="196" title="Vitamin deficiency" label="other nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="237" end="244" title="Tissue (biology)" label="tissues"/>
<link wikidata="Q25051684" start="309" end="323" title="Undernutrition in children" label="undernutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956975" start="328" end="341" title="overnutrition" label="overnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628806" start="402" end="416" title="stunted growth" label="stunted growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972881" start="418" end="425" title="wasting" label="wasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146902" start="431" end="442" title="underweight" label="underweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="509" end="516" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="560" end="580" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q939416" start="1011" end="1021" title="The Lancet" label="The Lancet"/>
<link wikidata="Q474191" start="1161" end="1168" title="Diet (nutrition)" label="dietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="1186" end="1211" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972881" start="1565" end="1572" title="wasting" label="wasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628806" start="1574" end="1582" title="Stunting (Medical)" label="stunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="1584" end="1591" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="1595" end="1602" title="Mineral (nutrient)" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="1711" end="1731" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336854" start="2189" end="2226" title="National Center for Health Statistics" label="National Center for Health Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="2269" end="2311" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019780" start="2451" end="2479" title="Indian Academy of Pediatrics" label="Indian Academy of Pediatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="2543" end="2560" title="World population" label="global population"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="3061" end="3067" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655893" start="4078" end="4098" title="Vitamin A deficiency" label="Vitamin A deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="4214" end="4223" title="Visual impairment" label="blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377123" start="4465" end="4482" title="iodine deficiency" label="iodine deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="4745" end="4752" title="Old age" label="elderly"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="4803" end="4816" title="breastfeeding" label="breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q25051684" start="4817" end="4825" title="Undernutrition in children" label="children"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="5990" end="6007" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="6111" end="6126" title="food insecurity" label="food insecurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665312" start="6199" end="6207" title="lockdown" label="lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="6446" end="6456" title="prevalence" label="prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="6860" end="6874" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q531507" start="7013" end="7026" title="micronutrient" label="micronutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="7216" end="7230" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="7317" end="7328" title="Physiology" label="physiologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="7661" end="7671" title="starvation" label="starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017329" start="7689" end="7714" title="Severe Acute Malnutrition" label="Severe Acute Malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7729" end="7756" title="Moderate Acute Malnutrition" label="Moderate Acute Malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="7769" end="7787" title="signs and symptoms" label="signs and symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839792" start="7791" end="7817" title="micronutrient deficiencies" label="micronutrient deficiencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="7951" end="7971" title="pedal edema" label="swelling in the legs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193889" start="7972" end="7983" title="ascites" label="and abdomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="8230" end="8236" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18225" start="8238" end="8247" title="Vitamin A" label="Vitamin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="8310" end="8330" title="low-income countries" label="low-income countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="8392" end="8398" title="Anemia" label="Anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954674" start="8416" end="8441" title="Iron-deficiency anemia" label="caused by iron deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082071" start="8809" end="8836" title="protein–energy malnutrition" label="protein–energy malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332886" start="8975" end="8994" title="calorie restriction" label="calorie restriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q213151" start="9152" end="9163" title="kwashiorkor" label="kwashiorkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q582904" start="9168" end="9176" title="marasmus" label="marasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="9296" end="9301" title="edema" label="edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362864" start="9312" end="9329" title="Hepatomegaly" label="liver enlargement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640780" start="9331" end="9347" title="hypoalbuminaemia" label="hypoalbuminaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365091" start="9353" end="9362" title="steatosis" label="steatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705665" start="9393" end="9407" title="depigmentation" label="depigmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193889" start="9481" end="9502" title="Ascites" label="swelling of the belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q190780" start="9508" end="9519" title="Limb (anatomy)" label="extremities"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="9663" end="9674" title="Ga language" label="Ga language"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="9686" end="9691" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q333203" start="9857" end="9863" title="Weaning" label="weaned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="10064" end="10074" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="10167" end="10172" title="edema" label="edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164665" start="10182" end="10198" title="Subcutaneous tissue" label="subcutaneous fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q424232" start="10213" end="10226" title="serum albumin" label="serum albumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="10272" end="10278" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131749" start="10320" end="10328" title="anorexia nervosa" label="anorexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131191" start="10580" end="10595" title="body mass index" label="body mass index"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="10742" end="10775" title="Chronic condition" label="chronic non-communicable diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="10781" end="10789" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="10812" end="10835" title="cardiovascular diseases" label="cardiovascular diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="11407" end="11418" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="11599" end="11605" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q629962" start="11916" end="11925" title="Arbitrariness" label="arbitrary"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="12077" end="12093" title="Preterm birth" label="born prematurely"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263159" start="12210" end="12230" title="John Waterlow" label="John Conrad Waterlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="12809" end="12822" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="12960" end="12964" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="13025" end="13044" title="Potable" label="safe drinking water"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="13162" end="13174" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="13256" end="13267" title="DNA replication" label="replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="13271" end="13280" title="HIV" label="the virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q194435" start="13307" end="13342" title="Avitaminosis" label="vitamin-deficiency-related diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="13348" end="13354" title="scurvy" label="scurvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183392" start="13359" end="13366" title="rickets" label="rickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="13660" end="13672" title="hypoglycemia" label="hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="13678" end="13689" title="Blood sugar level" label="blood sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="13737" end="13744" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829165" start="13751" end="13772" title="Unconsciousness" label="loss of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="13869" end="13880" title="Dehydration" label="Dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736316" start="14223" end="14244" title="altered mental status" label="altered mental status"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082071" start="14275" end="14303" title="Protein-calorie malnutrition" label="Protein-calorie malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141203" start="14314" end="14334" title="cognitive impairment" label="cognitive impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="14454" end="14463" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q127060" start="14658" end="14664" title="folate" label="folate"/>
<link wikidata="Q548213" start="14695" end="14713" title="neural tube defect" label="neural tube defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="14890" end="14896" title="infant" label="infant"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="14931" end="14942" title="Intelligence quotient" label="I.Q. points"/>
<link wikidata="Q165135" start="15110" end="15117" title="Goitre" label="goiters"/>
<link wikidata="Q472664" start="15119" end="15128" title="cretinism" label="cretinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="15133" end="15141" title="dwarfism" label="dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="15283" end="15296" title="Thyroid" label="thyroid gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886253" start="16258" end="16269" title="food prices" label="food prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="16401" end="16411" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515895" start="16417" end="16437" title="socioeconomic status" label="socioeconomic status"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="16568" end="16581" title="Famine" label="Food shortage"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="16809" end="16848" title="FAO" label="Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="16864" end="16875" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465458" start="16946" end="16963" title="food distribution" label="food distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="16965" end="16981" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q745692" start="17082" end="17096" title="Political sociology" label="sociopolitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="17365" end="17393" title="Economic inequality" label="differences in income levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="17798" end="17807" title="commodity" label="commodity"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="17808" end="17819" title="Speculation" label="speculators"/>
<link wikidata="Q186582" start="17860" end="17878" title="real-estate bubble" label="real-estate bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="17962" end="17968" title="Investment" label="invest"/>
<link wikidata="Q124488251" start="18024" end="18041" title="food price crisis" label="food price crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="18055" end="18062" title="biofuel" label="biofuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q98450626" start="18156" end="18166" title="rapporteur" label="rapporteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25616" start="18174" end="18187" title="right to food" label="right to food"/>
<link wikidata="Q123706" start="18189" end="18201" title="Jean Ziegler" label="Jean Ziegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q47161559" start="18216" end="18234" title="agricultural waste" label="agricultural waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885918" start="18244" end="18253" title="Corncob" label="corn cobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521309" start="18258" end="18271" title="banana leaves" label="banana leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="18870" end="18889" title="Infectious diseases" label="Infectious diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q156103" start="18936" end="18951" title="gastroenteritis" label="gastroenteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="18953" end="18962" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="18964" end="18971" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="18977" end="18984" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="19052" end="19060" title="AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="19127" end="19135" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11090" start="19147" end="19158" title="Small intestine" label="small bowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="19175" end="19195" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="19209" end="19224" title="coeliac disease" label="coeliac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q357503" start="19401" end="19418" title="bariatric surgery" label="bariatric surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287198" start="19651" end="19673" title="breast-milk substitute" label="breast-milk substitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="19934" end="19949" title="neonatal deaths" label="neonatal deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="19999" end="20004" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="20012" end="20030" title="Uterus" label="mother&amp;#x27;s womb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313081" start="20470" end="20485" title="iron deficiency" label="iron deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072298" start="20489" end="20504" title="zinc deficiency" label="zinc deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q331632" start="20587" end="20597" title="overeating" label="overeating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111958" start="20798" end="20810" title="productivity" label="productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="20823" end="20838" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q462052" start="20982" end="20989" title="Surplus product" label="surplus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349358" start="21024" end="21043" title="sedentary lifestyle" label="sedentary lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="21079" end="21094" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830383" start="21142" end="21164" title="toxic food environment" label="toxic food environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="21630" end="21640" title="automation" label="automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="22266" end="22279" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="22395" end="22406" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q191258" start="22471" end="22484" title="crop rotation" label="crop rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="22637" end="22647" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="22650" end="22659" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="22662" end="22672" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="22674" end="22683" title="Agricultural machinery" label="machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="22853" end="22863" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="22940" end="22951" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="23011" end="23021" title="subsidy" label="subsidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q160151" start="23231" end="23244" title="market prices" label="market prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="23396" end="23416" title="Environmental movement" label="environmental groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="23479" end="23495" title="Green Revolution" label="Green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q154824" start="23505" end="23519" title="Norman Borlaug" label="Norman Borlaug"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="23853" end="23867" title="Global warming" label="Global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="23964" end="23974" title="subtropics" label="subtropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="24040" end="24081" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277161" start="24203" end="24218" title="extreme weather" label="extreme weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="24494" end="24500" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="24636" end="24654" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="24841" end="24848" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q497841" start="24915" end="24939" title="colony collapse disorder" label="colony collapse disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="24960" end="24963" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12303496" start="24993" end="25049" title="list of crop plants pollinated by bees" label="many agricultural crops worldwide are pollinated by bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q50215926" start="25201" end="25231" title="Sustainable Development Goal 2" label="Sustainable Development Goal 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q50215926" start="25233" end="25237" title="SDG2" label="SDG2"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="25497" end="25513" title="Green Revolution" label="Green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="25574" end="25594" title="nitrogen fertilizers" label="nitrogen fertilizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="25599" end="25608" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q213753" start="25699" end="25706" title="harvest" label="harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q540912" start="25717" end="25732" title="food production" label="food production"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="25962" end="25966" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="26178" end="26184" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q826745" start="26208" end="26216" title="food aid" label="food aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060555" start="26625" end="26635" title="farmworker" label="farmworker"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="26728" end="26760" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q319189" start="26950" end="26963" title="Jeffrey Sachs" label="Jeffrey Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q876830" start="26981" end="26998" title="First World" label="wealthy countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="27006" end="27012" title="Investment" label="invest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782517" start="27073" end="27102" title="Ready-to-use therapeutic food" label="Ready to Use Therapeutic Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="27158" end="27165" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="27191" end="27206" title="Soybean" label="&amp;quot;soy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445113" start="27213" end="27217" title="kunu" label="kunu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099654" start="27227" end="27242" title="Local purchasing" label="locally sourced"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="27284" end="27290" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="27295" end="27302" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693955" start="27573" end="27588" title="Agricultural diversification" label="diversify crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="27613" end="27623" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444953" start="27719" end="27735" title="cycle of poverty" label="cycle of poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="27830" end="27839" title="foodstuff" label="foodstuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="28177" end="28195" title="World Food Program" label="World Food Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q433934" start="28345" end="28360" title="Josette Sheeran" label="Josette Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158451" start="28463" end="28480" title="Concern Worldwide" label="Concern Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887204" start="28532" end="28553" title="mobile phone operator" label="mobile phone operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398410" start="28555" end="28564" title="Safaricom" label="Safaricom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334491" start="28844" end="28853" title="Fred Cuny" label="Fred Cuny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343347" start="29570" end="29577" title="Hoarding" label="hoarded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936341" start="29590" end="29604" title="Price level" label="inflated price"/>
<link wikidata="Q113603" start="29642" end="29651" title="Food bank" label="Food bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142654" start="29657" end="29669" title="soup kitchen" label="soup kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q678522" start="29741" end="29753" title="basic income" label="basic income"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="29875" end="29890" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="30132" end="30140" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="30743" end="30749" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q864214" start="30779" end="30792" title="Biodegradable waste" label="organic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526" start="31191" end="31205" title="Thomas Malthus" label="Thomas Malthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="31218" end="31235" title="population growth" label="population growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="31257" end="31273" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="31653" end="31668" title="Family planning" label="Family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782389" start="31944" end="31962" title="Theories of famines" label="different theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q60901" start="32364" end="32390" title="Public Distribution System" label="Public Distribution System"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="32428" end="32437" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="32523" end="32539" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32557" end="32588" title="Theories of famines#Failure of exchange entitlements" label="shifts in exchange entitlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="32872" end="32879" title="fishery" label="fishery"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="32922" end="32932" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="32981" end="32992" title="Neoliberalism" label="Neoliberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="33032" end="33043" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="33413" end="33417" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="33422" end="33427" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="33607" end="33620" title="Infant mortality" label="infant deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q22728" start="33622" end="33633" title="breast milk" label="breast milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137154" start="33795" end="33811" title="Non-communicable disease" label="non-communicable"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="33816" end="33824" title="Allergy" label="allergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q61559" start="34031" end="34046" title="child mortality" label="child mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="34224" end="34239" title="food supplement" label="food supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754768" start="34600" end="34614" title="Cost-effectiveness analysis" label="cost-effective"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="34723" end="34743" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287198" start="34818" end="34825" title="Infant formula" label="formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="34861" end="34872" title="social norm" label="social norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="35607" end="35628" title="Financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465289" start="35916" end="35942" title="Food Assistance Convention" label="Food Assistance Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404417" start="35967" end="35982" title="legally binding" label="legally binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131025" start="36045" end="36065" title="Copenhagen Consensus" label="Copenhagen Consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="36099" end="36113" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="36114" end="36129" title="Philanthropy" label="philanthropists"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="36350" end="36357" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="36410" end="36445" title="Bill &amp;amp; Melinda Gates Foundation" label="Bill &amp;amp; Melinda Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="36556" end="36566" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="36568" end="36575" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="36587" end="36592" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="36594" end="36598" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="36603" end="36608" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="36786" end="36819" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="36888" end="36901" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q25616" start="37165" end="37178" title="right to food" label="right to food"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37211" end="37223" title="Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations#Online campaign against hunger" label="EndingHunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030329" start="37341" end="37352" title="viral video" label="viral video"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="37364" end="37375" title="Celebrity" label="celebrities"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="37461" end="37489" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="37511" end="37540" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751054" start="37736" end="37759" title="Sustainable agriculture" label="agriculture sustainable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191051" start="37942" end="37986" title="International Food Policy Research Institute" label="International Food Policy Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246201" start="38101" end="38119" title="private foundation" label="private foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q865909" start="38276" end="38291" title="development aid" label="development aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144560" start="38345" end="38350" title="Rate (mathematics)" label="rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="38945" end="38957" title="dietary supplements" label="supplemental"/>
<link wikidata="Q26830865" start="39101" end="39112" title="counselling" label="counselling"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="39283" end="39289" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="39361" end="39372" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195832" start="39533" end="39549" title="School meal" label="feeding students"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="39673" end="39683" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="39809" end="39851" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="40042" end="40046" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="40052" end="40058" title="Tablet computer" label="tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="40469" end="40486" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="41154" end="41179" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415366" start="41259" end="41271" title="immunization" label="immunization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41671" end="41701" title="therapeutic food#Ready-to-Use Therapeutic Food" label="ready-to-use therapeutic foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="41870" end="41885" title="hypoglycemia" label="low blood sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="41908" end="41924" title="hypothermia" label="body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="41937" end="41948" title="dehydration" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="41980" end="41990" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971815" start="42112" end="42137" title="broad spectrum antibiotic" label="broad spectrum antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="42570" end="42592" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladeshi government"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="42668" end="42679" title="dehydration" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="42734" end="42754" title="hypothermia" label="low body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326943" start="42795" end="42816" title="electrolyte imbalance" label="electrolyte imbalance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812693" start="43840" end="43858" title="refeeding syndrome" label="refeeding syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344580" start="43953" end="43962" title="enteral nutrition" label="enterally"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="43966" end="43978" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="parenterally"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="44059" end="44071" title="Cardiac dysrhythmia" label="dysrhythmias"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121266" start="44113" end="44122" title="Food fortification" label="fortified"/>
<link wikidata="Q187706" start="44326" end="44329" title="B12" label="B12"/>
<link wikidata="Q666242" start="44354" end="44363" title="flatbread" label="flatbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q545985" start="44434" end="44444" title="fish sauce" label="fish sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q902318" start="44460" end="44472" title="Iodised salt" label="iodized salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131025" start="44743" end="44763" title="Copenhagen Consensus" label="Copenhagen Consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="44940" end="44948" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072298" start="44950" end="44970" title="Zinc deficiency" label="zinc supplementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="45307" end="45316" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="45321" end="45330" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q633401" start="45484" end="45497" title="coconut water" label="coconut water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920739" start="45952" end="45973" title="Ringer&amp;#x27;s lactate solution" label="Ringer&amp;#x27;s lactate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185089" start="45984" end="45992" title="acidosis" label="acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q794086" start="46048" end="46067" title="Hypokalemia" label="low blood potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q275068" start="46569" end="46584" title="Broth" label="vegetable broth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323119" start="46595" end="46605" title="rice water" label="rice water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381652" start="47594" end="47618" title="oral rehydration therapy" label="oral rehydration therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="47929" end="47941" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q643555" start="47986" end="47996" title="Osmotic concentration" label="osmolarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q184630" start="48439" end="48457" title="potassium chloride" label="potassium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q409728" start="48463" end="48480" title="trisodium citrate" label="trisodium citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="48683" end="48690" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q420266" start="48921" end="48924" title="Fluid ounce" label="oz."/>
<link wikidata="Q2575857" start="49403" end="49419" title="nasogastric tube" label="nasogastric tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="49421" end="49432" title="Intravenous" label="Intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q178061" start="49479" end="49502" title="Shock (circulatory)" label="significant dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="49551" end="49575" title="congestive heart failure" label="congestive heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="49601" end="49613" title="Hypoglycemia" label="Hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="49823" end="49834" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575857" start="49838" end="49854" title="nasogastric tube" label="nasogastric tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="49920" end="49928" title="diazepam" label="diazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="50027" end="50038" title="Hypothermia" label="Hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16679262" start="50056" end="50077" title="Human body temperature" label="core body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421372" start="50933" end="50952" title="Global Hunger Index" label="Global Hunger Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627" start="52045" end="52075" title="disability adjusted life years" label="disability adjusted life years"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914395" start="52081" end="52090" title="Mortality (book)" label="Mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082071" start="52103" end="52130" title="protein-energy malnutrition" label="protein-energy malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377123" start="52238" end="52255" title="iodine deficiency" label="iodine deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q954674" start="52260" end="52282" title="iron deficiency anemia" label="iron deficiency anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61559" start="52481" end="52496" title="child mortality" label="child mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146902" start="52575" end="52586" title="Underweight" label="Underweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q18225" start="52769" end="52778" title="vitamin A" label="vitamin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="52782" end="52786" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="53620" end="53633" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="53670" end="53676" title="scurvy" label="scurvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="53711" end="53720" title="Crusades" label="Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="53786" end="53799" title="Citrus" label="citrus fruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="54054" end="54064" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="54097" end="54108" title="Lemon" label="lemon juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="54264" end="54279" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17652193" start="54522" end="54542" title="Nutritional science" label="science of nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="54564" end="54575" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="54580" end="54592" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q28738" start="54629" end="54641" title="Casimir Funk" label="Casimir Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q213151" start="55104" end="55115" title="Kwashiorkor" label="Kwashiorkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q582904" start="55119" end="55127" title="Marasmus" label="Marasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="55360" end="55376" title="green Revolution" label="green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="55574" end="55611" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q25616" start="55729" end="55742" title="Right to food" label="Right to food"/>
<link wikidata="Q457862" start="55763" end="55825" title="International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights" label="International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="55829" end="55835" title="treaty" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="55851" end="55882" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="55928" end="55939" title="human rights" label="human right"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893939" start="56434" end="56501" title="Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition" label="Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57003" end="57118" title="American Convention on Human Rights#Additional Protocols" label="Additional Protocol to the American Convention on Human Rights in the area of Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="57341" end="57355" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362984" start="57498" end="57537" title="Rome Declaration on World Food Security" label="Rome Declaration on World Food Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="57556" end="57589" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333664" start="57930" end="57954" title="Right to Food Guidelines" label="Right to Food Guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282120" start="58239" end="58253" title="disease burden" label="disease burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="61171" end="61177" title="Gender" label="Gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="63390" end="63410" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677203" start="63975" end="63998" title="Action for Healthy Kids" label="Action for Healthy Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433265" start="64433" end="64447" title="MyPlate" label="MyPlate eBooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q437458" start="66306" end="66318" title="elderly care" label="elderly care"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="66358" end="66377" title="essential nutrients" label="essential nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787939" start="66838" end="66848" title="sarcopenia" label="sarcopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351083" start="67050" end="67069" title="metabolic disorders" label="metabolic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q343624" start="67301" end="67322" title="Action Against Hunger" label="Action Against Hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658861" start="67331" end="67351" title="A Place at the Table" label="A Place at the Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q397284" start="67360" end="67376" title="Agrobiodiversity" label="Agrobiodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29469210" start="67379" end="67415" title="Child health and nutrition in Africa" label="Child health and nutrition in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241451" start="67418" end="67435" title="Childhood obesity" label="Childhood obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154896" start="67438" end="67464" title="Community Therapeutic Care" label="Community Therapeutic Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q63645073" start="67467" end="67488" title="Deficiency (medicine)" label="Deficiency (medicine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="67491" end="67506" title="Eating disorder" label="Eating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920219" start="67509" end="67524" title="Economic issues" label="Economic issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951436" start="67527" end="67540" title="Famine scales" label="Famine scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q582496" start="67543" end="67552" title="Fome Zero" label="Fome Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465314" start="67569" end="67593" title="Food Donation Connection" label="Food Donation Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="67596" end="67608" title="Homelessness" label="Homelessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985299" start="67611" end="67639" title="Hunger in the United Kingdom" label="Hunger in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845622" start="67642" end="67669" title="Hunger in the United States" label="Hunger in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943322" start="67672" end="67686" title="Hunger marches" label="Hunger marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169014" start="67689" end="67707" title="The Hunger Project" label="The Hunger Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="67710" end="67727" title="Income inequality" label="Income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042865" start="67730" end="67775" title="Integrated Food Security Phase Classification" label="Integrated Food Security Phase Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117122" start="67778" end="67799" title="List of global issues" label="List of global issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056486" start="67802" end="67823" title="Malnutrition in India" label="Malnutrition in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744443" start="67826" end="67854" title="Malnutrition in South Africa" label="Malnutrition in South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351939" start="67857" end="67877" title="Malnutrition in Peru" label="Malnutrition in Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744444" start="67880" end="67904" title="Malnutrition in Zimbabwe" label="Malnutrition in Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347029" start="67907" end="67919" title="NutritionDay" label="NutritionDay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070509" start="67922" end="67959" title="Nutrition and Education International" label="Nutrition and Education International"/>
<link wikidata="Q691112" start="67962" end="67971" title="Muselmann" label="Muselmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268452" start="67974" end="68012" title="National Security Study Memorandum 200" label="National Security Study Memorandum 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q267941" start="68022" end="68027" title="Oxfam" label="Oxfam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444953" start="68030" end="68042" title="Poverty trap" label="Poverty trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249235" start="68045" end="68062" title="Project Open Hand" label="Project Open Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="68065" end="68080" title="Social programs" label="Social programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q14901436" start="68083" end="68102" title="Starvation response" label="Starvation response"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485804" start="68105" end="68124" title="Sustainable fishery" label="Sustainable fishery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639272" start="68127" end="68164" title="United Nations Millennium Declaration" label="United Nations Millennium Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q194435" start="68167" end="68185" title="Vitamin deficiency" label="Vitamin deficiency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258980" wikidata="Q174196" url="?curid=258980" title="Ergodic hypothesis">
<text>In physics and thermodynamics, the ergodic hypothesis says that, over long periods of time, the time spent by a system in some region of the phase space of microstates with the same energy is proportional to the volume of this region, i.e., that all accessible microstates are equiprobable over a long period of time.

Liouville&#x27;s theorem states that, for a Hamiltonian system, the local density of microstates following a particle path through phase space is constant as viewed by an observer moving with the ensemble (i.e., the convective time derivative is zero). Thus, if the microstates are uniformly distributed in phase space initially, they will remain so at all times. But Liouville&#x27;s theorem does &quot;not&quot; imply that the ergodic hypothesis holds for all Hamiltonian systems.

The ergodic hypothesis is often assumed in the statistical analysis of computational physics. The analyst would assume that the average of a process parameter over time and the average over the statistical ensemble are the same. This assumption—that it is as good to simulate a system over a long time as it is to make many independent realizations of the same system—is not always correct. (See, for example, the Fermi–Pasta–Ulam–Tsingou experiment of 1953.)

Assumption of the ergodic hypothesis allows proof that certain types of perpetual motion machines of the second kind are impossible.

Systems that are ergodic are said to have the property of ergodicity; a broad range of systems in geometry, physics, and probability are ergodic. Ergodic systems are studied in ergodic theory.

==Phenomenology==
In macroscopic systems, the timescales over which a system can truly explore the entirety of its own phase space can be sufficiently large that the thermodynamic equilibrium state exhibits some form of ergodicity breaking. A common example is that of spontaneous magnetisation in ferromagnetic systems, whereby below the Curie temperature the system preferentially adopts a non-zero magnetisation even though the ergodic hypothesis would imply that no net magnetisation should exist by virtue of the system exploring all states whose time-averaged magnetisation should be zero. The fact that macroscopic systems often violate the literal form of the ergodic hypothesis is an example of spontaneous symmetry breaking.

However, complex disordered systems such as a spin glass show an even more complicated form of ergodicity breaking where the properties of the thermodynamic equilibrium state seen in practice are much more difficult to predict purely by symmetry arguments. Also conventional glasses (e.g. window glasses) violate ergodicity in a complicated manner. In practice this means that on sufficiently short time scales (e.g. those of parts of seconds, minutes, or a few hours) the systems may behave as &quot;solids&quot;, i.e. with a positive shear modulus, but on extremely long scales, e.g. over millennia or eons, as &quot;liquids&quot;, or with two or more time scales and &quot;plateaux&quot; in between.

==Ergodic hypothesis in finance==
Models used in finance and investment assume ergodicity, explicitly or implicitly. The ergodic hypothesis is prevalent in modern portfolio theory, discounted cash flow (DCF) models, and aggregate indicator models that infuse macroeconomics, among others.

The situations modeled by these theories can be useful. But often they are only useful during much, but not all, of any particular time period under study. They can therefore miss some of the largest deviations from the standard model, such as financial crises, debt crises and systemic risk in the banking system that occur only infrequently.

Nassim Nicholas Taleb has argued that a very important part of empirical reality in finance and investment is non-ergodic. An even statistical distribution of probabilities, where the system returns to every possible state an infinite number of times, is simply not the case we observe in situations where &quot;absorbing states&quot; are reached, a state where &quot;ruin&quot; is seen. The death of an individual, or total loss of everything, or the devolution or dismemberment of a nation state and the legal regime that accompanied it, are all absorbing states. Thus, in finance, path dependence matters. A path where an individual, firm or country hits a &quot;stop&quot;—an absorbing barrier, &quot;anything that prevents people with skin in the game from emerging from it, and to which the system will invariably tend. Let us call these situations &quot;ruin&quot;, as the entity cannot emerge from the condition. The central problem is that if there is a possibility of ruin, cost benefit analyses are no longer possible.&quot;—will be non-ergodic. All traditional models based on standard probabilistic statistics break down in these extreme situations.

The emerging field of ergodicity economics is beginning to show how including non-ergodic dynamics addresses some of the criticisms of neoclassical and pluralist economics; and, practically, what investors and entrepreneurs can do to correct for the typical outcome of a business or investment fund (under non-ergodic capital dynamics) being less than the expectation value. This correction is necessary for the regenerative economy described by regenerative economic theory to work in practice. 

==Ergodic hypothesis in social science==
In the social sciences, the ergodic hypothesis corresponds to the assumption that individuals are representative of groups, and vice versa, that group averages can adequately characterize what might be seen in an individual. This appears to not be the case: group level data often gives a poor indication of individual level variation, as individual standard deviations (SDs) tend to be almost eight times larger than group level SDs of the same people. Subsequently a third of the individual observations falls outside a 99.9% confidence interval of group level data.

==See also==
* Ergodic process
* Ergodic theory, a branch of mathematics concerned with a more general formulation of ergodicity
* Ergodicity
* Loschmidt&#x27;s paradox
* Poincaré recurrence theorem
* Lindy effect

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="15" end="29" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q174196" start="35" end="53" title="Ergodic hypothesis" label="ergodic hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="141" end="152" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q611952" start="156" end="167" title="Microstate (statistical mechanics)" label="microstates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742564" start="277" end="289" title="equiprobable" label="equiprobable"/>
<link wikidata="Q766722" start="319" end="343" title="Liouville&amp;#x27;s theorem (Hamiltonian)" label="Liouville&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072471" start="363" end="381" title="Hamiltonian system" label="Hamiltonian system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801562" start="535" end="561" title="Material derivative" label="convective time derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q274506" start="601" end="622" title="Uniform distribution (continuous)" label="uniformly distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="626" end="637" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="850" end="870" title="statistical analysis" label="statistical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q909554" start="874" end="895" title="computational physics" label="computational physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q202785" start="931" end="938" title="average" label="average"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="967" end="971" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q898535" start="997" end="1017" title="statistical ensemble" label="statistical ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q462254" start="1217" end="1252" title="Fermi–Pasta–Ulam–Tsingou problem" label="Fermi–Pasta–Ulam–Tsingou experiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1369" end="1380" title="Perpetual motion#Classification" label="second kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426803" start="1456" end="1466" title="ergodicity" label="ergodicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="1496" end="1504" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="1506" end="1513" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q176737" start="1519" end="1530" title="stochastic process" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498822" start="1575" end="1589" title="ergodic theory" label="ergodic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="1711" end="1722" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="1890" end="1903" title="ferromagnetic" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="1931" end="1948" title="Curie temperature" label="Curie temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q736716" start="2296" end="2325" title="spontaneous symmetry breaking" label="spontaneous symmetry breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490646" start="2374" end="2384" title="spin glass" label="spin glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="3081" end="3088" title="finance" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="3093" end="3103" title="investment" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072885" start="3188" end="3211" title="modern portfolio theory" label="modern portfolio theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q455422" start="3213" end="3233" title="discounted cash flow" label="discounted cash flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q107183651" start="3252" end="3271" title="macroeconomic indicators" label="aggregate indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="3291" end="3305" title="macroeconomics" label="macroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q114380" start="3566" end="3582" title="financial crises" label="financial crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q773335" start="3584" end="3595" title="debt crises" label="debt crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369234" start="3600" end="3613" title="systemic risk" label="systemic risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q333521" start="3667" end="3688" title="Nassim Nicholas Taleb" label="Nassim Nicholas Taleb"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="4152" end="4164" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673271" start="4173" end="4185" title="Regime change" label="legal regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093521" start="4251" end="4266" title="path dependence" label="path dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q942582" start="4651" end="4672" title="Cost–benefit analysis" label="cost benefit analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q104822256" start="4853" end="4873" title="ergodicity economics" label="ergodicity economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308046" start="5277" end="5305" title="regenerative economic theory" label="regenerative economic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="5377" end="5391" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298136" start="5955" end="5970" title="Ergodic process" label="Ergodic process"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498822" start="5973" end="5987" title="Ergodic theory" label="Ergodic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426803" start="6071" end="6081" title="Ergodicity" label="Ergodicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895095" start="6084" end="6108" title="Loschmidt&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Loschmidt&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q226014" start="6111" end="6138" title="Poincaré recurrence theorem" label="Poincaré recurrence theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152837" start="6141" end="6153" title="Lindy effect" label="Lindy effect"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258983" wikidata="Q584683" url="?curid=258983" title="Elective monarchy">
<text>An elective monarchy is a monarchy ruled by a monarch who is elected, in contrast to a hereditary monarchy in which the office is automatically passed down as a family inheritance. The manner of election, the nature of candidate qualifications, and the electors vary from case to case. Historically, it was common for elective monarchies to transform into hereditary ones (whether legally or &quot;de facto&quot;) by repeated election of the previous rulers&#x27; children, or for hereditary monarchies to acquire elective or semi-elective succession laws, particularly following dynastic crises.

==Evolution==
Many kingdoms were officially elective historically, though the candidates were typically only from the family of the deceased monarch. Eventually, however, most elected monarchies introduced hereditary succession, guaranteeing that the title and office stayed within the royal family and specifying, more or less precisely, the order of succession.
Today, almost all monarchies are hereditary monarchies in which the monarchs come from one royal family with the office of sovereign being passed from one family member to another upon the death or abdication of the incumbent.

==Historical examples==
===Europe===
====Ancient Greece====
The kings of Macedon and of Epirus were elected by the army, which was similar in composition to the Ecclesia of the &quot;Demos&quot;, the assembly of all free Athenian citizens. Military service often was linked with citizenship among the male members of the royal house.

====Ancient Rome and Byzantium====
In the ancient Roman Kingdom the kings were elected by the Roman assemblies. When a king died, the senate would appoint an &quot;interrex&quot; to oversee the election for a new king. Once the Roman kings were overthrown, there remained an absolute prohibition for royal establishment in the Roman constitution, a prohibition which formally remained in place during imperial times, both classical Roman and Byzantine. In practice, however, Imperial Rome was a monarchy. During the Principate (27 BC to 284 AD), which was the foundational stage of Roman imperialism, Roman monarchs would often take care to disguise their &quot;de facto&quot; position with the &quot;de jure&quot; apparatus of republicanism. This was particularly the case for Augustus, the first Emperor, who established the Principate. Whilst given many titles (including &quot;Augustus&quot;, i.e. &quot;majestic&quot;) he described himself as &quot;princeps senatus&quot;, or merely &quot;first among senators&quot;. The illusion of being elected from the Senate continued. Over time the principle weakened as republican government passed into distant history, and the Empire became functionally an absolute monarchy. The office of Roman and Byzantine emperor remained vaguely elective (albeit with the election procedure never strictly defined, but generally understood to be a matter for the Senate). For instance, whilst the first five Emperors were all descended from Julius Caesar, in each case their position was proclaimed, not inherited as of right. Claudius, the fourth Emperor, in particular stands out, being &quot;elected&quot; to office once the Praetorian Guard had made it clear he was their candidate.

Accordingly, heredity never was, and could never be, formally established in law. And whilst the later, more overtly authoritarian Dominate period further stripped the republican veneer from the constitution, Emperors succeeded by a mixture of proclamation by the Legions or Senate as much as by blood (though sons did succeed fathers).

In order to bypass the prohibition on heredity and ensure dynastic continuity, many reigning Byzantine emperors had their heirs crowned co-emperor so that the throne could not be considered vacant at their own death and thus the need for succession by election would not arise.

====United Kingdom====
A system of elective monarchy existed in Anglo-Saxon England (see Witenagemot).

John of England was chosen as King of England by a council of nobles and royal advisors at the death of his brother, Richard I, in 1199 because the heir by strict primogeniture, Arthur of Brittany, was a child at that time. This affirmed the principle of elective monarchy.

In 14th, 15th, late 17th and early 18th century England, the evolving relations between the Crown and Parliament resulted in a monarchy with both hereditary and quasi-elective elements – at least as between various contenders with some dynastic claim for the throne. Henry IV of England was chosen by Parliament in 1399 to replace Richard II. Richard was childless, and the Earl of March, the next in line to the throne, was a young child at the time, so Parliament bypassed him in favour of Henry, who had led a revolt against Richard. Parliament also confirmed depositions during the Wars of the Roses, as well as Henry VIII&#x27;s settlements of the crown. During the Exclusion Crisis, King Charles II strongly opposed any such idea.

Following the Glorious Revolution, Parliament enacted the Act of Succession, whose effect was to disinherit the Stuarts and replace them by the Hanoverians, whose dynastic claim was far more remote. William III and Mary II were chosen by Parliament to replace James II. (Mary was James&#x27; daughter, William was James&#x27; nephew, and William and Mary were succeeded by Mary&#x27;s younger sister Anne.) Parliament passed laws in the late 17th and early 18th centuries which explicitly excluded Catholics (and thus the male descendants of James II) from the order of succession. The Succession to the Crown Act 2013, replaced male-preference primogeniture with absolute primogeniture and ended disqualification of a person who married a Roman Catholic from succession.

In Scotland, the Declaration of Arbroath of 1320 asserted the rights of the nobles to choose a king if required, which implied elective monarchy. Tanistry was also the system of royal succession until King Malcolm II in the early 11th century introduced direct inheritance. The Isle of Man also used tanistry.

====Ireland====

In Ireland, from the beginning of recorded history until the mid-16th/early 17th century, succession was determined by an elective system based on patrilineal relationship known as tanistry.

====Dutch Republic====
In the Dutch Republic of the 17th and 18th centuries there was the office of the Stadtholder, whose powers fell short of those of a monarch, and which was elective. Each of the seven Dutch provinces could separately elect its own Stadtholder, and it did not have to be the same person in all of them. In theory anyone could be elected Stadtholder, though in practice it was restricted to members of the House of Orange. There was no obligation to elect a Stadtholder at all, and the leaders of the Dutch Republican faction, such as Oldenbarnevelt and De Witt, repeatedly tried to abolish the office of Stadtholder or leave it vacant – which it was for several decades of Dutch history. Conversely, the House of Orange and its adherents tried to increase the powers of the Stadtholder to approximate those of a monarch, to make it officially hereditary (which it became in the later part of the 18th century) and finally to transform it into a full-fledged monarchy – as it was in 1815.

====Gaul/France====
The Gallic tribes were each ruled by a &quot;rix&quot;, which can be translated as king, who were elected for terms of one year or longer. Candidates were drawn from relatives of past kings.

The Frankish kingdom was at least partly elective. Merovingian kings were elected, while Carolingian kings were elected at times. In the 10th century Western Frankish royal elections switched between different lineages before settling on the Capetians. Medieval France was an elective monarchy at the time of the first Capetian kings; the kings however took the habit of, during their reign, having their son elected as co-king and successor during their reigns. The election soon became a mere formality and vanished after the reign of Philip II.

After declaring the throne vacant, the French Chamber of Deputies voted 229–33 to declare Louis-Philippe of France as King of the French during the July Revolution of 1830, creating an elective monarchy. France briefly had again a kind of elective monarchy when Napoleon III was first elected President of France and then transformed himself into an Emperor.

====Holy Roman Empire====

The Holy Roman Empire, beginning with its predecessor Eastern Francia, is perhaps the best-known example of an elective monarchy. However, from 1440 to 1740, a Habsburg was always elected emperor, the throne becoming unofficially hereditary. During that period, the emperor was elected from within the House of Habsburg by a small council of nobles called prince-electors. The secular electoral seats were hereditary. However, spiritual electors (and other prince-(arch)bishops) were usually elected by the cathedral chapters as religious leaders, but simultaneously ruled as monarch (prince) of a territory of imperial immediacy (which usually comprised a part of their diocesan territory). Thus the prince-bishoprics were elective monarchies too. The same holds true for prince-abbacies, whose princess-abbesses or prince-abbots were elected by a college of clerics and imperially appointed as princely rulers in a pertaining territory.

====Bohemia====
Since medieval times, the King of Bohemia was elected by the Estates of Lands of the Bohemian Crown. Since 1526, when Ferdinand I assumed the Bohemian Crown, it was always held by the Habsburg branch who later became Holy Roman Emperor and who expected this situation to go on indefinitely. In 1618 the Bohemians chose to exercise in practice their legal right to choose a King at their discretion, despite having already elected Ferdinand II as king, and bestowed the Bohemian Crown on Frederick V, Elector Palatine – &quot;The Winter King&quot;. However, the Habsburgs regarded this as an act of rebellion, re-imposed their rule over Bohemia in the Battle of the White Mountain and in the aftermath abolished the Bohemian Elective Monarchy and made exclusive Habsburg rule the de jure as well as de facto situation. The attempt to make Frederick V King of Bohemia is regarded as a catalyst for the Thirty Years War.

====Hungary====
Hungary was an elective monarchy until 1687. This elective right carried on for another two more decades in the Principality of Transylvania which &quot;de jure&quot; continued to belong to the Lands of the Hungarian Crown but had split from Hungary when the childless King Louis II died after the Battle of Mohács.

====Iberia====
Visigothic Hispania elected the king from the relatives of past kings, in accordance with the Germanic traditions. In practice, the Visigoth kings appointed their eldest sons to manage the kingdom&#x27;s affairs, so that when the king died the eldest son was politically skilled enough to secure the throne. In the 5th century, hereditary succession was increasingly stable until the Frankish invasions against the Visigoths led to a period of crisis in which the Visigoths reverted to elections. After the crisis was over in the 6th century, the family of Leovigild attempted to revive hereditary succession until Swintila was overthrown and the Fourth Council of Toledo formally declared elective succession as the principle of succession in 633.

The Kingship of Aragon was initially elected by the &quot;rich men&quot; barons. Later this right was limited to the Cortes confirming the succession of the heir.

During the 19th century, more precisely between 1870 and 1873, an attempt of such a system took place in Spain. After the Glorious Revolution and Isabella II&#x27;s subsequent deposition in 1868 a new parliament was constituted through direct male suffrage. It was then decided that a democratically elected monarch was needed in Spain. The debates regarding Isabella&#x27;s succession took place until October 1869, when Amadeo I was finally chosen. Nevertheless, his reign lasted until 11 October 1873, when he abdicated citing his inability to solve the problems Spain was going through, after which the parliament proclaimed a republic.

Portugal&#x27;s monarchy contained the remnants of the elective principle in requiring reciprocal oaths, the assent of the Cortes and acclamation before acceding to the throne. Portugal&#x27;s first king Afonso I followed Visigothic precedent by appointing his son as co-ruler to establish a hereditary line of succession, but whenever there was doubt on succession, the elective principle would resume. The Cortes affirmed the crown as elective when it elevated King John in 1385. In Portugal, on 6 April 1385 in the aftermath of 1383–1385 Crisis, the Council of the Kingdom elected John I, then Master of the Order of Aviz, as King of Portugal. His half-brother Ferdinand I had died without a male heir in October 1383, and different factions made strenuous efforts to secure the throne for Princess Beatrice, Ferdinand&#x27;s only daughter and Queen consort of Castile and León, or for either of her uncles Infante John, Duke of Valencia de Campos and Infante Denis, Lord of Cifuentes. The Council elected instead the younger (and illegitimate) son of Peter I, thus avoiding a jure uxoris Castilian king.

====Kingdom of Jerusalem====
In the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem, the kingship was partially elected and partially hereditary. During the height of the kingdom in the mid-12th century there was a royal family and a relatively clear line of succession. Nevertheless, the king was elected, or at least recognized, by the Haute Cour. Here the king was considered a (first among equals), and in his absence his duties were performed by his seneschal.

====Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth====
The tradition of electing the country&#x27;s ruler, which occurred when there was no clear heir to the throne, dates to the very beginning of Polish statehood. The election privilege, exercised during the gatherings known as &quot;wiec&quot;, was usually limited to the most powerful nobles (magnates) or officials, and was heavily influenced by local traditions and strength of the ruler.

In Poland, after the death of the last Piast in 1370, Polish kings were initially elected by a small council; gradually, this privilege was granted to all members of the &quot;szlachta&quot; (Polish nobility). Kings of Poland and Grand Dukes of Lithuania during the times of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (1569–1795) were elected by gatherings of crowds of nobles at a field in Wola, today a district in Warsaw. Since in Poland, all sons of a noble were nobles, and not only the eldest, every one of an estimated 500,000 nobles could potentially have participated in such elections in person – by far the most extensive franchise of any European country at the time. During the election period, the function of the king was performed by an interrex (usually in the person of the primate of Poland). This unique Polish election was termed the free election (&quot;wolna elekcja&quot;). Although the elective principle was already established in Polish political culture in the late Middle Ages, the rules changed significantly in the 1570s, and the principles developed in that period lasted until the Partitions of Poland. There have been thirteen royal elections in Poland–Lithuania from 1573 to 1764. Roșu (2017) marked the 1575/1576 Polish–Lithuanian royal election as the most significant for several reasons. First, &#x27;the citizens of the commonwealth were forced to &quot;de facto&quot; depose their first elected king – thus applying the right of disobedience they had inscribed in their public records only two years before.&#x27; Second, it resulted in two candidates being proclaimed the winner, and in subsequent events the nobility was able to confirm their majority choice for Stephen Báthory and have it recognised, while avoiding war with Maximilian II of Habsburg.

====Scandinavia====
Scandinavian kingship, according to the Germanic tradition, was elected upon the death of the previous king. The selection was not always limited to the heirs of the previous king (e.g. in Sweden when the royal house was changing between the houses of Eric and Sverker between generations). Originally, kings were supposed to be elected from among the descendants of a previous king, which was connected to descent from gods. There could also be joint rule between multiple kings. Disputed succession was common because of a large number of sons sired by kings. However, when single rule appeared in the 9th century, civil wars grew in frequency throughout the region. Later, Christianisation led to the promulgation of primogeniture in Norway in 1163 and Denmark in 1170, but the elective idea still persisted in the requirement to be certified by a local assembly and subsequently the magnates would still elect the new king, albeit while the incumbent king was still alive. This demonstrated the enduring power of the nobles.

Originally, the Kings of Sweden were elected by all free men at the Mora Thing. Elective monarchy continued until 1544, when the Riksdag of the Estates designated the heirs of King Gustav Vasa as the heirs to the throne. The Danish monarchy was also officially elective, although the eldest son of the reigning monarch was usually elected. This continued until 1660, when a hereditary and absolute monarchy was instituted by Frederick III. Though the monarchy of Norway was originally hereditary, it too became elective in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Candidates had to be of royal blood, but the kingship was elected by a council of noblemen, rather than automatically passing to the eldest son. In 1905 Prince Carl was elected King of the newly independent Norway by the Storting after a referendum resolved in favor of monarchy.

The Scandinavian kingdoms were united under the Danish crown by Margaret I of Denmark in 1389, but many of her successors had the united kingdoms split up as Sweden elected a different king than Denmark and Norway upon succession. The election was usually contested through a Danish invasion of Sweden until Christian II of Denmark after his reconquest of Sweden had many of those voting against him executed in the Stockholm Bloodbath (1520), which ended much of the support for the Danish king on the Swedish throne.

In 1810, the Swedish Riksdag elected the French Marshall and Prince of Pontecorvo Jean Bernadotte to be the new Crown Prince, since it was apparent that the Swedish branch of the House of Holstein-Gottorp would die with the childless King Charles XIII. Bernadotte eventually ascended the throne as Charles XIV John of Sweden and founded the still current House of Bernadotte. In this case the elective aspect in the choice of Monarch was especially prominent, since Bernadotte had been a French commoner with no previous connection to Sweden and not the most remote of dynastic claims to the Swedish throne – his being chosen derived solely from urgent political and military considerations of the crisis time of the Napoleonic Wars.

====Sovereign Military Order of Malta====
The Sovereign Military Order of Malta, formerly known as the Knights Hospitaller or the Knights of Malta, remains a sovereign subject of international law since it was exiled to Rome from Malta during the French occupation of Malta under the First French Republic. The Order is ruled by the Prince and Grand Master, who is elected for life by the Council Complete of State. The Prince and Grand Master holds the rank of Prince, bestowed by the Holy Roman Emperor in 1607 and holds the precedence of a cardinal of the Church since 1630. The Council that elects the prince includes members of the Sovereign Council and other high-ranking office-holders and representatives of the Order&#x27;s worldwide entities. The Sovereign Council, including the Grand Commander, the Grand Chancellor, the Grand Hospitaller, and the Receiver of the Common Treasure, aid the prince in governing the order.

====Venice====
The Republic of Venice was ruled from 697 to 1797 by a doge, who normally ruled for life, though a few were forced from office. His powers were never those of an absolute monarch, but he was the Republic&#x27;s highest official and powerful within restrictions and levels of oversight that varied in different periods. The election process began with the Great Council of more than 2000 Venetian aristocrats and employed an elaborate system designed to prevent one family or alliance from dominating the process. It used smaller nominating groups that were reduced in number by the drawing of lots and required a supermajority for election.

===Africa===
==== Regency of Algiers ====

The Regency of Algiers (from the seventeenth century to the nineteenth century) was an elective monarchy, whose dey was elected, depending on the period, by the Divan of Algiers or by the Taïfa of the raïs (Assembly of the corsairs). The elected deys also bore the title of governor-sultan of Algiers or sultan of Algiers.

====Mali Empire====
In Africa, the Mali Empire functioned as both a constitutional and elective monarchy. The mansa, or emperor, had to be approved by the Great Assembly known as the Gbara, despite hereditary claims.

====Kongo====
The Kingdom of Kongo was a purer example of an elective monarchy, where blood claims had even less influence. Nobles elected a king&#x27;s successor, and it was common for the successor to be of a different family than his predecessor.

This form of elective monarchy existed in the kingdom from its inception around 1400 until its complete disintegration in the early 20th century.

====West Africa====
In the pre-colonial period, a number of West African rulers, such as the kings and chieftains of the Ashanti Empire and those of Ife and the Oyo Empire, were elected from amongst the various royal families of their polities by colleges of noblemen known as kingmakers. This practice has continued to the present day.

===Asia===
====Afghanistan====

In Afghanistan, jirgas have been reportedly organized since at least the early 18th century when the Hotaki and Durrani dynasties rose to power.
The ancient Aryan tribes, who are hypothesized to have spoken Proto-Indo-Iranian, came down in intermittent waves from Central Asia and Afghanistan which is a common myth. They practiced a sort of jirga system with two types of councils – &#x27; and &#x27;. The &#x27; (summit) comprised elders and tribal chiefs. The king also joined sessions of the &#x27;. was a sort of rural council. In India they are referred to as &quot;Samiti&quot; and &quot;Sabha&quot;.

====Persia/Iran====
The Parthian Empire (248 BC–224 AD), also known as the Arsacid Empire, is considered to be the oldest elective monarchy in Asia. The King of Kings has been required to undergo an assembly of the nobles called Mahestān, as a vote of approval before being allowed to ascend to the imperial throne or to be removed from the power.

Other monarchs, such as the former Shahs of Iran, have been required to undergo a parliamentary vote of approval before being allowed to ascend to the throne.

====Mongol Empire====
In the Mongol Empire, the Great Khan was chosen by the Kurultai. This was often convened in the capital. Other critical leadership positions were also assigned.

====Korea====
The ancient Korean kingdom of Silla elected its first king by a conference of tribal and village elders in 57 BC. Unified Silla&#x27;s kings were elected by the aristocracy whose powers were on par with the king. In the kingdom of Goguryeo, the ruler was originally chosen from among the heads of the five tribes, most often the Sono tribe.

====Siam/Thailand====
There were several occasions that the Kingdom of Siam and Thailand turned to a semi-elective monarchy system to settle the succession of the crown among disputed heirs:

* In 1824, Phutthaloetla Naphalai died suddenly without having named a successor to viceroy Maha Senanurak, who had died 16 July 1817. According to the traditions of royal succession, the viceroy or uparaja was heir presumptive. If there were none, then an &quot;ad hoc&quot; &quot;senabodi&quot; consisting of senior officials present at the death of a king, would elect a successor. As a result of enormous support from senior and influential noble, Chetsadabodin was elected as the successor.

* In 1867, as Mongkut had not designated who would succeed him, the choice fell to a council to decide. The council led by Prince Deves, Mongkut&#x27;s eldest half-brother, then chose Chulalongkorn as Mongkut&#x27;s successor. However, Chulalongkorn was only 15 and so the council choose Si Suriyawongse to become the regent until Chulalongkorn came of age.

* On 2 March 1935, Prince Ananda Mahidol was elected by the National Assembly and the Thai government to succeed his uncle, King Prajadhipok, as the eighth king of the Chakri dynasty, because Prajadhipok, the previous king, had not named an heir before his abdication.

===Oceania===
Several Māori tribes of the central North Island of New Zealand elected Pōtatau Te Wherowhero as their monarch in 1858. The Māori King movement or Kiingitanga has continued to the present. The current Māori monarch (i.e. monarch of the Kiingitanga movement, not of all Māori) is Kuīni (Queen) Ngā Wai Hono i te Pō. While in principle the position is not hereditary, in practice every Māori monarch thus far has been a child of the previous monarch.

The Hawaiian Kingdom could be considered a &quot;de facto&quot; example. From 1864 until the monarchy was overthrown in 1893, it was constitutionally a hereditary monarchy utilizing male-preference primogeniture. However, the Constitutions of 1864 and 1887, and the draft constitution of 1893, all provided that, in the event of the extinction of the royal line, the Legislature would elect a &quot;native aliʻi&quot; as the new monarch and stirps of a new dynasty. In practice, however, during the entire time from 1864 until the abolition of the monarchy, the throne was never passed from parent to child, as every Hawaiian monarch who reigned during that period died without leaving issue. Following the 1872 death of King Kamehameha V, a non-binding referendum was held, in which William Charles Lunalilo won; he was subsequently elected king by the legislature in 1873. King Kalākaua was elected by the legislature in 1874, after Lunalilo&#x27;s death. However, when Kalākaua died in 1891, the crown demised to the collateral line of his sister, Queen Liliʻuokalani. Prior to 1864, the Hawaiian King-in-Council appointed the heir to the Hawaiian throne.

===The Americas===

====Mexico====
The Tlatoanimeh of the Aztec Empire were chosen by a council of elders, nobles, and priests. He would be selected from a pool of four candidates.

====Costa Rica====
The &quot;mánkeme&quot; (king) of the Kingdom of Nicoya was elected by a council of elders known as the &quot;monéxico&quot;.

====Chile and Argentina====

French explorer Orélie-Antoine de Tounens claimed to be elected by the Mapuche to be the Great Toqui, Supreme Chieftain of the Mapuches, possibly in the belief that their cause might be better served with a European acting on their behalf. He later proclaimed himself as the King of Araucanía and Patagonia.

====United States====
An attempt to create an elective monarchy in the United States failed. Alexander Hamilton argued in a long speech before the Constitutional Convention of 1787 that the President of the United States should be an elective monarch, ruling for &quot;good behavior&quot; (i.e., for life, unless impeached) and with extensive powers. Hamilton believed that elective monarchs had sufficient power domestically to resist foreign corruption, yet there was enough domestic control over their behavior to prevent tyranny at home. His proposal was resoundingly voted down in favor of a four-year term with the possibility of reelection.

====Haiti====
The crown of the Empire of Haiti, established in 1804, was also elective according to its 1805 constitution.

== Extraordinary election ==
A hereditary monarchy may occasionally use election to fill a vacant throne. For example, the royal family may become extinct; depending on how precisely the succession to the throne is defined in law, several candidates with equally, or almost equally, strong claims could emerge, with an election being held to choose from among them. This differs from a formally elective monarchy in that it is an extraordinary measure, and with the new monarch the succession again becomes hereditary.

Alternatively, the monarch may be deposed, as in a revolution. While sometimes a monarch may be forced to abdicate in favour of his or her heir, on other occasions the royal family as a whole has been rejected, the throne going to an elected candidate. Examples of extraordinary election are:
* Michael of Russia, chosen by a Zemsky Sobor (national assembly) in 1613 after the extinction of the Rurikid dynasty and the end of the Time of Troubles. The resulting Romanov dynasty was an old boyar house with close ties to the former royal family, and Michael&#x27;s father, Feodor Romanov, was at the time a Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia under the monastic name of Filaret, in effect holding a position of interrex. Later, Patriarch Filaret, a skilled politician in his own right, became effectively a co-ruler and sometimes a regent for his weak and not very healthy son.
* In 1971 seven individual Emirates in the Arabian Peninsula united to form the United Arab Emirates and became a federation. Upon its formation, Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan of Abu Dhabi was elected as the head of the state and Ra&#x27;is (President) of the union by the ruling monarchs of the other six Emirates, while Zayed himself voted for Rashid bin Saeed Al Maktoum, then ruler of Dubai.
*Gopala, the first emperor of the Pala Empire, was chosen by independent regional warchiefs in the 8th century. This arrangement was common in many contemporary tribal societies in the region.

== Invitation ==
In the past; new polities or countries in internal turmoil sometimes selected and invited some person to become their monarch. The selected person might have had little or nothing to do with his prospective kingdom; he might have had associations with a current great power or with a current regional power, or might appear as a true outsider, (hopefully) unbiased in matters of internal politics. (The concept of &quot;invitation&quot; may discreetly gloss over intense lobbying or diplomatic maneuvering in some cases.) By selecting a foreign prince or aristocrat, nations could expect to gain diplomatic links and a figurehead accustomed to the trappings of courts and ceremonial duties. Newly established states in the 19th and early 20th centuries established trends in the selection and appointment of newly minted monarchs.

At the start of the 20th century, the first monarchs of several newly independent nations were elected by parliaments: Norway is the prime example. Previously, following precedent set in newly independent Greece, new nations without a well-established hereditary royal family often chose their own monarchs from among the established royal families of Europe, rather than elevate a member of the local power establishment, in the hope that a stable hereditary monarchy would eventually emerge from the process. The first king of Belgium, as well as the now-deposed royal families of Greece, Bulgaria, Albania (unsuccessfully) and Romania, were originally appointed in this manner. On 9 October 1918 the Parliament of newly independent Finland elected Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse, brother-in-law of the German Emperor Wilhelm II, as King of Finland – but soon afterwards, this move was foiled by the German defeat in WWI and the demise of Monarchy in Germany itself, and Finland opted to become a Republic instead.

Examples include:

* 862: According to tradition, various tribes of northern Rus&#x27; invited Rurik, a chief of their former Varangian foes, to re-establish order: his descendants ruled in Kiev, Muscovy and Russia until 1917. The legend of an invitation echoes the habit of later invitations to Rurikids and others to rule in Pskov and in Novgorod.
* 1573: The Polish &quot;szlachta&quot; broke with tradition by looking beyond Central Europe for a candidate and electing the French Prince Henry, Duke of Anjou as King of Poland.
* 1810: Sweden elected the French Napoleonic Marshal Jean Bernadotte as Crown Prince: he became King Charles XIV John of Sweden in 1818.
* 1831: Belgium selected a German Prince of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha as King Leopold I, the first King of the Belgians.
* 1832: European Great Power diplomats selected the German Prince Otto of Bavaria to become King Otto of Greece.
* 1863: The Greek National Assembly elected the Danish Prince William of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg as King George I of the Hellenes.
* 1863: The Conservative Party of Mexico offered the crown of the Second Mexican Empire to Maximilian, younger brother of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria.

* 1866: Romania elected the German Prince Karl of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen as its Ruling Prince (he later became King Carol I of Romania).
* 1870: In the wake of political turmoil in Spain, the Spanish Cortes re-established the Spanish monarchy under a new royal house, electing the Italian Prince Amedeo of Savoy as King Amadeo I of Spain.
* 1879: The Bulgarian Grand National Assembly elected the Russian-sponsored German Prince Alexander of Battenberg as its reigning &quot;knyaz&quot; (prince).
* 1887: The Bulgarian Grand National Assembly elected the Austro-Hungarian Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha-Koháry as Prince (later Tsar) of Bulgaria.
* 1905: Norway, newly independent of Sweden, elected Prince Carl of Denmark as its first modern independent monarch: Haakon VII of Norway
* 1914: The European powers selected the German Prince William of Wied as the ruler of the Principality of Albania.
* 1918: The German-occupied Kingdom of Lithuania voted to offer the throne to the German Prince Wilhelm of Urach, Count of Württemberg, 2nd Duke of Urach, who would have become King Mindaugas II.
* 1918: Frederick Charles Louis Constantine, Prince and Landgrave of Hesse, was elected to be King of Finland by the Finnish Parliament, but never reigned and abdicated on December 14 the same year.
* 1918: During the end of the First World War, there was an attempt by the German Empire to recognize Adolf Friedrich of Mecklenburg as the Duke of the United Baltic Duchy. However, the Regency Council only lasted less than a month in November, and was recognized by no other nation than Germany.

==Current elective monarchies==
Currently, the world&#x27;s only true elective monarchies are:

===Cambodia=== 
Article 13 of the Cambodian Constitution stipulates that the monarch is chosen for a life term by the 9-member Royal Council of the Throne, the composition of which includes the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the National Assembly, the Prime Minister, the two Patriarchs of the country’s two main Buddhist Sangha Nikayas, the 1st and 2nd Deputy Presidents of the Senate and the 1st and 2nd Deputy Speakers of the National Assembly. Article 14 of the Constitution further states that the royal candidate for the throne must be at least 30 years old and a descendant of the late King Ang Duong, King Norodom or King Sisowath.

===Holy See=== 
In the Holy See and the associated Vatican City State, the Pope is elected in a conclave by the College of Cardinals, generally from among their number.

===Malaysia===
The &quot;Yang di-Pertuan Agong&quot; (Supreme Head of State) of Malaysia is elected to a five-year term. Nine hereditary rulers from the Malay States form a Conference of Rulers who will determine the next &quot;Agong&quot; via a secret ballot. The position has to date been &quot;de facto&quot; rotated amongst the State rulers, originally based on seniority. The &quot;Yang di-Pertuan Agong&quot; shall not be re-elected unless the rotation succession was complete.

*Additionally, the Malaysian state of Negeri Sembilan is &quot;itself&quot; an elective monarchy, where the &quot;Yang di-Pertuan Besar&quot; of Negeri Sembilan is selected by a council of ruling chiefs. The ruling chiefs themselves are elected by the chieftain. Male candidates are determined based on matrilineal clan due to the influence of Minangkabau culture. The system was partially the basis for the federal monarchy.
*The Sultan of Perak is selected from amongst the most senior male princes descending from the 18th Sultan of Perak, Sultan Ahmadin. The Sultan, &quot;Raja Muda&quot; (Crown Prince), and &quot;Raja Di-Hilir&quot; (Deputy Crown Prince) are selected by the Dewan Negara of Perak. A son of the reigning Sultan cannot become &quot;Raja Muda&quot; if there is a more senior prince descended from the previous Sultan; this is possible should the senior prince relinquish his right to become &quot;Raja Muda&quot;.

===United Arab Emirates=== 
The president is elected by the Federal Supreme Council with a term of five years. Since its formation, the position has been a &quot;de facto&quot; hereditary position to the Al Nahyan sheikhs of Abu Dhabi by consensus of the Federal Supreme Council. Likewise, the Vice President and Prime Minister of the UAE is a position held by the Al Maktoum sheikhs of Dubai. Elections are held every 5 years. The position of the ruler of each emirate of the United Arab Emirates is determined by consensus of the respective ruling royal family of that emirate.

===Similar forms===
* Andorra can be considered a semi-elective principality. Andorra&#x27;s two heads of state are Spain&#x27;s Bishop of La Seu d&#x27;Urgell and the Count of Foix. The title of Count was merged with the French crown in 1609, meaning that all French kings from then on became Co-Prince. France relinquished control upon the formation of the First Republic, briefly leaving Andorra under a clerical monarchy, but Napoleon reclaimed the seat. Since Napoleon III&#x27;s deposition and the formation of the French Third Republic, the French co-prince of Andorra has been the (now democratically elected) President of France, as they are considered the unofficial successor of the Counts of Foix. The Andorran authorities and people have no say in the election of the President of France, leaving Andorra in the unique position of having a monarch who is democratically elected by the citizenry of another state.
* Eswatini has a form of quasi-elective monarchy. No king can appoint his successor. Instead, the royal family decides which of his wives shall be &quot;Great Wife&quot; and &quot;Indlovukazi&quot; (She-Elephant / Queen Mother). The son of this &quot;Great Wife&quot; will automatically become the next king. The eldest son is never appointed successor, as he has other ceremonial roles.
* Nigeria has a system in which Nigerian traditional rulers (or &quot;royal fathers&quot;, e.g. the Obas, Ezes and Emirs) are usually elected by councils of kingmakers from almost endless pools of contending cousins who are eligible for the elections because they all claim descent from founding monarchs or other royals. Each title is therefore held for life by one of these dynastic cousins in turn, often through rotation.
* The cacique of the Ngöbe people of Costa Rica and Panama is appointed for life by a council of 13 elders. The latest election was in 2013 after the death of the previous cacique at around 100 years old. The current cacique is Costa Rican-born Pedro Palacios, son of the previous cacique Pedro Bejarano.
*While Samoa has been a parliamentary republic since independence in 1962, it was commonly mistaken for an elective monarchy for most of its existence. The Constitution of Samoa provides that the Head of State be elected for a five-year term by the &quot;Fono&quot;, the Samoan parliament. Articles 18 and 45 of the Constitution provide, respectively, that any Member of Parliament may be elected head of state, and that any Samoan citizen may be elected to Parliament, although 47 out of the 49 seats in the &quot;Fono&quot; are reserved for &quot;matai&quot;, or chiefs (the other two are reserved for non-Samoans). However, most of the confusion stemmed from a special clause which named Malietoa Tanumafili II and Tupua Tamasese Meaole, who were two of the four paramount chiefs (&quot;Tama-a-Aiga&quot;), as joint presidents for life, only reverting to the normal rule of electing the head of state for five years upon Malietoa&#x27;s death in 2007. In addition, the Samoan head of state is referred to as &quot;His Highness&quot;, and an unwritten constitutional convention dictates that the President be elected from among the four paramount chiefs.
* Saudi Arabia&#x27;s throne, while hereditary, is not determined by a succession law but rather by consensus of the House of Saud as to who will be Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia; consensus may change depending on the Crown Prince&#x27;s actions or influence, creating strong incentive for the Crown Prince to assert his power. Since 2007, the process of establishing the consensus of the House has been institutionalized in the form of the Allegiance Council, comprising the most powerful senior princes, which has the power to disapprove the King&#x27;s nominee for Crown Prince and substitute its own by simple majority vote. In effect, this makes the Saudi monarchy elective within the House of Saud, as the king&#x27;s eldest son has not become Crown Prince since the death of King Abdulaziz in 1953. However, it was only in 2015, through the accession of Muhammad bin Nayef, that a member of the house who was not a son of Abdulaziz attained the position (all prior Crown Princes had been chosen from among Abdulaziz&#x27;s sons). Upon Prince Muhammad&#x27;s removal, Prince Muhammad bin Salman became the first Crown Prince since Saud to hold the position during the reign of his father. 
* The Māori King Movement in New Zealand chooses a Maori monarch, elected by the Kaumātua of various New Zealand iwi (tribes). However, every Maori monarch to date has been succeeded by their child, making the position hereditary in effect.
* Wallis and Futuna (territories of the French Republic) have traditional heads of the three regions who are elected.

==See also==
* Elective dictatorship
* President for life
* Tanistry

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q584683" start="3" end="20" title="Elective monarchy" label="elective monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="26" end="34" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="61" end="68" title="election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="87" end="106" title="hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="327" end="337" title="Monarchy" label="monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11572907" start="804" end="825" title="hereditary succession" label="hereditary succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006518" start="1053" end="1065" title="royal family" label="royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="1085" end="1094" title="monarch" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="1160" end="1170" title="abdication" label="abdication"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="1263" end="1270" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11266977" start="1278" end="1284" title="Epirus (ancient state)" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q730392" start="1351" end="1359" title="Ecclesia (ancient Athens)" label="Ecclesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1373" end="1378" title="Athenian democracy#Etymology" label="Demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="1411" end="1419" title="classical Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q201038" start="1575" end="1588" title="Roman Kingdom" label="Roman Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q623086" start="1619" end="1635" title="Roman assemblies" label="Roman assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1957" end="1962" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1967" end="1976" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="2041" end="2051" title="Principate" label="Principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2303" end="2311" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="2586" end="2592" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="2640" end="2661" title="Roman Republic" label="republican government"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="2987" end="3015" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="descended from Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="3088" end="3096" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="3189" end="3205" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q238399" start="3380" end="3388" title="Dominate" label="Dominate"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="3930" end="3949" title="Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q497578" start="3955" end="3966" title="Witenagemot" label="Witenagemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="3970" end="3985" title="John of England" label="John of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="4087" end="4096" title="Richard I" label="Richard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q363800" start="4148" end="4166" title="Arthur of Brittany" label="Arthur of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="4347" end="4357" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q161866" start="4512" end="4531" title="Henry IV of England" label="Henry IV of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="4576" end="4586" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286673" start="4619" end="4632" title="Edmund Mortimer, 5th Earl of March" label="Earl of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="4831" end="4848" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383566" start="4916" end="4932" title="Exclusion Crisis" label="Exclusion Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="4997" end="5016" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632635" start="5041" end="5058" title="Succession to the Crown Act 1707" label="Act of Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="5127" end="5138" title="Hanoverians" label="Hanoverians"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="5182" end="5193" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="5198" end="5205" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary II"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="5243" end="5251" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="5383" end="5387" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="5408" end="5412" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832870" start="5544" end="5563" title="succession to the British throne" label="order of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632629" start="5569" end="5601" title="Succession to the Crown Act 2013" label="Succession to the Crown Act 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q598496" start="5773" end="5796" title="Declaration of Arbroath" label="Declaration of Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669878" start="5902" end="5910" title="Tanistry" label="Tanistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669878" start="6265" end="6273" title="tanistry" label="tanistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="6306" end="6320" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="6380" end="6391" title="Stadtholder" label="Stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="6702" end="6717" title="House of Orange" label="House of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q166623" start="6831" end="6845" title="Johan van Oldenbarnevelt" label="Oldenbarnevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q318362" start="6850" end="6857" title="Johan de Witt" label="De Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="7310" end="7323" title="Gauls" label="Gallic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="7751" end="7766" title="Medieval France" label="Medieval France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937731" start="7817" end="7822" title="House of Capet" label="Capet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="8035" end="8044" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="8137" end="8161" title="Louis-Philippe of France" label="Louis-Philippe of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555606" start="8165" end="8183" title="King of the French" label="King of the French"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="8195" end="8210" title="July Revolution" label="July Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="8309" end="8321" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="8438" end="8455" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="8622" end="8629" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="8736" end="8753" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="8790" end="8804" title="prince-elector" label="prince-elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184737" start="8941" end="8958" title="cathedral chapter" label="cathedral chapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="9045" end="9063" title="imperial immediacy" label="imperial immediacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22881" start="9135" end="9151" title="prince-bishopric" label="prince-bishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063178" start="9251" end="9263" title="prince-abbot" label="prince-abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146319" start="9283" end="9290" title="college (canon law)" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q44330" start="9416" end="9431" title="King of Bohemia" label="King of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12292478" start="9451" end="9457" title="Estate (land)" label="Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="9462" end="9489" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Lands of the Bohemian Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q150611" start="9508" end="9519" title="Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="9574" end="9582" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="9607" end="9625" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q150599" start="9820" end="9832" title="Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57195" start="9877" end="9906" title="Frederick V, Elector Palatine" label="Frederick V, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373" start="10041" end="10069" title="Battle of the White Mountain" label="Battle of the White Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="10290" end="10306" title="Thirty Years War" label="Thirty Years War"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="10325" end="10332" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q655621" start="10437" end="10465" title="Principality of Transylvania (1571–1711)" label="Principality of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906266" start="10519" end="10547" title="Lands of the Hungarian Crown" label="Lands of the Hungarian Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q157092" start="10599" end="10607" title="Louis II of Hungary" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="10623" end="10639" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Battle of Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="10657" end="10676" title="Visigothic kingdom" label="Visigothic Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540751" start="11693" end="11712" title="Glorious Revolution (Spain)" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q183085" start="11717" end="11728" title="Isabella II of Spain" label="Isabella II"/>
<link wikidata="Q32432" start="11993" end="12001" title="Amadeo I of Spain" label="Amadeo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q497777" start="12202" end="12210" title="First Spanish Republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105495" start="12744" end="12760" title="1383–1385 Crisis" label="1383–1385 Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244869" start="12766" end="12788" title="Portuguese Cortes" label="Council of the Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q201575" start="12797" end="12803" title="John I of Portugal" label="John I"/>
<link wikidata="Q639358" start="12824" end="12837" title="Order of Aviz" label="Order of Aviz"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="12842" end="12858" title="King of Portugal" label="King of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q108442" start="12877" end="12888" title="Ferdinand I of Portugal" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q233745" start="13006" end="13023" title="Beatrice of Portugal" label="Princess Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q977753" start="13060" end="13084" title="Queen consort of Castile" label="Queen consort of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576661" start="13089" end="13093" title="Queen consort of Leon" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621235" start="13123" end="13163" title="Infante John, Duke of Valencia de Campos" label="Infante John, Duke of Valencia de Campos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756102" start="13168" end="13200" title="Infante Denis, Lord of Cifuentes" label="Infante Denis, Lord of Cifuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q295824" start="13268" end="13275" title="Peter I of Portugal" label="Peter I"/>
<link wikidata="Q728870" start="13293" end="13304" title="jure uxoris" label="jure uxoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="13367" end="13387" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q381637" start="13642" end="13652" title="Haute Cour of Jerusalem" label="Haute Cour"/>
<link wikidata="Q167334" start="13759" end="13768" title="officers of the Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="seneschal"/>
<link wikidata="Q847696" start="14041" end="14045" title="wiec" label="wiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q501844" start="14102" end="14110" title="Magnates of Poland and Lithuania" label="magnates"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="14204" end="14210" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="14240" end="14245" title="Piast" label="Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="14377" end="14385" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="14480" end="14510" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020136" start="14584" end="14588" title="Wola" label="Wola"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="14610" end="14616" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569007" start="14946" end="14954" title="Interrex (Poland)" label="interrex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839419" start="14985" end="15002" title="primate of Poland" label="primate of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156016" start="15048" end="15061" title="Free election (Polish throne)" label="free election"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="15307" end="15327" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252351" start="15432" end="15474" title="1576 Polish–Lithuanian royal election" label="1575/1576 Polish–Lithuanian royal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="15615" end="15633" title="Henry III of France" label="first elected king"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="15899" end="15914" title="Stephen Báthory" label="Stephen Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q150862" start="15963" end="15988" title="Maximilian II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian II of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q936648" start="16457" end="16467" title="Diarchy" label="joint rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="17057" end="17072" title="Monarchy of Sweden" label="Kings of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q304555" start="17109" end="17113" title="Stones of Mora" label="Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="17114" end="17119" title="Thing (assembly)" label="Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255390" start="17170" end="17192" title="Riksdag of the Estates" label="Riksdag of the Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q210601" start="17208" end="17213" title="House of Vasa" label="heirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q52947" start="17222" end="17233" title="Gustav I of Sweden" label="Gustav Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="17266" end="17281" title="Monarchy of Denmark" label="Danish monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="17430" end="17447" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157812" start="17466" end="17479" title="Frederick III of Denmark" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="17492" end="17510" title="monarchy of Norway" label="monarchy of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="17755" end="17766" title="Haakon VII of Norway" label="Prince Carl"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="17823" end="17831" title="Storting" label="Storting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514328" start="17838" end="17850" title="1905 Norwegian monarchy referendum" label="a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q202266" start="17947" end="17968" title="Margaret I of Denmark" label="Margaret I of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q154460" start="18191" end="18214" title="Christian II of Denmark" label="Christian II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q846876" start="18299" end="18318" title="Stockholm Bloodbath" label="Stockholm Bloodbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255390" start="18424" end="18431" title="Riksdag of the Estates" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18464" end="18484" title="Principality of Pontecorvo#Princes of Pontecorvo" label="Prince of Pontecorvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="18485" end="18500" title="Jean Bernadotte" label="Jean Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q207293" start="18515" end="18527" title="Crown Prince" label="Crown Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q52928" start="18642" end="18654" title="Charles XIII of Sweden" label="Charles XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="18701" end="18727" title="Charles XIV John of Sweden" label="Charles XIV John of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q201625" start="18758" end="18777" title="House of Bernadotte" label="House of Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="19120" end="19135" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="19184" end="19217" title="Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Sovereign Military Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="19241" end="19260" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="19296" end="19313" title="Sovereignty" label="sovereign subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="19317" end="19334" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984282" start="19385" end="19411" title="French occupation of Malta" label="French occupation of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="19422" end="19443" title="First French Republic" label="First French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q952136" start="19471" end="19494" title="List of Princes and Grand Masters of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Prince and Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="20090" end="20108" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q858316" start="20141" end="20145" title="Doge of Venice" label="doge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096992" start="20297" end="20313" title="Chief magistrate" label="highest official"/>
<link wikidata="Q583190" start="20441" end="20454" title="Great Council of Venice" label="Great Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="20699" end="20712" title="supermajority" label="supermajority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045696" start="20775" end="20793" title="Regency of Algiers" label="Regency of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20883" end="20886" title="Regency of Algiers#Dey of Algiers" label="dey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20932" end="20948" title="Regency of Algiers#Diwân council" label="Divan of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184536" start="21130" end="21141" title="Mali Empire" label="Mali Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886285" start="21205" end="21210" title="Mansa (title)" label="mansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299285" start="21278" end="21283" title="Gbara" label="Gbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q796583" start="21331" end="21347" title="Kingdom of Kongo" label="Kingdom of Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="21771" end="21782" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="21832" end="21846" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Ashanti Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180084" start="21860" end="21863" title="Ife" label="Ife"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="21872" end="21882" title="Oyo Empire" label="Oyo Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006518" start="21922" end="21936" title="royal family" label="royal families"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409583" start="21988" end="21997" title="kingmaker" label="kingmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="22084" end="22095" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q627449" start="22182" end="22188" title="Hotak dynasty" label="Hotaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316729" start="22193" end="22200" title="Durrani dynasty" label="Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q179733" start="22238" end="22243" title="Aryan" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q966439" start="22288" end="22306" title="Proto-Indo-Iranian language" label="Proto-Indo-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="22345" end="22357" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="22714" end="22729" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q938153" start="22843" end="22856" title="King of Kings" label="King of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="22919" end="22927" title="Parliament" label="Mahestān"/>
<link wikidata="Q207991" start="23074" end="23087" title="Pahlavi dynasty" label="Shahs of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="23228" end="23241" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q187878" start="23247" end="23257" title="Great Khan" label="Great Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q136649" start="23276" end="23284" title="Kurultai" label="Kurultai"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456" start="23427" end="23432" title="Silla" label="Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q715257" start="23511" end="23524" title="Unified Silla" label="Unified Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155700" start="23799" end="23814" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom (1782–1932)" label="Kingdom of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="23819" end="23827" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q959495" start="24015" end="24022" title="Front Palace" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473768" start="24023" end="24037" title="Maha Senanurak" label="Maha Senanurak"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064875" start="24130" end="24137" title="uparaja" label="uparaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="24142" end="24158" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q192683" start="24194" end="24200" title="ad hoc" label="ad hoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q873368" start="24213" end="24221" title="senabodi" label="senabodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q319669" start="24383" end="24396" title="Nangklao" label="Chetsadabodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918289" start="24716" end="24731" title="Si Suriyawongse" label="Si Suriyawongse"/>
<link wikidata="Q313124" start="24916" end="24927" title="Prajadhipok" label="Prajadhipok"/>
<link wikidata="Q313124" start="24979" end="24990" title="Prajadhipok" label="Prajadhipok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="25079" end="25084" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="25085" end="25091" title="iwi" label="tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="25107" end="25119" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="25123" end="25134" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q887437" start="25143" end="25164" title="Pōtatau Te Wherowhero" label="Pōtatau Te Wherowhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235723" start="25195" end="25214" title="Māori King movement" label="Māori King movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q130085565" start="25364" end="25384" title="Ngā Wai Hono i te Pō" label="Ngā Wai Hono i te Pō"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="25525" end="25541" title="Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Hawaiian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="25673" end="25692" title="hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="25703" end="25732" title="male-preference primogeniture" label="male-preference primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555128" start="25764" end="25768" title="1864 Constitution of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556201" start="25773" end="25777" title="1887 Constitution of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726594" start="25927" end="25932" title="aliʻi" label="aliʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q887354" start="26242" end="26259" title="Kamehameha V" label="King Kamehameha V"/>
<link wikidata="Q499103" start="26305" end="26329" title="Lunalilo" label="William Charles Lunalilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q163080" start="26396" end="26409" title="Kalākaua" label="King Kalākaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q107288" start="26572" end="26591" title="Liliʻuokalani" label="Queen Liliʻuokalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104362" start="26720" end="26728" title="Tlatoani" label="Tlatoani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608489" start="26739" end="26751" title="Aztec Empire" label="Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16624774" start="26920" end="26937" title="Kingdom of Nicoya" label="Kingdom of Nicoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q886786" start="27054" end="27079" title="Orélie-Antoine de Tounens" label="Orélie-Antoine de Tounens"/>
<link wikidata="Q178484" start="27109" end="27116" title="Mapuches" label="Mapuche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451147" start="27133" end="27138" title="Toqui" label="Toqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q271570" start="27321" end="27344" title="Kingdom of Araucanía and Patagonia" label="Araucanía and Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="27418" end="27431" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="27440" end="27458" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="27494" end="27527" title="Philadelphia Convention" label="Constitutional Convention of 1787"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="27537" end="27567" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350808" start="27643" end="27651" title="President for life" label="for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q480498" start="27660" end="27669" title="impeachment" label="impeached"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006756" start="28027" end="28042" title="Empire of Haiti (1804–1806)" label="Empire of Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="28691" end="28701" title="revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q181915" start="28935" end="28952" title="Michael of Russia" label="Michael of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177904" start="28966" end="28978" title="Zemsky Sobor" label="Zemsky Sobor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210398" start="29035" end="29050" title="Rurikid dynasty" label="Rurikid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q94080" start="29070" end="29086" title="Time of Troubles" label="Time of Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q112707" start="29102" end="29117" title="Romanov dynasty" label="Romanov dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q203563" start="29129" end="29134" title="boyar" label="boyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q547759" start="29212" end="29226" title="Patriarch Philaret of Moscow" label="Feodor Romanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q849170" start="29246" end="29280" title="Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia" label="Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q634484" start="29349" end="29357" title="interrex" label="interrex"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="29559" end="29576" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="29596" end="29616" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q167846" start="29669" end="29695" title="Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan" label="Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="29699" end="29708" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q733312" start="29866" end="29893" title="Rashid bin Saeed Al Maktoum" label="Rashid bin Saeed Al Maktoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="29909" end="29914" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352284" start="29917" end="29923" title="Gopala" label="Gopala"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="29950" end="29961" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="31078" end="31084" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="31164" end="31170" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006518" start="31222" end="31234" title="royal family" label="royal family"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31293" end="31317" title=":Category:European royal families" label="royal families of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="31408" end="31427" title="hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="31488" end="31495" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="31550" end="31558" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="31560" end="31567" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="31589" end="31596" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="31694" end="31701" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q63679" start="31710" end="31743" title="Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse" label="Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="31782" end="31792" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q615902" start="31797" end="31812" title="Kingdom of Finland (1918)" label="King of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="31881" end="31884" title="WWI" label="WWI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147883" start="32057" end="32066" title="Ruthenia" label="Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990" start="32075" end="32080" title="Rurik" label="Rurik"/>
<link wikidata="Q210398" start="32276" end="32284" title="Rurikids" label="Rurikids"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="32355" end="32363" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="32471" end="32491" title="Henry III of France" label="Henry, Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="32612" end="32638" title="Charles XIV John of Sweden" label="Charles XIV John of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462133" start="32692" end="32709" title="Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Saxe-Coburg-Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12971" start="32718" end="32727" title="Leopold I of Belgium" label="Leopold I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="32835" end="32842" title="House of Wittelsbach" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q77067" start="32858" end="32872" title="Otto of Greece" label="Otto of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="32947" end="32987" title="House of Glücksburg" label="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142" start="32996" end="33004" title="George I of Greece" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984928" start="33034" end="33062" title="Conservative Party (Mexico)" label="Conservative Party of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q371334" start="33088" end="33109" title="Second Mexican Empire" label="Second Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="33113" end="33123" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166877" start="33144" end="33151" title="Emperor of Austria" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="33152" end="33177" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q157013" start="33230" end="33254" title="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="33298" end="33316" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="33488" end="33493" title="House of Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32432" start="33502" end="33519" title="Amadeo I of Spain" label="Amadeo I of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q159591" start="33611" end="33634" title="Alexander of Battenberg" label="Alexander of Battenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q151667" start="33761" end="33802" title="Ferdinand I of Bulgaria" label="Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha-Koháry"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="33956" end="33976" title="Haakon VII of Norway" label="Haakon VII of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q57594" start="34032" end="34047" title="William of Wied" label="William of Wied"/>
<link wikidata="Q187035" start="34068" end="34091" title="Principality of Albania" label="Principality of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q612359" start="34121" end="34141" title="Kingdom of Lithuania (1918)" label="Kingdom of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q58010" start="34182" end="34246" title="Wilhelm Karl, Duke of Urach" label="Prince Wilhelm of Urach, Count of Württemberg, 2nd Duke of Urach"/>
<link wikidata="Q63679" start="34297" end="34363" title="Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse" label="Frederick Charles Louis Constantine, Prince and Landgrave of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q615902" start="34383" end="34398" title="Kingdom of Finland (1918)" label="King of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q643412" start="34406" end="34424" title="Parliament of Finland" label="Finnish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="34518" end="34533" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="34563" end="34576" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q60697" start="34590" end="34620" title="Duke Adolf Friedrich of Mecklenburg" label="Adolf Friedrich of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q376778" start="34640" end="34659" title="United Baltic Duchy" label="United Baltic Duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="34916" end="34925" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42298246" start="34959" end="34966" title="Monarchy of Cambodia" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993870" start="35009" end="35036" title="Royal Council of the Throne" label="Royal Council of the Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q530150" start="35489" end="35498" title="Ang Duong" label="Ang Duong"/>
<link wikidata="Q559803" start="35505" end="35512" title="Norodom of Cambodia" label="Norodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q887995" start="35521" end="35529" title="Sisowath of Cambodia" label="Sisowath"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="35555" end="35563" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="35583" end="35601" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City State"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="35607" end="35611" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q186431" start="35628" end="35636" title="Papal conclave" label="conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q852242" start="35644" end="35664" title="College of Cardinals" label="College of Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="35727" end="35748" title="Yang di-Pertuan Agong" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="35782" end="35790" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658454" start="35855" end="35867" title="Monarchies of Malaysia" label="Malay States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159925" start="35875" end="35895" title="Conference of Rulers" label="Conference of Rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="35999" end="36007" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="36089" end="36110" title="Yang di-Pertuan Agong" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q50464" start="36216" end="36221" title="States of Malaysia" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q213893" start="36225" end="36240" title="Negeri Sembilan" label="Negeri Sembilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572849" start="36301" end="36322" title="Yamtuan Besar" label="Yang di-Pertuan Besar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338629" start="36376" end="36389" title="Undang" label="ruling chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="36490" end="36501" title="matrilineal" label="matrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130350" start="36531" end="36542" title="Minangkabau people" label="Minangkabau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649311" start="36618" end="36633" title="Sultan of Perak" label="Sultan of Perak"/>
<link wikidata="Q955006" start="37154" end="37163" title="President of the United Arab Emirates" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440456" start="37182" end="37205" title="Federal Supreme Council" label="Federal Supreme Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="37347" end="37356" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="37509" end="37514" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="37599" end="37619" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="37725" end="37732" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="37767" end="37779" title="principality" label="principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="37819" end="37824" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q877736" start="37832" end="37862" title="Bishop of La Seu d&amp;#x27;Urgell" label="Bishop of La Seu d&amp;#x27;Urgell"/>
<link wikidata="Q24851389" start="37871" end="37884" title="Count of Foix" label="Count of Foix"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="38062" end="38076" title="French First Republic" label="First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="38133" end="38141" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="38168" end="38180" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="38224" end="38245" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="38321" end="38340" title="President of France" label="President of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="38631" end="38639" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063414" start="38782" end="38792" title="Great Wife" label="Great Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432460" start="38809" end="38820" title="Indlovukazi" label="Indlovukazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="39019" end="39026" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10290758" start="39049" end="39076" title="Nigerian traditional rulers" label="Nigerian traditional rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880442" start="39117" end="39120" title="Oba (ruler)" label="Oba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423109" start="39123" end="39126" title="Eze" label="Eze"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="39132" end="39136" title="Emir" label="Emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409583" start="39174" end="39183" title="kingmaker" label="kingmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q599898" start="39449" end="39456" title="cacique" label="cacique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283203" start="39464" end="39476" title="Ngöbe people" label="Ngöbe people"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="39480" end="39490" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="39495" end="39501" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="39755" end="39760" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="39772" end="39794" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164230" start="39904" end="39925" title="Constitution of Samoa" label="Constitution of Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269555" start="40003" end="40007" title="Fono" label="Fono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247662" start="40297" end="40302" title="Fa&amp;#x27;amatai" label="matai"/>
<link wikidata="Q317378" start="40439" end="40461" title="Malietoa Tanumafili II" label="Malietoa Tanumafili II"/>
<link wikidata="Q887243" start="40466" end="40487" title="Tupua Tamasese Meaole" label="Tupua Tamasese Meaole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350808" start="40567" end="40586" title="President for life" label="presidents for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623587" start="40765" end="40777" title="His Highness" label="His Highness"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="40907" end="40919" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31711" start="41022" end="41035" title="House of Saud" label="House of Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q514241" start="41054" end="41066" title="Succession to the Saudi Arabian throne" label="Crown Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="41070" end="41082" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756142" start="41345" end="41363" title="Allegiance Council" label="Allegiance Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q151509" start="41691" end="41700" title="Ibn Saud" label="Abdulaziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q455341" start="41765" end="41783" title="Muhammad bin Nayef" label="Muhammad bin Nayef"/>
<link wikidata="Q6892571" start="41985" end="42004" title="Mohammed bin Salman" label="Muhammad bin Salman"/>
<link wikidata="Q244206" start="42041" end="42045" title="Saud of Saudi Arabia" label="Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235723" start="42106" end="42125" title="Māori King Movement" label="Māori King Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="42129" end="42140" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814026" start="42181" end="42189" title="Kaumātua" label="Kaumātua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="42213" end="42216" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="42343" end="42360" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="42381" end="42396" title="France" label="French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15915170" start="42475" end="42496" title="Elective dictatorship" label="Elective dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350808" start="42499" end="42517" title="President for life" label="President for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669878" start="42520" end="42528" title="Tanistry" label="Tanistry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258986" wikidata="Q5498822" url="?curid=258986" title="Ergodic theory">
<text>Ergodic theory is a branch of mathematics that studies statistical properties of deterministic dynamical systems; it is the study of ergodicity. In this context, &quot;statistical properties&quot; refers to properties which are expressed through the behavior of time averages of various functions along trajectories of dynamical systems. The notion of deterministic dynamical systems assumes that the equations determining the dynamics do not contain any random perturbations, noise, etc. Thus, the statistics with which we are concerned are properties of the dynamics.

Ergodic theory, like probability theory, is based on general notions of measure theory. Its initial development was motivated by problems of statistical physics.

A central concern of ergodic theory is the behavior of a dynamical system when it is allowed to run for a long time. The first result in this direction is the Poincaré recurrence theorem, which claims that almost all points in any subset of the phase space eventually revisit the set. Systems for which the Poincaré recurrence theorem holds are conservative systems; thus all ergodic systems are conservative.

More precise information is provided by various ergodic theorems which assert that, under certain conditions, the time average of a function along the trajectories exists almost everywhere and is related to the space average. Two of the most important theorems are those of Birkhoff (1931) and von Neumann which assert the existence of a time average along each trajectory. For the special class of ergodic systems, this time average is the same for almost all initial points: statistically speaking, the system that evolves for a long time &quot;forgets&quot; its initial state. Stronger properties, such as mixing and equidistribution, have also been extensively studied.

The problem of metric classification of systems is another important part of the abstract ergodic theory. An outstanding role in ergodic theory and its applications to stochastic processes is played by the various notions of entropy for dynamical systems.

The concepts of ergodicity and the ergodic hypothesis are central to applications of ergodic theory. The underlying idea is that for certain systems the time average of their properties is equal to the average over the entire space. Applications of ergodic theory to other parts of mathematics usually involve establishing ergodicity properties for systems of special kind. In geometry, methods of ergodic theory have been used to study the geodesic flow on Riemannian manifolds, starting with the results of Eberhard Hopf for Riemann surfaces of negative curvature. Markov chains form a common context for applications in probability theory. Ergodic theory has fruitful connections with harmonic analysis, Lie theory (representation theory, lattices in algebraic groups), and number theory (the theory of diophantine approximations, L-functions).

==Ergodic transformations==

Ergodic theory is often concerned with ergodic transformations. The intuition behind such transformations, which act on a given set, is that they do a thorough job &quot;stirring&quot; the elements of that set. E.g. if the set is a quantity of hot oatmeal in a bowl, and if a spoonful of syrup is dropped into the bowl, then iterations of the inverse of an ergodic transformation of the oatmeal will not allow the syrup to remain in a local subregion of the oatmeal, but will distribute the syrup evenly throughout. At the same time, these iterations will not compress or dilate any portion of the oatmeal: they preserve the measure that is density.

The formal definition is as follows: 

Let be a measure-preserving transformation on a measure space , with . Then is ergodic if for every in with (that is, is invariant), either or .

The operator Δ here is the symmetric difference of sets, equivalent to the exclusive-or operation with respect to set membership. The condition that the symmetric difference be measure zero is called being essentially invariant.

==Examples==
* An irrational rotation of the circle R/Z, &quot;T&quot;: &quot;x&quot; → &quot;x&quot; + θ, where θ is irrational, is ergodic. This transformation has even stronger properties of unique ergodicity, minimality, and equidistribution. By contrast, if θ = &quot;p&quot;/&quot;q&quot; is rational (in lowest terms) then &quot;T&quot; is periodic, with period &quot;q&quot;, and thus cannot be ergodic: for any interval &quot;I&quot; of length &quot;a&quot;, 0 &lt; &quot;a&quot; &lt; 1/&quot;q&quot;, its orbit under &quot;T&quot; (that is, the union of &quot;I&quot;, &quot;T&quot;(&quot;I&quot;), ..., &quot;T&quot;&quot;q&quot;−1(&quot;I&quot;), which contains the image of &quot;I&quot; under any number of applications of &quot;T&quot;) is a &quot;T&quot;-invariant mod 0 set that is a union of &quot;q&quot; intervals of length &quot;a&quot;, hence it has measure &quot;qa&quot; strictly between 0 and 1.
* Let &quot;G&quot; be a compact abelian group, &quot;μ&quot; the normalized Haar measure, and &quot;T&quot; a group automorphism of &quot;G&quot;. Let &quot;G&quot;* be the Pontryagin dual group, consisting of the continuous characters of &quot;G&quot;, and &quot;T&quot;* be the corresponding adjoint automorphism of &quot;G&quot;*. The automorphism &quot;T&quot; is ergodic if and only if the equality (&quot;T&quot;*)&quot;n&quot;(&quot;χ&quot;) = &quot;χ&quot; is possible only when &quot;n&quot; = 0 or &quot;χ&quot; is the trivial character of &quot;G&quot;. In particular, if &quot;G&quot; is the &quot;n&quot;-dimensional torus and the automorphism &quot;T&quot; is represented by a unimodular matrix &quot;A&quot; then &quot;T&quot; is ergodic if and only if no eigenvalue of &quot;A&quot; is a root of unity.
* A Bernoulli shift is ergodic. More generally, ergodicity of the shift transformation associated with a sequence of i.i.d. random variables and some more general stationary processes follows from Kolmogorov&#x27;s zero–one law.
* Ergodicity of a continuous dynamical system means that its trajectories &quot;spread around&quot; the phase space. A system with a compact phase space which has a non-constant first integral cannot be ergodic. This applies, in particular, to Hamiltonian systems with a first integral &quot;I&quot; functionally independent from the Hamilton function &quot;H&quot; and a compact level set &quot;X&quot; = {(&quot;p&quot;,&quot;q&quot;): &quot;H&quot;(&quot;p&quot;,&quot;q&quot;) = E} of constant energy. Liouville&#x27;s theorem implies the existence of a finite invariant measure on &quot;X&quot;, but the dynamics of the system is constrained to the level sets of &quot;I&quot; on &quot;X&quot;, hence the system possesses invariant sets of positive but less than full measure. A property of continuous dynamical systems that is the opposite of ergodicity is complete integrability.

==Ergodic theorems==
Let &quot;T&quot;: &quot;X&quot; → &quot;X&quot; be a measure-preserving transformation on a measure space (&quot;X&quot;, Σ, &quot;μ&quot;) and suppose ƒ is a &quot;μ&quot;-integrable function, i.e. ƒ ∈ &quot;L&quot;1(&quot;μ&quot;). Then we define the following &quot;averages&quot;:

 Time average: This is defined as the average (if it exists) over iterations of &quot;T&quot; starting from some initial point &quot;x&quot;:

:formula_1

 Space average: If &quot;μ&quot;(&quot;X&quot;) is finite and nonzero, we can consider the &quot;space&quot; or &quot;phase&quot; average of ƒ:

:formula_2

In general the time average and space average may be different. But if the transformation is ergodic, and the measure is invariant, then the time average is equal to the space average almost everywhere. This is the celebrated ergodic theorem, in an abstract form due to George David Birkhoff. (Actually, Birkhoff&#x27;s paper considers not the abstract general case but only the case of dynamical systems arising from differential equations on a smooth manifold.) The equidistribution theorem is a special case of the ergodic theorem, dealing specifically with the distribution of probabilities on the unit interval.

More precisely, the pointwise or strong ergodic theorem states that the limit in the definition of the time average of ƒ exists for almost every &quot;x&quot; and that the (almost everywhere defined) limit function formula_3 is integrable:

:formula_4

Furthermore, formula_5 is &quot;T&quot;-invariant, that is to say

:formula_6

holds almost everywhere, and if &quot;μ&quot;(&quot;X&quot;) is finite, then the normalization is the same:

:formula_7

In particular, if &quot;T&quot; is ergodic, then formula_3 must be a constant (almost everywhere), and so one has that

:formula_9

almost everywhere. Joining the first to the last claim and assuming that &quot;μ&quot;(&quot;X&quot;) is finite and nonzero, one has that

:formula_10

for almost all &quot;x&quot;, i.e., for all &quot;x&quot; except for a set of measure zero.

For an ergodic transformation, the time average equals the space average almost surely.

As an example, assume that the measure space (&quot;X&quot;, Σ, &quot;μ&quot;) models the particles of a gas as above, and let ƒ(&quot;x&quot;) denote the velocity of the particle at position &quot;x&quot;. Then the pointwise ergodic theorems says that the average velocity of all particles at some given time is equal to the average velocity of one particle over time.

A generalization of Birkhoff&#x27;s theorem is Kingman&#x27;s subadditive ergodic theorem.

==Probabilistic formulation: Birkhoff–Khinchin theorem==

Birkhoff–Khinchin theorem. Let ƒ be measurable, &quot;E&quot;(|ƒ|) &lt; ∞, and &quot;T&quot; be a measure-preserving map. Then with probability 1:

:formula_11

where formula_12 is the conditional expectation given the σ-algebra formula_13 of invariant sets of &quot;T&quot;.

Corollary (Pointwise Ergodic Theorem): In particular, if &quot;T&quot; is also ergodic, then formula_13 is the trivial σ-algebra, and thus with probability 1:

:formula_15

==Mean ergodic theorem==
Von Neumann&#x27;s mean ergodic theorem, holds in Hilbert spaces.

Let &quot;U&quot; be a unitary operator on a Hilbert space &quot;H&quot;; more generally, an isometric linear operator (that is, a not necessarily surjective linear operator satisfying ‖&quot;Ux&quot;‖ = ‖&quot;x&quot;‖ for all &quot;x&quot; in &quot;H&quot;, or equivalently, satisfying &quot;U&quot;*&quot;U&quot; = I, but not necessarily &quot;UU&quot;* = I). Let &quot;P&quot; be the orthogonal projection onto {&quot;ψ&quot; ∈ &quot;H&quot; | &quot;Uψ&quot; = ψ} = ker(&quot;I&quot; − &quot;U&quot;).

Then, for any &quot;x&quot; in &quot;H&quot;, we have:

:formula_16

where the limit is with respect to the norm on &quot;H&quot;. In other words, the sequence of averages

:formula_17

converges to &quot;P&quot; in the strong operator topology.

Indeed, it is not difficult to see that in this case any formula_18 admits an orthogonal decomposition into parts from formula_19 and formula_20 respectively. The former part is invariant in all the partial sums as formula_21 grows, while for the latter part, from the telescoping series one would have:

:formula_22

This theorem specializes to the case in which the Hilbert space &quot;H&quot; consists of &quot;L&quot;2 functions on a measure space and &quot;U&quot; is an operator of the form

:formula_23

where &quot;T&quot; is a measure-preserving endomorphism of &quot;X&quot;, thought of in applications as representing a time-step of a discrete dynamical system. The ergodic theorem then asserts that the average behavior of a function ƒ over sufficiently large time-scales is approximated by the orthogonal component of ƒ which is time-invariant.

In another form of the mean ergodic theorem, let &quot;Ut&quot; be a strongly continuous one-parameter group of unitary operators on &quot;H&quot;. Then the operator

:formula_24

converges in the strong operator topology as &quot;T&quot; → ∞. In fact, this result also extends to the case of strongly continuous one-parameter semigroup of contractive operators on a reflexive space.

Remark: Some intuition for the mean ergodic theorem can be developed by considering the case where complex numbers of unit length are regarded as unitary transformations on the complex plane (by left multiplication). If we pick a single complex number of unit length (which we think of as &quot;U&quot;), it is intuitive that its powers will fill up the circle. Since the circle is symmetric around 0, it makes sense that the averages of the powers of &quot;U&quot; will converge to 0. Also, 0 is the only fixed point of &quot;U&quot;, and so the projection onto the space of fixed points must be the zero operator (which agrees with the limit just described).

==Convergence of the ergodic means in the &quot;Lp&quot; norms==
Let (&quot;X&quot;, Σ, &quot;μ&quot;) be as above a probability space with a measure preserving transformation &quot;T&quot;, and let 1 ≤ &quot;p&quot; ≤ ∞. The conditional expectation with respect to the sub-σ-algebra Σ&quot;T&quot; of the &quot;T&quot;-invariant sets is a linear projector &quot;ET&quot; of norm 1 of the Banach space &quot;Lp&quot;(&quot;X&quot;, Σ, &quot;μ&quot;) onto its closed subspace &quot;Lp&quot;(&quot;X&quot;, Σ&quot;T&quot;, &quot;μ&quot;). The latter may also be characterized as the space of all &quot;T&quot;-invariant &quot;Lp&quot;-functions on &quot;X&quot;. The ergodic means, as linear operators on &quot;Lp&quot;(&quot;X&quot;, Σ, &quot;μ&quot;) also have unit operator norm; and, as a simple consequence of the Birkhoff–Khinchin theorem, converge to the projector &quot;ET&quot; in the strong operator topology of &quot;Lp&quot; if 1 ≤ &quot;p&quot; ≤ ∞, and in the weak operator topology if &quot;p&quot; = ∞. More is true if 1 &lt; &quot;p&quot; ≤ ∞ then the Wiener–Yoshida–Kakutani ergodic dominated convergence theorem states that the ergodic means of ƒ ∈ &quot;Lp&quot; are dominated in &quot;Lp&quot;; however, if ƒ ∈ &quot;L&quot;1, the ergodic means may fail to be equidominated in &quot;Lp&quot;. Finally, if ƒ is assumed to be in the Zygmund class, that is |ƒ| log+(|ƒ|) is integrable, then the ergodic means are even dominated in &quot;L&quot;1.

==Sojourn time==
Let (&quot;X&quot;, Σ, &quot;μ&quot;) be a measure space such that &quot;μ&quot;(&quot;X&quot;) is finite and nonzero. The time spent in a measurable set &quot;A&quot; is called the sojourn time. An immediate consequence of the ergodic theorem is that, in an ergodic system, the relative measure of &quot;A&quot; is equal to the mean sojourn time:

:formula_25

for all &quot;x&quot; except for a set of measure zero, where χ&quot;A&quot; is the indicator function of &quot;A&quot;.

The occurrence times of a measurable set &quot;A&quot; is defined as the set &quot;k&quot;1, &quot;k&quot;2, &quot;k&quot;3, ..., of times &quot;k&quot; such that &quot;Tk&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is in &quot;A&quot;, sorted in increasing order. The differences between consecutive occurrence times &quot;Ri&quot; = &quot;ki&quot; − &quot;k&quot;&quot;i&quot;−1 are called the recurrence times of &quot;A&quot;. Another consequence of the ergodic theorem is that the average recurrence time of &quot;A&quot; is inversely proportional to the measure of &quot;A&quot;, assuming that the initial point &quot;x&quot; is in &quot;A&quot;, so that &quot;k&quot;0 = 0.

:formula_26

(See almost surely.) That is, the smaller &quot;A&quot; is, the longer it takes to return to it.

==Ergodic flows on manifolds==
The ergodicity of the geodesic flow on compact Riemann surfaces of variable negative curvature and on compact manifolds of constant negative curvature of any dimension was proved by Eberhard Hopf in 1939, although special cases had been studied earlier: see for example, Hadamard&#x27;s billiards (1898) and Artin billiard (1924). The relation between geodesic flows on Riemann surfaces and one-parameter subgroups on SL(2, R) was described in 1952 by S. V. Fomin and I. M. Gelfand. The article on Anosov flows provides an example of ergodic flows on SL(2, R) and on Riemann surfaces of negative curvature. Much of the development described there generalizes to hyperbolic manifolds, since they can be viewed as quotients of the hyperbolic space by the action of a lattice in the semisimple Lie group SO(n,1). Ergodicity of the geodesic flow on Riemannian symmetric spaces was demonstrated by F. I. Mautner in 1957. In 1967 D. V. Anosov and Ya. G. Sinai proved ergodicity of the geodesic flow on compact manifolds of variable negative sectional curvature. A simple criterion for the ergodicity of a homogeneous flow on a homogeneous space of a semisimple Lie group was given by Calvin C. Moore in 1966. Many of the theorems and results from this area of study are typical of rigidity theory.

In the 1930s G. A. Hedlund proved that the horocycle flow on a compact hyperbolic surface is minimal and ergodic. Unique ergodicity of the flow was established by Hillel Furstenberg in 1972. Ratner&#x27;s theorems provide a major generalization of ergodicity for unipotent flows on the homogeneous spaces of the form Γ \ &quot;G&quot;, where &quot;G&quot; is a Lie group and Γ is a lattice in &quot;G&quot;.

In the last 20 years, there have been many works trying to find a measure-classification theorem similar to Ratner&#x27;s theorems but for diagonalizable actions, motivated by conjectures of Furstenberg and Margulis. An important partial result (solving those conjectures with an extra assumption of positive entropy) was proved by Elon Lindenstrauss, and he was awarded the Fields medal in 2010 for this result.

==See also==
* Chaos theory
* Ergodic hypothesis
* Ergodic process
* Kruskal principle
* Lindy effect
* Lyapunov time – the time limit to the predictability of the system
* Maximal ergodic theorem
* Ornstein isomorphism theorem
* Statistical mechanics
* Symbolic dynamics

==References==
==Historical references==
* .
* .
* .
* .

==Modern references==
* 
* Vladimir Igorevich Arnol&#x27;d and André Avez, &quot;Ergodic Problems of Classical Mechanics&quot;. New York: W.A. Benjamin. 1968.
* Leo Breiman, &quot;Probability&quot;. Original edition published by Addison–Wesley, 1968; reprinted by Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1992. . &quot;(See Chapter 6.)&quot;
* &quot;(A survey of topics in ergodic theory; with exercises.)&quot;
* Karl Petersen. Ergodic Theory (Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1990.
* Françoise Pène, &quot;Stochastic properties of dynamical systems&quot;, Cours spécialisés de la SMF, Volume 30, 2022
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt and Máté Weirdl, &quot;Pointwise ergodic theorems via harmonic analysis&quot;, (1993) appearing in &quot;Ergodic Theory and its Connections with Harmonic Analysis, Proceedings of the 1993 Alexandria Conference&quot;, (1995) Karl E. Petersen and Ibrahim A. Salama, &quot;eds.&quot;, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, . &quot;(An extensive survey of the ergodic properties of generalizations of the equidistribution theorem of shift maps on the unit interval. Focuses on methods developed by Bourgain.)&quot;
* A. N. Shiryaev, &quot;Probability&quot;, 2nd ed., Springer 1996, Sec. V.3. .
* &quot;(A detailed discussion about the priority of the discovery and publication of the ergodic theorems by Birkhoff and von Neumann, based on a letter of the latter to his friend Howard Percy Robertson.)&quot;
* Andrzej Lasota, Michael C. Mackey, &quot;Chaos, Fractals, and Noise: Stochastic Aspects of Dynamics&quot;. Second Edition, Springer, 1994.
* Manfred Einsiedler and Thomas Ward, Ergodic Theory with a view towards Number Theory. Springer, 2011.
* Jane Hawkins, &quot;Ergodic Dynamics: From Basic Theory to Applications&quot;, Springer, 2021. 

==External links==

* Ergodic Theory (16 June 2015) Notes by Cosma Rohilla Shalizi
* Ergodic theorem passes the test From Physics World</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5498822" start="0" end="14" title="Ergodic theory" label="Ergodic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="30" end="41" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="55" end="66" title="statistical" label="statistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="95" end="111" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426803" start="133" end="143" title="ergodicity" label="ergodicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130194" start="262" end="274" title="time average" label="time average"/>
<link wikidata="Q176640" start="455" end="461" title="random" label="random"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587856" start="477" end="482" title="Noisy data" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="592" end="610" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192276" start="643" end="650" title="Measure (mathematics)" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="712" end="731" title="statistical physics" label="statistical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q226014" start="893" end="920" title="Poincaré recurrence theorem" label="Poincaré recurrence theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397701" start="940" end="950" title="almost all" label="almost all"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="979" end="990" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11385752" start="1079" end="1098" title="conservative system" label="conservative system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498822" start="1193" end="1209" title="Ergodic theory" label="ergodic theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139334" start="1316" end="1333" title="almost everywhere" label="almost everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q327301" start="1419" end="1427" title="George David Birkhoff" label="Birkhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="1439" end="1450" title="John von Neumann" label="von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498822" start="1544" end="1559" title="Ergodic theory" label="ergodic systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350572" start="1754" end="1760" title="mixing (mathematics)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530388" start="1765" end="1781" title="equidistribution" label="equidistribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q176737" start="1988" end="2006" title="stochastic process" label="stochastic process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003225" start="2045" end="2052" title="measure-theoretic entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426803" start="2093" end="2103" title="ergodicity" label="ergodicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q174196" start="2112" end="2130" title="ergodic hypothesis" label="ergodic hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="2454" end="2462" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q213488" start="2518" end="2531" title="geodesic flow" label="geodesic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="2535" end="2555" title="Riemannian manifolds" label="Riemannian manifolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q86070" start="2586" end="2599" title="Eberhard Hopf" label="Eberhard Hopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q753035" start="2604" end="2619" title="Riemann surface" label="Riemann surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q176645" start="2644" end="2656" title="Markov chain" label="Markov chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="2700" end="2718" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q876215" start="2765" end="2782" title="harmonic analysis" label="harmonic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q357300" start="2784" end="2794" title="Lie theory" label="Lie theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="2796" end="2817" title="representation theory" label="representation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497088" start="2819" end="2827" title="lattice (discrete subgroup)" label="lattices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695400" start="2831" end="2846" title="algebraic group" label="algebraic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="2854" end="2867" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227061" start="2883" end="2909" title="diophantine approximations" label="diophantine approximations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789063" start="2911" end="2922" title="L-functions" label="L-functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003225" start="3654" end="3687" title="measure-preserving transformation" label="measure-preserving transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058212" start="3693" end="3706" title="measure space" label="measure space"/>
<link wikidata="Q124632519" start="3766" end="3775" title="invariant sigma-algebra" label="invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q498186" start="3866" end="3878" title="exclusive-or" label="exclusive-or"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073537" start="4039" end="4058" title="irrational rotation" label="irrational rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105356493" start="4066" end="4072" title="circle group" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="4139" end="4149" title="irrational number" label="irrational"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426803" start="4215" end="4232" title="unique ergodicity" label="unique ergodicity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4234" end="4244" title="minimal dynamical system" label="minimality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530388" start="4250" end="4266" title="equidistribution" label="equidistribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887083" start="4967" end="4974" title="Compact group" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="4975" end="4988" title="abelian group" label="abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162676" start="5019" end="5031" title="Haar measure" label="Haar measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q742064" start="5053" end="5071" title="group automorphism" label="group automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632419" start="5116" end="5131" title="Pontryagin dual" label="Pontryagin dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062934" start="5168" end="5178" title="character (mathematics)" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844662" start="5472" end="5489" title="trivial character" label="trivial character"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="5573" end="5578" title="torus group" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367055" start="5634" end="5651" title="unimodular matrix" label="unimodular matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="5714" end="5724" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q756747" start="5747" end="5760" title="root of unity" label="root of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042439" start="5766" end="5781" title="Bernoulli shift" label="Bernoulli shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q378542" start="5879" end="5902" title="i.i.d. random variables" label="i.i.d. random variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192209" start="5925" end="5943" title="stationary process" label="stationary process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004664" start="5959" end="5989" title="Kolmogorov&amp;#x27;s zero–one law" label="Kolmogorov&amp;#x27;s zero–one law"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="6009" end="6036" title="continuous dynamical system" label="continuous dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="6095" end="6106" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072471" start="6235" end="6253" title="Hamiltonian system" label="Hamiltonian system"/>
<link wikidata="Q766722" start="6497" end="6521" title="Liouville&amp;#x27;s theorem (Hamiltonian)" label="Liouville&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957758" start="6854" end="6876" title="Integrable system" label="complete integrability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003225" start="6954" end="6987" title="measure-preserving transformation" label="measure-preserving transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058212" start="6993" end="7006" title="measure space" label="measure space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139334" start="7683" end="7700" title="almost everywhere" label="almost everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q327301" start="7769" end="7790" title="George David Birkhoff" label="George David Birkhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984052" start="7967" end="7991" title="equidistribution theorem" label="equidistribution theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397701" start="8858" end="8868" title="almost all" label="almost all"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="8932" end="8939" title="Lebesgue measure" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="9191" end="9199" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906153" start="9454" end="9496" title="Kingman&amp;#x27;s subadditive ergodic theorem" label="Kingman&amp;#x27;s subadditive ergodic theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434353" start="9684" end="9702" title="almost surely" label="with probability 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q772232" start="9742" end="9765" title="conditional expectation" label="conditional expectation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972470" start="10122" end="10138" title="unitary operator" label="unitary operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="10144" end="10157" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q519967" start="10487" end="10508" title="orthogonal projection" label="orthogonal projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392013" start="10826" end="10850" title="strong operator topology" label="strong operator topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164293" start="11122" end="11140" title="telescoping series" label="telescoping series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308481" start="11801" end="11820" title="one-parameter group" label="one-parameter group"/>
<link wikidata="Q846542" start="12025" end="12048" title="one-parameter semigroup" label="one-parameter semigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392013" start="13651" end="13675" title="strong operator topology" label="strong operator topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277121" start="13731" end="13753" title="weak operator topology" label="weak operator topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803641" start="14569" end="14586" title="mean sojourn time" label="mean sojourn time"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="14644" end="14651" title="Lebesgue measure" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q371983" start="14686" end="14704" title="indicator function" label="indicator function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434353" start="15401" end="15414" title="almost surely" label="almost surely"/>
<link wikidata="Q213488" start="15547" end="15560" title="geodesic flow" label="geodesic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="15564" end="15571" title="Compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q753035" start="15572" end="15587" title="Riemann surface" label="Riemann surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q945953" start="15610" end="15619" title="Gaussian curvature" label="curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619102" start="15635" end="15675" title="hyperbolic manifold" label="manifolds of constant negative curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q86070" start="15707" end="15720" title="Eberhard Hopf" label="Eberhard Hopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637574" start="15796" end="15821" title="Hadamard&amp;#x27;s billiards" label="Hadamard&amp;#x27;s billiards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801175" start="15833" end="15847" title="Artin billiard" label="Artin billiard"/>
<link wikidata="Q307169" start="15943" end="15951" title="SL2(R)" label="SL(2, R)"/>
<link wikidata="Q951438" start="15977" end="15988" title="S. V. Fomin" label="S. V. Fomin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315414" start="15993" end="16006" title="I. M. Gelfand" label="I. M. Gelfand"/>
<link wikidata="Q56297274" start="16023" end="16034" title="Anosov flow" label="Anosov flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878538" start="16254" end="16270" title="hyperbolic space" label="hyperbolic space"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="16278" end="16284" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497088" start="16290" end="16297" title="lattice (discrete subgroup)" label="lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11061828" start="16326" end="16333" title="SO(n,1)" label="SO(n,1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058244" start="16370" end="16396" title="Riemannian symmetric space" label="Riemannian symmetric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q15810640" start="16418" end="16431" title="Friederich Ignaz Mautner" label="F. I. Mautner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232736" start="16449" end="16461" title="D. V. Anosov" label="D. V. Anosov"/>
<link wikidata="Q950897" start="16466" end="16478" title="Ya. G. Sinai" label="Ya. G. Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q855622" start="16560" end="16579" title="sectional curvature" label="sectional curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324364" start="16646" end="16663" title="homogeneous space" label="homogeneous space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003162" start="16669" end="16689" title="semisimple Lie group" label="semisimple Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15279659" start="16703" end="16718" title="Calvin C. Moore" label="Calvin C. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17127780" start="16800" end="16815" title="Rigidity (mathematics)" label="rigidity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555939" start="16831" end="16844" title="G. A. Hedlund" label="G. A. Hedlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q556862" start="16981" end="16999" title="Hillel Furstenberg" label="Hillel Furstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295875" start="17009" end="17031" title="Ratner&amp;#x27;s theorems" label="Ratner&amp;#x27;s theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="17179" end="17188" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q450297" start="17335" end="17341" title="Marina Ratner" label="Ratner"/>
<link wikidata="Q325705" start="17434" end="17442" title="Grigory Margulis" label="Margulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q334069" start="17559" end="17577" title="Elon Lindenstrauss" label="Elon Lindenstrauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="17602" end="17614" title="Fields medal" label="Fields medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="17656" end="17668" title="Chaos theory" label="Chaos theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q174196" start="17671" end="17689" title="Ergodic hypothesis" label="Ergodic hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298136" start="17692" end="17707" title="Ergodic process" label="Ergodic process"/>
<link wikidata="Q121833185" start="17710" end="17727" title="Kruskal principle" label="Kruskal principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152837" start="17730" end="17742" title="Lindy effect" label="Lindy effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527923" start="17745" end="17758" title="Lyapunov time" label="Lyapunov time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534066" start="17783" end="17797" title="predictability" label="predictability"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795637" start="17814" end="17837" title="Maximal ergodic theorem" label="Maximal ergodic theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103669" start="17840" end="17868" title="Ornstein isomorphism theorem" label="Ornstein isomorphism theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="17871" end="17892" title="Statistical mechanics" label="Statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350838" start="17895" end="17912" title="Symbolic dynamics" label="Symbolic dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q157642" start="17999" end="18030" title="Vladimir Igorevich Arnol&amp;#x27;d" label="Vladimir Igorevich Arnol&amp;#x27;d"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984052" start="19057" end="19081" title="equidistribution theorem" label="equidistribution theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278680" start="19085" end="19094" title="shift map" label="shift map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987578" start="19103" end="19116" title="unit interval" label="unit interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q951222" start="19169" end="19183" title="Albert Shiryaev" label="A. N. Shiryaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664562" start="19602" end="19620" title="Manfred Einsiedler" label="Manfred Einsiedler"/>
<link wikidata="Q14465793" start="19625" end="19636" title="Thomas Ward (mathematician)" label="Thomas Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q18686626" start="19706" end="19718" title="Jane M. Hawkins" label="Jane Hawkins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258988" wikidata="Q622830" url="?curid=258988" title="Caruaru">
<text>Caruaru is a Brazilian municipality in the state of Pernambuco. The most populous city in the interior of the state, Caruaru is located in the microzone of Agreste and because of its cultural importance, it is nicknamed &quot;Capital do Agreste&quot; (Portuguese for the &quot;capital city of the Agreste region&quot;), &quot;Princesinha do Agreste&quot; (&quot;Little Princess of Agreste&quot;), and &quot;Capital of agreste&quot; (&quot;the capital city of &quot;forró&quot;&quot;).

The city is located from the state capital of Recife, which has an international airport. However, Caruaru has its own airport. Caruaru is renowned for its extensive &quot;Festival de São João&quot; (&quot;Saint John&#x27;s Festival&quot;), which takes up the whole month of June, sometimes extending into July. Caruaru had a 2024 resident population of 402,290 inhabitants, living in a land area of .

Caruaru is the hometown, among others, of Álvaro Lins, Brazilian journalist, and Lieutenant Brigadier Reginaldo dos Santos, former dean of the Brazilian Technological Institute for Aeronautics.

==History==
The lands that today comprise the city of Caruaru were originally a cattle ranch owned by family Nunes dos Bezerros. This name was given because of the proximity of the farm to the Bezerros chapel. Some orphans used to live with the Nunes family. One of them, José Rodrigues de Jesus, inherited part of the estate, staying at the location that would later be named Caruaru.
There he built a chapel dedicated to the Immaculate Conception. A village started to grow around this chapel. In 1846, Friar Euzébio de Sales started to build the parish named &quot;Igreja Matriz&quot;, nowadays a cathedral. In later years, the church was rebuilt twice, the last one in 1883. The geographical position benefited the city, because it was a necessary stopover in the transportation of cattle to the interior of the state.

==Geography==

* State: Pernambuco
* Region: Agreste of Pernambuco
* Bordering municipalities: Toritama, Vertentes, Frei Miguelinho and Taquaritinga do Norte (N); Altinho and Agrestina (S); Brejo da Madre de Deus and São Caetano (W); Bezerros and Riacho das Almas (E)
* Area: 
* Elevation: 
* Hydrography: Capibaribe, Ipojuca and Una rivers
* Vegetation: Hypoxerophilous Caatinga
* Climate: Semi-arid
* Mean annual temperature: 
* Main road: BR-232
* Distance to Recife - 140 km
* Distance to Gravatá - 48 km

==Economy==
The main economic activities in Caruaru are industry (especially textiles), tourism, commerce, and handicraft, and the primary sector, especially the raising of goats, chickens, and cattle, and the production of milk. Agricultural activity in the Caruaru area also includes beans, cassava, and maize. Caruaru also hosts one of the biggest open-air traditional handicrafts markets of Brazil, the &quot;Feira de Caruaru&quot;.

===Economic Indicators===


===Health Indicators===
== Transports ==

Caruaru has one regional airport, the Oscar Laranjeira Airport, it is located in the west parte of the city, the nearest major international airport is the Recife/Guararapes–Gilberto Freyre International Airport in Recife which is 138 km far from the city. The city is served by two expressways, the BR-232 and the BR-104.

== Culture ==

===Festa Junina ===

Every June, as part of the nativity of St John the Baptist, Caruaru hosts one of the principal Brazilian Festa Junina. Since 1994, the festival has been held in Pátio de Eventos Luiz Gonzaga.

===Sports===

There are two association football (soccer) teams in the city: Clube Atlético do Porto, which plays at Antônio Inácio de Souza Stadium (capacity: 9,000), and Central Sport Club, which plays at Estádio Luiz José de Lacerda (capacity: 30,000). Both teams compete in the main series of Pernambuco&#x27;s state tournament. Caruaru also hosts an annual race of the Brazilian Formula Truck competition, at the Ayrton Senna International Circuit, the state&#x27;s main motor race track.

==Tourism==

Caruaru&#x27;s &quot;Museu do Barro&quot; (&quot;Clay Museum&quot;) promotes and displays works from the main ceramic centers of Pernambuco. Its collection includes pieces by .

==Sister cities==
Caruaru has two sister cities, both outside the country:
* Hof, Bavaria, Germany
* Vila Nova de Famalicão, Braga, Portugal

==See also==

*List of cities in Brazil
*List of municipalities in Pernambuco

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q622830" start="0" end="7" title="Caruaru" label="Caruaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184121" start="23" end="35" title="Municipalities of Brazil" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q485258" start="43" end="48" title="States of Brazil" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="52" end="62" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827134" start="156" end="163" title="Agreste" label="Agreste"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="252" end="262" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q586110" start="465" end="470" title="forró" label="forró"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="532" end="538" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q387704" start="553" end="574" title="Recife/Guararapes–Gilberto Freyre International Airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962787" start="605" end="612" title="Caruaru Airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115066" start="658" end="678" title="Festa Junina" label="Festival de São João"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317163" start="1032" end="1081" title="Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica" label="Brazilian Technological Institute for Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q185606" start="1511" end="1532" title="Immaculate Conception" label="Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="1932" end="1942" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827134" start="1953" end="1960" title="Agreste" label="Agreste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013594" start="2003" end="2011" title="Toritama" label="Toritama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065306" start="2013" end="2022" title="Vertentes" label="Vertentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011848" start="2024" end="2039" title="Frei Miguelinho" label="Frei Miguelinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011859" start="2044" end="2065" title="Taquaritinga do Norte" label="Taquaritinga do Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525816" start="2071" end="2078" title="Altinho" label="Altinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787629" start="2083" end="2092" title="Agrestina" label="Agrestina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807223" start="2098" end="2120" title="Brejo da Madre de Deus" label="Brejo da Madre de Deus"/>
<link wikidata="Q777635" start="2125" end="2136" title="São Caetano, Pernambuco" label="São Caetano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011830" start="2142" end="2150" title="Bezerros" label="Bezerros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964406" start="2155" end="2171" title="Riacho das Almas" label="Riacho das Almas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352970" start="2214" end="2224" title="Capibaribe River" label="Capibaribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127926" start="2226" end="2233" title="Ipojuca River" label="Ipojuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618598" start="2238" end="2241" title="Una River (Pernambuco)" label="Una"/>
<link wikidata="Q375816" start="2279" end="2287" title="Caatinga" label="Caatinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="2299" end="2308" title="Semi-arid climate" label="Semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2350" end="2356" title="BR-232" label="BR-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="2371" end="2377" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q535373" start="2401" end="2408" title="Gravatá" label="Gravatá"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="2495" end="2502" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="2506" end="2513" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="2515" end="2523" title="commerce" label="commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="2529" end="2539" title="handicraft" label="handicraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="2549" end="2563" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="2591" end="2595" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="2598" end="2605" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="2612" end="2618" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="2642" end="2646" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="2704" end="2708" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="2711" end="2718" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="2724" end="2729" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="2813" end="2819" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962787" start="2964" end="2988" title="Caruaru Airport" label="Oscar Laranjeira Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q387704" start="3082" end="3137" title="Recife/Guararapes–Gilberto Freyre International Airport" label="Recife/Guararapes–Gilberto Freyre International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="3141" end="3147" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3226" end="3232" title="BR-232" label="BR-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877398" start="3241" end="3247" title="BR-104" label="BR-104"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870479" start="3313" end="3344" title="nativity of St John the Baptist" label="nativity of St John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115066" start="3391" end="3403" title="Festa Junina" label="Festa Junina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="3507" end="3527" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q768225" start="3556" end="3579" title="Clube Atlético do Porto" label="Clube Atlético do Porto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3596" end="3627" title="Estádio Antônio Inácio de Souza" label="Antônio Inácio de Souza Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506734" start="3651" end="3669" title="Central Sport Club" label="Central Sport Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9255334" start="3686" end="3714" title="Lacerdão" label="Estádio Luiz José de Lacerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366941" start="3863" end="3876" title="Formula Truck" label="Formula Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827221" start="3897" end="3930" title="Autódromo Internacional Ayrton Senna (Caruaru)" label="Ayrton Senna International Circui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777138" start="3961" end="3971" title="race track" label="race track"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938" start="4242" end="4245" title="Hof, Bavaria" label="Hof"/>
<link wikidata="Q551658" start="4266" end="4288" title="Vila Nova de Famalicão" label="Vila Nova de Famalicão"/>
<link wikidata="Q499753" start="4322" end="4346" title="List of cities in Brazil" label="List of cities in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840215" start="4348" end="4384" title="List of municipalities in Pernambuco" label="List of municipalities in Pernambuco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258992" wikidata="Q5702334" url="?curid=258992" title="Helen Gardner (critic)">
<text>Dame Helen Louise Gardner, (13 February 1908 – 4 June 1986) was an English literary critic and academic. Gardner began her teaching career at the University of Birmingham, and from 1966 to 1975 was a Merton Professor of English Literature, the first woman to have that position. She was best known for her work on the poets John Donne and T. S. Eliot, but also published on John Milton and William Shakespeare. She published over a dozen books, and received multiple honours.

Her critical stance was traditional and focused on history and biography; it involved the work&#x27;s historical context, the personal habits of the author, and the relationship of the text to the time period. One of her beliefs was that a literary critic&#x27;s job is to assist other people in reading for themselves.

==Personal life==
Gardner was the daughter of Charles Henry and Helen Mary Roadnight Cockman Gardner. She went to North London Collegiate School. She did her B.A. at St Hilda&#x27;s College, Oxford, in 1929, later receiving a M.A. at the same college in 1935.

==Academic career==
Gardner&#x27;s teaching career began at the University of Birmingham, where she held a temporary post as an assistant lecturer from 1930 to 1931. After three years as an assistant lecturer at Royal Holloway College in London, she returned to Birmingham, as a member of the English department (1934–41). She became a tutor at Oxford in 1941 and was a fellow of St Hilda&#x27;s College, Oxford, from 1942 to 1966, where she was also a university reader in Renaissance English literature. From 1966 to 1975, Gardner was the Merton Professor of English Literature, the first woman to have that position, and a fellow of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford.

The University of Cambridge offered Gardner the new chair in Medieval and Renaissance Literature, but she declined, in part because she had heard that the university&#x27;s first choice, C. S. Lewis, had changed his mind about refusing the position.

==Critical approach and subject matter==
Gardner published on T. S. Eliot from early on in her career; F. O. Matthiessen cited her 1942 essay &quot;The Recent Poetry of T. S. Eliot&quot; with approbation.

Her critical methodology included the work&#x27;s historical context, the personal habits of the author, and the relationship of the text to the time period. She prepared several editions of poetry by John Donne, including &quot;The Divine Poems&quot; (1952), &quot;Selected Prose&quot; (1967) and &quot;The Elegies and the Songs of Sonnets&quot; (1965), all of which attracted commendation for her careful work. As a scholar of poetry by Eliot, she wrote three studies on him and said he was a major influence on her own criticism. She also wrote criticism on John Milton and William Shakespeare. Gardner influenced the perceptions of British poetry of many readers, especially poetry from the late sixteenth to the early seventeenth centuries. Gardner was an Anglican Christian and her faith was a subtle part of her writing.

Gardner, it is said, &quot;belonged to no &#x27;school of literary criticism. She was critical of the New Criticism and its insistence on multiple interpretations; she disavowed &quot;the rejection of determinate meanings in texts&quot;, insisting that despite texts being open to multiple interpretations, there is still &quot;intentional communication&quot; for readers to try to understand. In 1979, when she delivered the Charles Eliot Norton Lectures (published as &quot;In Defence of the Imagination&quot;) Gardner said that she opposed the then-current trend of literary criticism to over-interpreting texts and using technical jargon. Of the function of a critic, she stated that it is to &quot;shine a torch&quot; and not &quot;wield a sceptre&quot;, meaning that the function of a critic is &quot;to illuminate rather than attack&quot;. 
==Honours==
Gardner she was appointed as a CBE in 1962 and as a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1967. In 1971, she was elected as a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and an international member of the American Philosophical Society in 1982. She received honorary degrees from Cambridge, London, Harvard and Yale universities. She died in Bicester in 1986.

==Legacy==
Gardner&#x27;s will bequeathed the royalties from the &quot;New Oxford Book of English Verse&quot; to the National Portrait Gallery, for the purchase of portraits relating to English literature and portraits from the late 16th and early 17th centuries. The character E. M. Ashford in Margaret Edson &quot;Wit&quot; is based on Gardner. &quot;Wit&quot; was later adapted into a 2001 film. She was listed in &quot;International Who&#x27;s Who in Poetry 2004&quot; under the subheading &quot;Literary Figures of the Past&quot;.

==Works by Helen Gardner==
Gardner wrote more than a dozen books: monographs, critical editions, and anthologies. She edited &quot;The New Oxford Book of English Verse 1250–1950&quot; (published 1972), which replaced Arthur Quiller-Couch&#x27;s &quot;The Oxford Book of English Verse&quot;. &quot;The New Oxford Book of English Verse 1250–1950&quot; was also published in braille.

Gardner&#x27;s 1971 book &quot;Religion and Literature&quot; collects two lecture series, the 1966 Ewing Lectures on religious poetry and the 1968 T. S. Eliot Memorial Lectures on tragedy. Diana Fortuna, reviewing the book for the &quot;Modern Language Review&quot;, praised the lectures on tragedy as &quot;an essential introduction to the subject&quot;, but was less impressed with the lectures on religious poetry, judging that it covered too much material and consequently did not treat some selections &quot;fully enough&quot;.

She also published an anthology of religious poetry, &quot;A Book of Religious Verse&quot;, which according to her 1972 reviewer in &quot;The New York Times&quot; &quot;should be read in conjunction with her provocative lectures on religious poetry printed in her &quot;Religion and Literature&quot;&quot;. The reviewer noted Gardner&#x27;s attempt to find &quot;viable&quot; religious poetry from the 20th century, but found that religious poems by Edwin Muir and W. H. Auden could not compare &quot;with Herbert, Donne or Milton&quot;, and thought the volume &quot;end[ed] with a whimper&quot;. Other criticism of her work includes her focus on judgments in analyzing literary works.

===Bibliography===
*&quot;The Art of T. S. Eliot&quot; (1949)
*&quot;The Divine Poems of John Donne&quot; (1952)
*&quot;The Metaphysical Poets&quot; (1957)
*&quot;The Business of Criticism&quot; (1959)
*&quot;Edwin Muir: the W. D. Thomas Memorial Lecture&quot; (1961)
*&quot;The Elegies and the Songs and Sonnets of John Donne&quot; (1965)
*&quot;A Reading of &quot;Paradise Lost&quot;: the Alexander Lectures in the University of Toronto&quot; (1962)
*&quot;The Waste Land 1972: The Adamson lecture, 3rd May 1972&quot; (See List of Adamson Lectures.)

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Gardnering&quot; (26 January 2007)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5702334" start="0" end="25" title="Helen Gardner (critic)" label="Dame Helen Louise Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q223429" start="146" end="170" title="University of Birmingham" label="University of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420920" start="200" end="238" title="Merton Professors" label="Merton Professor of English Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q140412" start="324" end="334" title="John Donne" label="John Donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="339" end="350" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="374" end="385" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="390" end="409" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249136" start="912" end="942" title="North London Collegiate School" label="North London Collegiate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="956" end="960" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1465651" start="964" end="995" title="St Hilda&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St Hilda&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="1024" end="1028" title="Master of Arts" label="M.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q223429" start="1123" end="1147" title="University of Birmingham" label="University of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202039" start="1271" end="1293" title="Royal Holloway College" label="Royal Holloway College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465651" start="1439" end="1470" title="St Hilda&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St Hilda&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420920" start="1600" end="1638" title="Merton Professors" label="Merton Professor of English Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q951946" start="1695" end="1721" title="Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford" label="Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="1728" end="1751" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248215" start="1785" end="1820" title="Professor of Medieval and Renaissance English (Cambridge)" label="Medieval and Renaissance Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="1911" end="1922" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="2037" end="2048" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386358" start="2078" end="2095" title="F. O. Matthiessen" label="F. O. Matthiessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q140412" start="2382" end="2392" title="John Donne" label="John Donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="2742" end="2753" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="2758" end="2777" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="2942" end="2950" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q742302" start="3112" end="3125" title="New Criticism" label="New Criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064268" start="3436" end="3465" title="Charles Eliot Norton Lectures" label="Charles Eliot Norton Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="3901" end="3904" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="3922" end="3971" title="Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="4042" end="4079" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="4115" end="4145" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="4190" end="4199" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="4201" end="4207" title="University of London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="4209" end="4216" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="4221" end="4225" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q251903" start="4252" end="4260" title="Bicester" label="Bicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="4388" end="4413" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q516100" start="4566" end="4580" title="Margaret Edson" label="Margaret Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027789" start="4587" end="4590" title="Wit (play)" label="Wit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158905" start="4939" end="4985" title="The New Oxford Book of English Verse 1250–1950" label="The New Oxford Book of English Verse 1250–1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q322871" start="5025" end="5045" title="Arthur Quiller-Couch" label="Arthur Quiller-Couch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115248" start="5059" end="5091" title="The Oxford Book of English Verse" label="The Oxford Book of English Verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="5180" end="5187" title="braille" label="braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888740" start="5427" end="5449" title="Modern Language Review" label="Modern Language Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5862" end="5880" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872091" start="6936" end="6960" title="List of Adamson Lectures" label="List of Adamson Lectures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258995" wikidata="Q545553" url="?curid=258995" title="Georgi Lozanov">
<text>Georgi Lozanov (; 22 July 1926 – 6 May 2012), known as &#x27;the father of accelerated learning&#x27;, was a Bulgarian scientist, neurologist, psychiatrist, psychologist and educator, creator of suggestology, suggestopedia (or &#x27;suggestopaedia&#x27;, an experimental branch of suggestology for use in pedagogy), and integrated psychotherapy. 

He developed suggestopedia, a learning/teaching theory based on his early-1960s study of suggestion which is known as &quot;suggestology&quot;.

Lozanov&#x27;s theory and practice triggered an accelerated learning movement in the West, where various techniques not originally included in Lozanov&#x27;s theory were introduced. Such techniques included elements such as breathing, visualization, and biofeedback. There is a school in Sliven dedicated to preparing teachers for using suggestopaedia during lessons in order to improve the learning speed of pupils.

During the 1970s his theories and method were carefully analyzed and evaluated worldwide by a committee on languages learning and eventually certified by Unesco as &quot;the most cultural integral and effective learning method&quot; in Second Language Acquisition, better known today as its corporate adaptation called the Accelerated Learning Method. 

Among his research, Lozanov had conducted during his earlier career stages advanced long-term research in the field of parapsychology, especially on clairvoyance at the University of Sofia.

He eventually left Bulgaria, and settled in Western Europe creating and opening the International Centre for Desuggestology and Suggestopedia, Vienna, Austria, also referred to as the Lozanov Institute in Vienna, while conducting his extensive work in North America, particularly in Washington, D.C., USA, and Ottawa-Gatineau, Canada, working at its corresponding Diplomatic Institutes on the development and implementation of Accelerated Second Language Learning, training programs tailored to enhance the learning of diplomats, defense officers, and global federal government employees.

==Legacy== 
In 1966 he created the State Suggestology Research Institute in Sofia, Bulgaria, and the Centre for Suggestology and Development of Personality at the University of Sofia &quot; St Climent Ohridski&quot;, which he directed until 1984.

During the 1970s he created the Lozanov learning method for super-learning of foreign languages, after the methodology audit of 1978 the method was certified by the Unesco in 1980. Upon certification of his method, he created the International Centre for Desuggestology and Suggestopedia in Vienna, Austria.

Then in 2005 with the contribution of his colleague, the linguist, pedagogue, and artist Dr. Evelyna Gateva, they created the Lozanov International Centre for Teacher Training in Vorarlberg, Austria that developed and provided teacher-training programs and certified new instructor and facilitators. During March 2006 at the Trainers&#x27; Conference in Sofia, it was created the International Association of Suggestology (Suggestopedia) founded with headquarters in Oslo, Norway; Dr. Lozanov was elected honorary chairman of the Association, and Professor Lisa Hartmark from Norway was elected chairwoman.

Also in 2006, on 26 March, he created the Lozanov International Trainers Association and they founded LITTA the Lozanov Institute. There are hundreds of trained teachers at Litta website in many different countries, from 1991 to 2008. One, in particular, named Paulo Sergio Negrete, from Brazil, and trained in 2000, developed the Neuropedia / Deblocking Method, based on Suggestopedia, which claims to be a development of the method. The scientific paper was published in 2011.

==References==
==External links==
* http://chapmanenglishcourse.com

* Neuropedia The Deblocking Method</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q545553" start="0" end="14" title="Georgi Lozanov" label="Georgi Lozanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="109" end="117" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417194" start="209" end="222" title="suggestopedia" label="suggestopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417194" start="541" end="561" title="accelerated language learning" label="accelerated learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="717" end="723" title="breath" label="breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q860959" start="728" end="741" title="Mental image" label="visualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q864329" start="747" end="758" title="biofeedback" label="biofeedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q179098" start="1384" end="1398" title="parapsychology" label="parapsychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975244" start="1414" end="1426" title="clairvoyance" label="clairvoyance"/>
<link wikidata="Q841581" start="1434" end="1453" title="University of Sofia" label="University of Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="1475" end="1483" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1540" end="1597" title="International Centre for Desuggestology and Suggestopedia" label="International Centre for Desuggestology and Suggestopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1661" end="1667" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1739" end="1755" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="1766" end="1781" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa-Gatineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="2122" end="2127" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="2129" end="2137" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q841581" start="2209" end="2228" title="University of Sofia" label="University of Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2524" end="2581" title="International Centre for Desuggestology and Suggestopedia" label="International Centre for Desuggestology and Suggestopedia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2696" end="2710" title="Evelyna Gateva" label="Evelyna Gateva"/>
<link wikidata="Q38981" start="2782" end="2792" title="Vorarlberg" label="Vorarlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="2794" end="2801" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="3070" end="3074" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="3076" end="3082" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3160" end="3173" title="Lisa Hartmark" label="Lisa Hartmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3472" end="3492" title="Paulo Sergio Negrete" label="Paulo Sergio Negrete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3542" end="3552" title="Neuropedia" label="Neuropedia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3555" end="3572" title="Deblocking Method" label="Deblocking Method"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258997" wikidata="Q2543161" url="?curid=258997" title="Walmer Castle">
<text>Walmer Castle is an artillery fort originally constructed by Henry VIII in Walmer, Kent, between 1539 and 1540. It formed part of the King&#x27;s Device programme to protect against invasion from France and the Holy Roman Empire, and defended the strategically important Downs anchorage off the English coast. Comprising a keep and four circular bastions, the moated stone castle covered and had 39 firing positions on the upper levels for artillery. It cost the Crown a total of £27,092 to build the three castles of Walmer, Sandown, and Deal, which lay adjacent to one another along the coast and were connected by earthwork defences. The original invasion threat passed, but during the Second English Civil War of 1648–49, Walmer was seized by pro-Royalist insurgents and was only retaken by Parliamentary forces after several months&#x27; fighting.

In the 18th century, Walmer became the official residence of the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports and was gradually modified from a military fortification into a private residence. Various Prime Ministers and prominent politicians were appointed as Lord Warden, including William Pitt, the Duke of Wellington and Lord Granville, who adapted parts of the Tudor castle as living spaces and constructed extensive gardens around the property. By 1904, the War Office agreed that Walmer had no remaining military utility and it passed to the Ministry of Works. Successive Lord Wardens continued to use the property but it was also opened to the public. Walmer was no longer considered a particularly comfortable or modern residence, however, and Lord Curzon blamed the poor condition of the castle for his wife&#x27;s death in 1906.

Lord Wardens since the Second World War have included Winston Churchill, Robert Menzies and Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, but they have made only intermittent use of Walmer Castle. In the 21st century, Walmer Castle is run as a tourist attraction by English Heritage. The interior of the castle displays a range of historical objects and pictures associated with the property and its Lord Wardens, protected since the 19th century by special legislation. The grounds include the Queen Mother&#x27;s Garden, designed by Penelope Hobhouse as a 95th birthday gift for Elizabeth in 1997.

==History==

===16th century===
Walmer Castle was built to defend the English coast from attack by France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII. Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities, only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications, and while France and the Empire remained in conflict with one another, maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely. Modest defences, based around simple blockhouses and towers, existed in the south-west and along the Sussex coast, with a few more impressive works in the north of England, but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale.
In 1533, Henry broke with Pope Paul III in order to annul the long-standing marriage to his wife, Catherine of Aragon and remarry. Catherine was the aunt of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, and he took the annulment as a personal insult. This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538, and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England. An invasion of England appeared certain. In response, Henry issued an order, called a &quot;device&quot;, in 1539, giving instructions for the &quot;defence of the realm in time of invasion&quot; and the construction of forts along the English coastline.
Walmer and the adjacent castles of Deal and Sandown were constructed to protect the Downs in east Kent, an important anchorage formed by the Goodwin Sands which gave access to Deal Beach, on which enemy soldiers could easily be landed. The stone castles were supported by a line of four earthwork forts, known as the Great Turf, the Little Turf Bulwark, the Great White Bulwark of Clay and the Walmer Bulwark, and a 
defensive ditch and bank. Collectively the castles became known as the &quot;castles of the Downs&quot; and cost the Crown a total of £27,092 to build.

Walmer was built between April 1539 and autumn 1540, by a team including Richard Benese as the surveyor, William Clement as the master carpenter, and Christopher Dickenson as the master mason. It was initially garrisoned by a captain, two lieutenants, two porters, ten gunners and three soldiers, at an annual cost of £174. It was probably equipped with a range of brass and cast-iron guns, along with arquebuses and bows for close defence. In 1597, a report listed the castle&#x27;s artillery as comprising a cannon, a culverin, five demi-culverins, a saker, a minion and a falcon.

===17th century===

Walmer Castle was left to decline in the early 17th century, with little money being made available for repairs and the garrison receiving low pay, leading some members to reside in nearby Deal rather the fort itself, and to take on additional employment to supplement their wages. Walmer Castle was seized by Parliamentary forces at the start of the first English Civil War between the supporters of King Charles I and Parliament, but did not play a significant role in the remainder of the initial conflict. After the few years of unsteady peace after 1645, the Second Civil War broke out in 1648, this time with Charles&#x27; Royalist supporters joined by Scottish allies. The Parliamentary navy was based in the Downs, protected by Walmer and the other Henrician castles, but by May a Royalist insurrection was under way across Kent.

Vice-Admiral William Batten had been forced to resign from his post as Commander of the Fleet the previous year by Parliamentary officials, and he now encouraged the fleet to join the Royalist faction. Sir Henry Palmer, a former sailor, accompanied by other members of the Kentish gentry, also called on the fleet to revolt, taking advantage of the many fellow Kentish men in the crews. Walmer and Deal Castle declared for the King, shortly after the garrisons at Sandown. With both the coastal fortresses and the navy now under Royalist control, Parliament feared that foreign forces might be landed along the coast or aid sent to the Scots.

Parliament defeated the wider insurgency at the Battle of Maidstone at the start of June, and then sent a force under the command of Colonel Nathaniel Rich to deal with Walmer and the other castles along the Downs. Walmer Castle was the first to be besieged, and surrendered on 12 July. Deal was attacked in late July, and in August artillery assaults began on Sandown as well, leading to the surrender of both remaining fortifications. Walmer was badly damaged during the conflict and it was estimated by Rich, responsible for carrying out the repairs, that the work would cost at least £500.

In 1649, Parliament ordered new supplies of ammunition and powder be sent to Walmer and the other castles of the Downs, which were brought back into good order. The garrison at Walmer remained substantial during the period, with a governor, a corporal and 20 soldiers, but when Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660 he reduced the numbers again to a captain, lieutenant, porter and 16 men. In the Glorious Revolution of 1688 against Charles&#x27; brother, King James II, the townsfolk of Deal seized Walmer Castle on behalf of William III, the Prince of Orange. By the end of the century, however, the castle was increasingly regarded as out of date from a military perspective.

===18th–19th centuries===

====1700–1828====

In the 18th century, Walmer Castle became the official residence of the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. The Lord Warden was originally a medieval title linked to five key ports along the coast of England; the position&#x27;s prominence had faded, but it still retained important judicial and military functions. When Lionel Sackville, 1st Duke of Dorset, was appointed to the post in 1708 he decided that the existing residence in Dover Castle was unsatisfactory, probably because of the semi-ruinous state of the castle, and moved into Walmer Castle instead.

The Duke occupied the post of Lord Warden until 1765, save for two periods when it was filled by James Butler, 2nd Duke of Ormonde and John Sidney, 6th Earl of Leicester. He carried out extensive work to make the castle more habitable, building extensions towards the north bastion and constructing a small house in the south bastion for the soldiers. Under the subsequent Lord Wardens, the politicians Robert Darcy, 4th Earl of Holderness, and Francis North, 1st Earl of Guilford, the castle continued to house artillery but it became increasingly less military in character.

The Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger was then made the Lord Warden in 1792. Pitt was badly in debt and King George III believed that the post, which came with a salary of £3,000 a year, would usefully supplement Pitt&#x27;s income. Pitt made extensive use of the castle and by 1803 he used it as his main residence in an effort to reduce his living costs. Pitt&#x27;s niece, Lady Hester Stanhope, joined him at Walmer between 1803 and 1806; together with Pitt, she carried out extensive work on the castle gardens, transforming them from a simple kitchen garden into a set of landscaped ornamental enclosures; Stanhope enlisted the Dover militia to help with the landscaping and planting.

With the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars, Pitt became energetically involved in the protection of the ports along the coast, entertaining the local garrison commanders, naval captains and the local gentry at Walmer on a regular basis. After Pitt resigned as prime minister in 1801, fears remained of a French invasion and he formed a volunteer cavalry unit at Walmer Castle, where he lived with his new officers. He also formed a unit of bombardier infantry and a fleet of 35 fishing boats called luggers, which he armed with or guns, reviewing them from the castle. Stanhope remarked on the constant drilling of army units around the castle during her time there.

Robert Jenkinson, 2nd Earl of Liverpool, took possession of Walmer Castle following the death of Pitt in 1806. Liverpool was a favourite of King George&#x27;s, and his appointment as Lord Warden was again intended to provide a valuable income and a country retreat. As prime minister, Liverpool used Walmer as a personal retreat and as a location for private political discussions with selected guests.

====1829–99====

On Lord Liverpool&#x27;s death in 1828, Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington and the prime minister at the time, asked King George IV for the post of Lord Warden, primarily because he was seeking the use of Walmer Castle. Wellington took up post in 1829 and considered Walmer to be &quot;the most charming marine residence&quot;. He made use of the castle each autumn, entertaining extensively there but living and sleeping in a single room. He was visited there twice by Victoria, once when she was still a princess and later as queen. Wellington let the gardens fall into a poor condition. Wellington died in his room at Walmer on 14 September 1852. His embalmed body was kept in his room to lie in state until 10 November, and when the room was opened for public visitors during the final two days, around 9,000 attended. The Duke&#x27;s body was finally removed to London via Deal, complete with a military escort.

James Broun-Ramsay, 1st Marquess of Dalhousie became Lord Warden; on his death, the prime minister Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston, took over the castle in 1861. Palmerston initially declined to buy the contents of the castle from his predecessor&#x27;s estate on taking up the post, a practice which had become traditional for the Lords Warden, complaining about the high price being proposed. This raised the risk that the historical contents of the castle might be sold off at open auction; and some of Wellington&#x27;s former belongings were therefore removed by his family for safekeeping.

The politician Granville Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville was offered the post of Lord Warden by the new prime minister, Lord Russell in 1865. Russell noted that the role would be expensive for Granville to perform — the salary had been abolished in 1828 — but that it would provide him with a property by the sea, which Granville had been seeking to acquire for a while. Granville took over Walmer in 1865. He expanded the gardens, built new kennels for a hunting pack and spent many years reassembling the furniture and other objects that Pitt and Wellington had used at the castle. He received large numbers of visitors, many of whom stopped off while travelling to or from France. The diplomat Baron de Malortie visited Granville and his family at Walmer, and later praised the homely atmosphere in the castle. He described how, after breakfast, the family and guests would all gather in the drawing room, which was the only large room in the house, and Granville would answer government correspondence amid the daily life of the rest of the household.

The businessman and politician William Smith was appointed Lord Warden in 1891, but died in Walmer Castle during his first visit here in October of that year. Smith had proposed that the historical artefacts in the castle should be protected from being removed by later Lord Wardens and suggested that government pass an Indenture of Heirlooms Bill. The government carried out the plan after Smith&#x27;s death, protecting almost 70 pieces of furniture and 50 artworks at the castle and forbidding them being moved from the castle without the Secretary of State for War&#x27;s approval. Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury, became the next Lord Warden; with adequate legal protection now in place, the 3rd Duke of Wellington suggested returning his grandfather&#x27;s possessions to the castle, but Lady Salisbury declined the offer.

===20th–21st centuries===

By 1904 the War Office had concluded that Walmer had no remaining military value and agreed to transfer the castle to the Office of Works, who accepted it on the condition that they were paid £2,400 in order to carry out repairs. The Office&#x27;s survey noted that &quot;the lower floor ... is very inconvenient, dark and not conducive to health while the women servants have to sleep in a sort of dormitory in the slopes of the roof... The principal floor is, generally speaking, badly arranged and badly lighted and the Dining Room is very small&quot;; the report suggested that it would be best to demolish the building and rebuild it.

Proposals were made to find the next Lord Warden, [[George Curzon, 1st Marquess Curzon of Kedleston], alternative accommodation and the [[Royal Marines]] were approached as replacement tenants for the castle, but declined the offer. The ministry acquired agreement for most of the castle to be opened to the public, with various historical objects related to the property being put on display, including some donated by King [[Edward VII]]. Lord Curzon moved into the castle when returned from [[British Raj|India]] in 1905. His wife, [[Mary Curzon, Baroness Curzon of Kedleston|Mary]], fell ill, which Curzon believed to be a result of their poor accommodation, and despite being moved to a new residence, she died shortly afterwards. As a result, Curzon decided to resign the post of Lord Warden, leaving the castle, and subsequently the Prince of Wales, the future [[George V]], took up the post.

[[William Lygon, 7th Earl Beauchamp]], became the Lord Warden in 1913, building a [[Roman Catholic]] [[chapel]] at the castle and holding large parties there each summer. His children later commented that they found the castle was chilly and cramped. The prime minister, [[H. H. Asquith]], was invited by Beauchamp to use the castle during the [[First World War]] as a weekend retreat, as it had good communication links with the front line in France. Asquith&#x27;s wife, [[Margot Asquith, Countess of Oxford and Asquith|Margot]], was not initially impressed by Walmer, noting in her diary that while it was &quot;very distinguished&quot; and had &quot;great charm&quot;, it was &quot;terribly exposed&quot; with &quot;cold... noisy corridors and small rooms&quot;; she later came to like the castle and noted that she was sad to finally leave it.

Lygon had sexual relations with men, which was illegal in England during this period. Rumours spread about the parties that he had held at Walmer Castle after the war, where, according to the historian [[Richard Davenport-Hines]], he had &quot;behaved indiscreetly with young men&quot;. The King was informed about his lifestyle and Lygon fled the country in 1931, resigning the appointment of Lord Warden the following year.
Lygon&#x27;s successor, the politician [[Rufus Isaacs, 1st Marquess of Reading]], became the Lord Warden in 1934, holding jovial family gatherings there. His wife, [[Stella Isaacs, Marchioness of Reading|Stella]], attempted to restore Wellington&#x27;s old bedroom to its earlier appearance during the Duke&#x27;s tenure and, as part of this project, the [[Arthur Wellesley, 4th Duke of Wellington|4th Duke of Wellington]] agreed to send the original contents of the room back to the castle, where they still remain. The politician [[Freeman Freeman-Thomas, 1st Marquess of Willingdon]], became Lord Warden in 1936, followed by Sir [[Winston Churchill]] who followed him in 1941 during the [[Second World War]]. Churchill noted to the [[John Reith, 1st Baron Reith|Minister of Works and Buildings]] that he had told King George V on taking up the position that he doubted that he would be able to live at Walmer Castle during the war, as it was within range of the German artillery along the French coast, or indeed that he would able to afford to live there afterwards, and for that reason he hoped that the state would maintain the castle and gardens, and decide what use it should be put to after the war.

Sir [[Robert Menzies]], the Australian politician, became the Lord Warden in 1965 and visited the castle on an annual basis, staying in the flat there. [[Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother]] followed Menzies in 1978, initially visiting the castle from the Royal Yacht [[HMY Britannia]], but from 1986 onwards taking over the entire castle for three days each July. This required moving furniture, silverware and other furnishings from London and caused difficulties for English Heritage, who managed the property. Admiral of the Fleet [[Michael Boyce, Baron Boyce]], took up the post of Lord Warden in 2004. Since his death on 6 November 2022 the post was vacant until June 2024 when Sir [[George Zambellas]] became the current Lord Warden.

In the 21st century, the property is managed by [[English Heritage]], attracting 152,391 visitors in 2019. English Heritage carried out a £674,000 programme of improvements to the castle in 2015 intended to improve the visitor experience. The castle is protected under UK law as a [[scheduled monument]], while the surrounding gardens are protected with a grade II [[listed building|listing]].

==Architecture==

===Castle===

Walmer Castle retains most of its original 16th-century structure, with a tall [[keep]], across, at the centre, flanked by four rounded [[bastion]]s, one of which served as a [[gatehouse]], and a [[moat]], surrounded in turn by a [[curtain wall (fortification)|curtain wall]]. Its curved walls are thick. It was nearly identical to its sister castle at Sandown and was approximately across, covering . The historian [[John Rigby Hale|John Hale]] considered the original castle to form a transitional design between older medieval English designs and [[Star fort|newer Italian style]]s of defence.

The castle had three tiers of [[List of medieval and early modern gunpowder artillery|artillery]] – the heaviest and longest range weapons occupying the upper levels, including the keep – with a total of 39 firing positions, and 31 [[gunloop]]s in the basement for [[handgun]]s should close defence be required. The [[embrasure]]s in the walls were all widely splayed to provide the maximum possible space for the guns to operate and traverse, and the interior of the castle was designed with vents to allow the smoke from its guns to escape.

From the 18th century onwards, the interior of the castle was converted to provide accommodation for the Lord Wardens, almost all of which is now open to visitors. The castle is still entered through the ground floor of the gatehouse in the western bastion, which contains the original porter&#x27;s lodge. In the middle of the castle is the keep, which originally housed the Servants&#x27; Hall and now a set of tea rooms. In the southern bastion is a set of rooms which are reached through the Hall Room, originally built as gunners&#x27; lodgings in the 18th century and converted into the entrance hall to the castle in the 1930s. On the far side of the bastion are the Sackville and Willingdon Rooms, built in the 18th century; the Willingdon Room is now used as a museum for objects relating to William Pitt. The Lucas Room has been redecorated in a mid-19th century style and is used to present various items of Wellington memorabilia. The north and east bastions are filled in, providing solid foundations for the gun platforms above.

The second floor contains the Lord Warden&#x27;s private apartments in the west bastion and the western half of the keep. In the southern bastion is the Duke of Wellington&#x27;s Room and the Lucas Room, originally part of an apartment of rooms selected by William Pitt for his use, as they formed the warmest part of the castle. The corridor running across the castle through the keep was built by Pitt to link the north and south halves of the castle.

The Prince Consort&#x27;s and Queen Victoria&#x27;s rooms in the keep are named after their use during the royal visit of 1842, although their decoration today dates from the [[interwar period]]. The Dining Room, Drawing Room and Ante Room, which overlook the northern bastion, date from the 1730s, when the Duke of Dorset constructed them to form a private set of chambers. These rooms feature a range of pink and purple window glass, which tradition says was installed by the Earl of Liverpool to protect his wife&#x27;s eyesight; recent analysis shows that some of the pink-tinted glass dates from the 1730s, and discoloured naturally over time, while other panes were intentionally purchased around 1800 in these hues, but probably as status symbols and not for any medical purpose.

===Gardens===

The gardens of Walmer Castle date mainly from the 1790s and 1860s and comprise around of land, split evenly between formal ornamental gardens and [[Landscaped parkland|parkland]]. The main body of the gardens stretches away from the castle towards the north-west, and is made up of protected, well-drained, [[chalk]]-based soil, forming a maritime [[microclimate]].

The castle is approached through the castle [[meadow]], an area of open parkland, lined with [[Quercus ilex|Holm oaks]] planted in the 1860s, and is surrounded by the dry moat, now a garden dating from at least the 1850s and planted with trees and shrubs. Adjacent to the castle are the Queen Mother&#x27;s Garden and the [[kitchen garden]] and [[Greenhouse|glasshouses]]. The Queen Mother&#x27;s Garden was built by English Heritage as a 95th birthday gift for the then Lord Warden in 1997, the site having been originally part of the wider kitchen gardens, before being turned into a [[tennis court]] in the 1920s. Designed by [[Penelope Hobhouse]], the garden incorporates a pool, a viewing mound and a classical pavilion. The two glasshouses have been restored, functioning as cold greenhouses, while the remainder of the kitchen garden is planted with a mixture of vegetables, fruit trees and flowers.

The Broadwalk is the main axis of the gardens and separates the glasshouses from the Oval Lawn, planted with [[lime tree]]s and [[yew]]s. The Broadwalk is lined by the &quot;Cloud Hedge&quot;, a formal 19th-century yew hedge that grew out of control in the Second World War and was left in its current, undulating style. Two terraces in the middle of the garden, designed by [[William Masters (botanist)|William Masters]] in an [[Italian garden|Italianate]] style, separate the further half of the garden. On the other side are the paddock, planted with Holm oaks, and a curved belt of woodland of [[beech]], [[Fraxinus|ash]] and [[chestnut]] trees, badly damaged in the storms of [[Great Storm of 1987|1987]] and [[Burns&#x27; Day storm|1990]]. At the far end is the Glen, a woodland hollow formed from an old chalk quarry in the 19th century.

==See also==
* [[Castles in Great Britain and Ireland]]

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

*English Heritage visitors&#x27; page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2543161" start="0" end="13" title="Walmer Castle" label="Walmer Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="61" end="71" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551894" start="75" end="81" title="Walmer" label="Walmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="83" end="87" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267014" start="146" end="162" title="Device Forts" label="Device programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="211" end="228" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238161" start="271" end="286" title="The Downs (ship anchorage)" label="Downs anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q91165" start="323" end="327" title="keep" label="keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q81851" start="346" end="354" title="bastions" label="bastions"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="360" end="364" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716239" start="440" end="449" title="List of medieval and early modern gunpowder artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="459" end="468" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416497" start="526" end="533" title="Sandown Castle, Kent" label="Sandown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180981" start="539" end="543" title="Deal Castle" label="Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025332" start="689" end="713" title="Second English Civil War" label="Second English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="751" end="759" title="Cavalier" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="795" end="815" title="Roundheads" label="Parliamentary forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809853" start="919" end="950" title="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports" label="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="1042" end="1057" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="1125" end="1137" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="1143" end="1161" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q334053" start="1166" end="1180" title="Granville Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville" label="Lord Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="1305" end="1315" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110533" start="1390" end="1407" title="Ministry of Works (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q271878" start="1594" end="1605" title="Lord Curzon" label="Lord Curzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q788163" start="1650" end="1671" title="Mary Curzon, Baroness Curzon of Kedleston" label="his wife&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1705" end="1721" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="1736" end="1753" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="1755" end="1769" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="1774" end="1806" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="1936" end="1952" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q75619929" start="2205" end="2222" title="Penelope Hobhouse" label="Penelope Hobhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="2370" end="2376" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2385" end="2402" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="2443" end="2453" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="2469" end="2478" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2735" end="2742" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q82101" start="2797" end="2807" title="blockhouse" label="blockhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="2861" end="2867" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="3021" end="3034" title="Pope Paul III" label="Pope Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="3047" end="3052" title="Annulment" label="annul"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="3093" end="3112" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Catherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="3152" end="3181" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267014" start="3469" end="3475" title="Device Fort" label="device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180981" start="3667" end="3671" title="Deal Castle" label="Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416497" start="3676" end="3683" title="Sandown Castle, Kent" label="Sandown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238161" start="3712" end="3721" title="The Downs (ship anchorage)" label="the Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494482" start="3773" end="3786" title="Goodwin Sands" label="Goodwin Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011096" start="3808" end="3818" title="Deal, Kent" label="Deal Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="4162" end="4171" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="4577" end="4586" title="cast-iron" label="cast-iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716239" start="4587" end="4591" title="List of medieval and early modern gunpowder artillery" label="guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="4604" end="4612" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="4619" end="4623" title="bow and arrow" label="bows"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="4712" end="4718" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054101" start="4722" end="4730" title="culverin" label="culverin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255322" start="4737" end="4750" title="demi-culverin" label="demi-culverin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402901" start="4755" end="4760" title="Saker (cannon)" label="saker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865651" start="4764" end="4770" title="Minion (cannon)" label="minion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054134" start="4777" end="4783" title="Falconet (cannon)" label="falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="5163" end="5180" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="5212" end="5221" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="5226" end="5236" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025332" start="5370" end="5386" title="Second English Civil War" label="Second Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4079482" start="5658" end="5672" title="William Batten" label="William Batten"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871639" start="6337" end="6356" title="Battle of Maidstone" label="Battle of Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990254" start="6430" end="6444" title="Nathaniel Rich (soldier)" label="Nathaniel Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="7162" end="7172" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="7177" end="7199" title="Restoration (England)" label="restored to the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="7289" end="7308" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="7353" end="7361" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="7419" end="7430" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="7436" end="7452" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809853" start="7690" end="7721" title="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports" label="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q748895" start="7781" end="7795" title="Cinque Ports" label="five key ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q337505" start="7936" end="7972" title="Lionel Sackville, 1st Duke of Dorset" label="Lionel Sackville, 1st Duke of Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="8050" end="8062" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q610327" start="8277" end="8310" title="James Butler, 2nd Duke of Ormonde" label="James Butler, 2nd Duke of Ormonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809615" start="8315" end="8349" title="John Sidney, 6th Earl of Leicester" label="John Sidney, 6th Earl of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343394" start="8583" end="8619" title="Robert Darcy, 4th Earl of Holderness" label="Robert Darcy, 4th Earl of Holderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482068" start="8625" end="8660" title="Francis North, 1st Earl of Guilford" label="Francis North, 1st Earl of Guilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="8762" end="8776" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="8777" end="8801" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="8873" end="8883" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q73980" start="9145" end="9160" title="Hester Stanhope" label="Hester Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q624114" start="9312" end="9326" title="kitchen garden" label="kitchen garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070591" start="9428" end="9439" title="landscaping" label="landscaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="9480" end="9505" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q783186" start="9962" end="9968" title="lugger" label="lugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q312569" start="10131" end="10170" title="Robert Jenkinson, 2nd Earl of Liverpool" label="Robert Jenkinson, 2nd Earl of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="10592" end="10632" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="10680" end="10689" title="George IV" label="George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="11028" end="11036" title="Queen Victoria" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q333117" start="11476" end="11521" title="James Broun-Ramsay, 1st Marquess of Dalhousie" label="James Broun-Ramsay, 1st Marquess of Dalhousie"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="11575" end="11617" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q334053" start="12099" end="12142" title="Granville Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville" label="Granville Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="12206" end="12218" title="John Russell, 1st Earl Russell" label="Lord Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q176472" start="13174" end="13187" title="William Henry Smith (1825–1891)" label="William Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q622568" start="13686" end="13712" title="Secretary of State for War" label="Secretary of State for War"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="13730" end="13778" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q334429" start="13858" end="13880" title="Henry Wellesley, 3rd Duke of Wellington" label="3rd Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548243" start="13955" end="13969" title="Georgina Gascoyne-Cecil, Marchioness of Salisbury" label="Lady Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="14030" end="14040" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349678" start="14140" end="14155" title="Office of Works" label="Office of Works"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="258998" wikidata="Q315773" url="?curid=258998" title="Jan Guillou">
<text>Jan Oskar Sverre Lucien Henri Guillou (, ; born 17 January 1944) is a French-Swedish author and journalist. Guillou&#x27;s fame in Sweden was established during his time as an investigative journalist, most notably in 1973 when he and co-reporter Peter Bratt exposed a secret and illegal intelligence organization in Sweden, &quot;Informationsbyrån&quot; (IB). He is still active within journalism as a column writer for the Swedish evening tabloid &quot;Aftonbladet&quot;. Among his books are a series of spy fiction novels about a spy named Carl Hamilton, and a trilogy(+) of historical fiction novels about a Knight Templar, Arn Magnusson. He is the owner of one of the largest publishing companies in Sweden, Piratförlaget (&quot;Pirate Publishing&quot;), together with his wife, publisher Ann-Marie Skarp, and Liza Marklund.

== Life and career ==
Guillou was born in Södertälje, Stockholm County, Sweden. His Breton-Swedish father, Charles Guillou (1922–2020), came to Sweden in 1941 as the son of a member of the French Resistance and head of the offices of Free France in Stockholm, and later became a journalist for the French nationwide daily newspaper &quot;L&#x27;Équipe&quot;. His mother, Marianne (née &quot;Botolfsen&quot;; 1922–2013), was of Norwegian descent. Guillou acquired French citizenship at birth and became a Swedish citizen in 1975. When Guillou&#x27;s paternal grandfather was offered a position at the French embassy in Helsinki, Finland, his father decided to move with him and settled there. Guillou grew up with his mother and her new husband in Saltsjöbaden and Näsbypark outside of Stockholm.

===Education===
Guillou studied at Vasa Real in Stockholm but was expelled from the school because of his bad behaviour, including physical abuse, theft and blackmail. He then went on to study for two years at the Solbacka boarding school in Södermanland. Guillou has described his upbringing, with the continuous physical abuse from his sadistic stepfather and the harsh treatment at the Solbacka school, in the semi-autobiographical novel &quot;Ondskan&quot; (1981). According to the Swedish tabloid newspaper &quot;Expressen&quot;, his mother, his sister, his teachers and his friends from the Solbacka school have contested his account and called the book a hoax.

He finished his &quot;studentexamen&quot; (upper-secondary final examination) from the boarding school Viggbyholmsskolan, located in Viggbyholm, in 1964. Guillou then attended Stockholm University from 1964 to 1966.

===Family===
Guillou first lived together with author and translator Marina Stagh, with whom he has two children, Dan (born 1970) and Ann-Linn (born 1972) Guillou. His daughter Ann-Linn, a journalist and feminist commentator, lives in a civil union with Sandra Andersson, daughter of film director Roy Andersson.

He is now married to publisher Ann-Marie Skarp (born 1952), the daughter of colonel Åke Skarp and Märta (née Kugelberg). He has an apartment in the Östermalm district of Stockholm, where he has lived for most of his adult life. He also has a country residence in Flybo, Östhammar Municipality, northern Roslagen, where he lives when he writes his books.

===Employment===
Guillou started his career as a journalist writing for the magazine &quot;FIB aktuellt&quot; from 1966 to 1967. He later co-founded the &quot;Folket i Bild/Kulturfront&quot; magazine, at which he worked from 1972 until 1977. He currently writes a column for &quot;Aftonbladet&quot; and also comments occasionally in other news outlets on current events usually taking the left-wing and the Anti-American side, particularly the conflicts in the Middle East and miscellaneous domestic issues, including the United States&#x27; War on Terrorism, Israeli policy towards the Palestinians, the Swedish Security Service, Swedish courtroom procedures and public inquiries.

Guillou has served as the host of several television programmes: &quot;Magazinet&quot; (1981–1984), &quot;Rekordmagazinet&quot; (last years together with Göran Skytte) and &quot;Grabbarna på Fagerhult&quot; (together with Pär Lorentzon and Leif G. W. Persson), all shown on Sveriges Television.

He co-authored the crime/drama television series &quot;Talismanen&quot; (TV4, 2003). In the series, Guillou and co-author Henning Mankell both play the roles of themselves. Guillou also authored and narrated the history documentary series &quot;Arns rike&quot; (TV4, 2004) and &quot;Häxornas tid&quot; (TV4, 2005).

He was awarded the Lenin Award (Sweden) in 2014, and at the prize ceremony Cecilia Cervin said this about him: &quot;You have remained &quot;cheeky&quot;, or refractory as Jan Myrdal usually calls it, i.e., disobedient, defiant, resilient, through a long writing life. You have achieved a lot with it and that is why we pay tribute to you today.&quot;

== The IB affair ==
In 1973, &quot;Folket i Bild/Kulturfront&quot;, a left-wing magazine, published a series of articles written by Guillou and Peter Bratt, revealing a Swedish secret intelligence agency called &quot;Informationsbyrån&quot; (&quot;The Information Bureau&quot; or &quot;IB&quot; for short). The articles, based on information initially furnished by former IB employee Håkan Isacson, described the IB as a secret organization that gathered information on Swedish communists and others deemed to be &quot;security risks&quot;. The organization operated outside of the framework of the defense and ordinary intelligence, and was invisible in terms of state budget allocations. The articles in &quot;Folket i Bild/Kulturfront&quot; accused the IB staff of being engaged in alleged murder, break-ins, wiretapping against foreign embassies in Sweden and spying abroad.

The exposure of the IB in the magazine, which included headshots with names and social security numbers of some of the alleged staff published under the headline &quot;Spies&quot;, led to a major domestic political scandal known as the &quot;IB affair&quot; (&quot;IB-affären&quot;). The activities ascribed to this secret outfit and its alleged ties to the Swedish Social Democratic Party were denied by Prime Minister Olof Palme, Defense Minister Sven Andersson and the Supreme Commander of the Swedish Armed Forces, General Stig Synnergren. However, later investigations by various journalists and by a public commissions, as well as autobiographies by the persons involved, have confirmed some of the activities described by Bratt and Guillou. In 2002, the public commission published a 3,000-page report where research about the IB affair was included.

Guillou, Peter Bratt and Håkan Isacson were all arrested, tried &quot;in camera&quot; (behind closed doors) and convicted of espionage. According to Bratt, the verdict required some stretching of established judicial practice on the part of the court since none of them were accused of having acted in collusion with a foreign power. After one appeal Guillou&#x27;s sentence was reduced from one year to 10 months. Guillou and Bratt served part of their sentence in solitary cells. Guillou was kept first at Långholmen Prison in central Stockholm and later at Österåker Prison north of the capital.

==The CIA affair==

In 1976, two employees of Sveriges Radio contacted Guillou at &quot;Folket i Bild/Kulturfront&quot; with a story of a colleague that had been recruited by a CIA officer in Stockholm. They had earlier been turned down by a major newspaper, and now asked the journalist that had exposed IB if he could publish the story. The three worked out a scenario where the CIA recruiter could be legally accused of espionage, and instructed the recruit to collect evidence thereof. Unbelievably enough, the CIA officer agreed to give his spy written instructions of what information to retrieve, so the informal counter-intelligence group had only to stockpile these, take photographs of the two spies meeting, and discuss how much they needed before the final exposure would be made.

The recruited spy was at a later meeting instructed to go to Angola with orders to get information about both military and political conditions. The legally experienced within the group advised their double agent not to agree, but he went anyway. Afterwards, the group assembled to write a false report about the conditions in the civil war-ridden country. Before the three could finalize the entire story for publishing, the spy went to Angola a second time, now with additional tasks on his instruction sheet.

After the spy had returned to Sweden, Guillou in advance placed the article in a major newspaper and with a television news editor. He also contacted the Foreign Department in order to prevent official denials, and discuss the repercussions of the espionage exposure. The published article was a true &#x27;scoop&#x27;, and the CIA spy handler was ordered to leave Sweden together with a colleague. The spy himself avoided prosecution thanks to the article&#x27;s portrayal of him as a rather heroic journalist, exposing foreign illegal operations to the public. Afterwards, both he and Guillou were interrogated by the Swedish Security Service, but for assumed political reasons, no criminal charges were made.

==Swedish tabloid accusation==
During a five-year period starting in 1967, Guillou had a series of meetings with KGB representatives. In October 2009, the Swedish news tabloid &quot;Expressen&quot; told this story under the headline &quot;Guillou secret agent for Soviet Union&quot;. The Swedish security service Säpo at the time knew of the contacts from Guillou&#x27;s colleague Arne Lemberg, who suspected the activities could be illegal.

According to Guillou, his intention was to expose the KGB espionage journalistically through a scoop based on the activities he was being exposed to and the discussions he had with his KGB contact Jevgenij Gergel. One of the journalists who wrote the articles later commented that he believed Guillou&#x27;s explanation, &quot;I do not doubt one word of what he has said&quot;.

Guillou received payment from KGB for written reports on Swedish politics, and &quot;Expressen&quot; points to this fact when defending its choice to refer to Guillou as a secret agent. Former KGB Colonel and defector Sergey Tretyakov characterised Guillou as a &quot;classic agent&quot;. &quot;Because he accepted money and, worst of all, signed receipts, there&#x27;s no question about it. The handling of him could be a textbook example at the KGB school in Moscow&quot;. Espionage prosecutor Tomas Lindstrand wrote to PON that &quot;Agent and spy are not synonymous ideas ... an agent does not have to commit acts of espionage. An agent can perform assignments for his handler without crossing the line to what is prosecutable.&quot;

Säpo at the time was skeptical towards Lemberg&#x27;s report and commented that it found nothing illegal in a newspaper man writing an article based on public information and delivering it to Jevgenij Gergel.

The public Ombudsman of the Swedish Press, Yrsa Stenius, later concluded that &quot;Expressen&quot; presentation of facts had been an example of irresponsible journalism. According to her, &quot;Expressen&quot; had not backed up its frontpage assertion, that &quot;Jan Guillou [was a] Secret Soviet Agent&quot;, despite the fact that this had caused &quot;massive&quot; damage to Guillou&#x27;s reputation. Stenius&#x27;s conclusion caused controversy, and a number of newspaper leader writers demanded that she resign her post.

On 1 June 2010, the Swedish Press Council [PON] acquitted &quot;Expressen&quot; of wrongdoing. &quot;Expressen&quot; denies having claimed that Guillou was guilty of the crime of &quot;espionage&quot;, and PON agrees. The frontpage and headline assertions (&quot;Guillou Secret Soviet Agent&quot;, &quot;Confesses KGB mission&quot;, &quot;Recruited by chief of espionage&quot;) according to PON &quot;do not have well defined meanings&quot;. PON was also satisfied that the factual details of the story were fully covered in the text of the articles which also included Guillou&#x27;s own account of the events.

== Political views ==
During the 1960s and early 1970s, Guillou was associated with the Maoist Clarté association. He was also a member of the Communist Party of Sweden (formerly known as the Communist League Marxists-Leninists), a minor Maoist party active mainly during the 1970s, for six months until he was expelled for refusing to pay the monthly member fee while he was living abroad. Today, he no longer considers himself a communist or a Maoist, but describes himself as socialist with a position on the political spectrum &quot;to the left of the Left Party&quot; (a Swedish party formerly known as &quot;The Left Party, the Communists&quot;).

===On the Middle East===
Guillou is known for his support of the Palestinian people, and he has over the years consistently criticized Israel. In 1976, he wrote, &quot;Zionism is in its foundation racist because the state of Israel is built upon an apartheid system, exactly like South Africa&quot;. He has repeatedly taken the stance that Israel is an &quot;apartheid state&quot;. In an article published in &quot;Svenska Dagbladet&quot; in 1977, Guillou wrote, &quot;I&#x27;m an optimist, I believe that Israel will cease to exist prior to Armageddon&quot;.

The book &quot;Irak – det nya Arabien&quot; (&quot;Iraq – The New Arabia&quot;), written by Guillou and his then-wife Marina Stagh, was published in 1977. In the book, which deals with Iraq under the Baath Party before Saddam Hussein&#x27;s presidency, it is argued that the &quot;European idea of Iraq as a particularly violent country&quot; is simply &quot;a blend of political propaganda and racist fantasies&quot; (p. 91). Guillou and Stagh did the research for the book in 1975 and they assert that, at this time, &quot;the Baath regime is clearly popular and among the most stable in the Arab World&quot; (pp. 168–169), the freedom of the press enjoyed in Iraq was more extensive than in most other countries in the world (p. 239) and it would come as no surprise to the authors if &quot;well before the year 2000, Iraq will have surpassed European countries in living standards&quot; (p. 174).

The conditions at the Abu Ghraib prison, which Guillou claims to have visited as the first Western journalist, are described as excellent and even &quot;better than Swedish prisons&quot; (pp. 249–250). The book was published two years before Saddam Hussein became President of Iraq in 1979. In his 2009 autobiography, &quot;Ordets makt och vanmakt&quot; (&quot;The Power and Powerlessness of the Word&quot;), Guillou states that quotes such as the ones cited could be considered true back then. He does however also write that Saddam Hussein, who at the time of publishing was the vice-president under President Ahmed Hassan Al Bakr, was the actual leader of Iraq.

===On the United States===
Immediately following the September 11 attacks, Guillou caused controversy when he walked out of the Göteborg Book Fair in the midst of the three minutes of silence observed throughout Europe to honour the victims of the attacks. In an article in &quot;Aftonbladet&quot;, Guillou argued that the event was an act of hypocrisy, stating that &quot;the U.S. is the great mass murderer of our time. The wars against Vietnam and its nearby countries alone claimed four million lives. Without a minute of silence in Sweden&quot;. He also criticised those who said that the attacks were &quot;an attack on us all&quot; by stating that the attacks were only &quot;an attack on U.S. imperialism&quot;.

He labeled the media&#x27;s reaction to the 2006 transatlantic aircraft plot and the measures taken to avoid havoc at the airports unnecessary since the suspects had already been caught. He argued that the media coverage was sensationalist and driven by profit considerations, and that the British government used the occasion to give an impression of success in the War on Terrorism. Pointing out that no explosives had been found, he wrote in a column headlined &quot;Don&#x27;t believe anything written about al-Qaida&quot; that the reactions had resulted in a victimization of the Muslim community.

When the film &quot;Evil&quot; (2003), an adaption of Guillou&#x27;s autobiographical novel from 1981, was nominated for an Academy Award in 2003 Guillou was still listed as a terrorist by the US government, because of the IB affair, but managed to get a visa for attending the Academy Award ceremony. However, the film&#x27;s director Mikael Håfström had given Guillou&#x27;s ticket to his own wife and Guillou was not able to attend the ceremony.

===On other issues ===
Ever since the IB affair and the resulting prison sentence for espionage in 1973, Guillou has been a strong critic of the Swedish Security Service. According to Guillou, the Security Service has listed him as a terrorist, which has led to problems with security officials when visiting other countries.

In recent years, Guillou has repeatedly criticised some people and groups within the Swedish radical feminist movement. However, he rejects being called an &quot;antifeminist&quot;.

Guillou has also attracted controversy over his views on the history of homosexuality. He has said that &quot;homosexuality is more of a vogue phenomenon than something you&#x27;re born into. It&#x27;s something that has come and gone through history&quot; and that &quot;homosexuality didn&#x27;t exist in the 17th century&quot;.

== Books ==
=== Early novels ===
Guillou&#x27;s first novel &quot;Om kriget kommer (If the War Comes)&quot; was published in 1971. It&#x27;s a political spy novel told in the form of a pseudo-documentary about how Sweden in the early 1970s launches a military invasion of South Africa and Rhodesia to overthrow the white apartheid regimes. The main character is the Swedish military spy Karl Aronovitch who prepares the invasion together with African politicians and guerillas.

His second novel, &quot;Det stora avslöjandet (The Big Disclosure)&quot;, was written in prison (see the IB affair) and was published in 1974. The book is intended as a comedy and is a semi-autobiographical novel about a young journalist writing for men&#x27;s magazines in Stockholm in the early 1970s. The author&#x27;s alter ego created for the novel is named Erik Ponti, a character that would return in several of his later novels.

His third novel, &quot;Ondskan&quot; (&quot;The Evil&quot;), was published in 1981, and is heavily autobiographical in depicting the author&#x27;s teenage experience of an abusive step-father and a sadistic upperclass boarding school. As in his previous novel, the character Erik Ponti functions as his fictional alter ego. The movie adaption &quot;Evil&quot; in 2003 was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film at the 76th Academy Awards and won three Swedish Guldbagge Awards including Best Film.

=== Hamilton ===

In 1986 Guillou published &quot;Coq Rouge&quot;, the first novel about his fictional Swedish military spy Carl Hamilton. The idea to write a Swedish spy novel had first come to him in prison in 1974 (see the IB affair), but the writing was put on hold until the mid 80&#x27;s when he was inspired to the plot of the novel when encountering the Norwegian security police in Oslo (an encounter that is featured in the novel where it happens to his alter ego Erik Ponti). The novel became a bestseller and nine more novels about Hamilton followed, with the series ending with its tenth title in 1995.

The main character Carl Hamilton is a Swedish navy officer with Navy SEAL and FBI training, having been secretly recruited by Sweden&#x27;s military intelligence while doing compulsory military service. The plot follows Hamilton&#x27;s career as a field operator for Sweden&#x27;s security police and military intelligence agency, with various missions of investigating murder, infiltrating terrorist groups, rescuing hostages in foreign countries and committing assassinations, with a heavy focus on the world of politics and journalism. Partly because of Hamilton&#x27;s radical leftist background he receives the codename Coq Rouge, which was used as the title for the original series.

Guillou stated that the tenth novel, &quot;En medborgare höjd över varje misstanke&quot; (1995), was the last book of the series and that it was impossible for Hamilton to return. However, when he was working on the novel &quot;Madame Terror&quot; ten years later, he realised that he needed Hamilton to make the plot work. After Hamilton had made his return, he also appears in the novel &quot;Men inte om det gäller din dotter&quot;.

;Film and TV adaptations based on Hamilton
* &quot;Codename Coq Rouge&quot;, portrayed by Stellan Skarsgård (1989)
* &quot;Förhöret&quot;, portrayed by Stellan Skarsgård (television film 1989) (English translation: The Interrogation)
* &quot;The Democratic Terrorist&quot; (TV series), with Humberto López y Guerra (1989)
* &quot;Enemy&#x27;s Enemy&quot;, portrayed by Peter Haber (television miniseries 1990)
* &quot;The Democratic Terrorist&quot; (film), portrayed by Stellan Skarsgård (1992)
* &quot;Vendetta&quot;, portrayed by Stefan Sauk (movie 1995, extended television miniseries 1996)
* &quot;Tribunal&quot;, portrayed by Stefan Sauk (television film, 1995)
* &quot;Hamilton&quot;, portrayed by Peter Stormare (movie 1998, extended television miniseries 2001)
* &quot;Hamilton – I nationens intresse&quot;, portrayed by Mikael Persbrandt (2012)
* &quot;Hamilton – Men inte om det gäller din dotter&quot;, portrayed by Mikael Persbrandt (2012)
* &quot;Agent Hamilton&quot; portrayed by Jakob Oftebro (2020)
The Carl Hamilton who appears in the movies and TV series made between 1989 and 1998 (Stellan Skarsgård, Peter Haber, Stefan Sauk and Peter Stormare) is based on the novels, with minor changes.

The Carl Hamilton who appears in the movies Hamilton – &quot;I nationens intresse&quot; (2011) and &quot;Hamilton – Men inte om det gäller din dotter&quot; (2012), played by Mikael Persbrandt, is only loosely based on the character from the novel and does not follow the original story line or setting, and is mostly a new character moved into the 2010s.

The Carl Hamilton who appears in the TV series &quot;Hamilton&quot; (2020), played by Jakob Oftebro, is entirely different from the original story, both younger and moved to the 2020s.

=== Crusades trilogy ===
After finishing the Hamilton series in 1995, Guillou began writing a medieval trilogy about the Crusades. The intent was to depict the increasing modern day tensions between the Western world and the Arab world, by telling about the previous Holy War between Christianity and Islam. The main character of the trilogy is Arn Magnusson, a fictional Swedish nobleman in the 12th century who is forced to become a Knight Templar in Palestine during the Crusades. Arn becomes a witness as well as a catalyst to many important historical events, both in his homeland of Västra Götaland and in the Holy Land. Apart from depicting the Crusades, the novels also depict the early formation of Sweden.

The &quot;Crusades Trilogy&quot; consists of the following novels:
*&quot;The Road to Jerusalem&quot;, original Swedish title &quot;Vägen till Jerusalem&quot; (1998)
*&quot;The Knight Templar&quot;, original Swedish title &quot;Tempelriddaren&quot; (1999), 
*&quot;The Kingdom at the End of the Road&quot;, original Swedish title &quot;Riket vid vägens slut&quot; (2000)

As a follow-up to the trilogy Guillou also wrote a fourth medieval novel entitled &quot;The Heritage of Arn,&quot; original Swedish title &quot;Arvet efter Arn&quot; (2001) about Birger Jarl, a mighty ruler during the formation of Sweden and supposed founder of Stockholm. In Guillou&#x27;s fictional universe, Birger Jarl is the grandson of Arn Magnusson.

=== The War on Terror ===
In 2004 Guillou returned to contemporary crime novels meant to depict the world of Western politics and law in the wake of 9/11 and the War on Terror, mainly focusing on the new character Eva Johnsén-Tanguy, a high ranking police officer who comes to work within the Swedish security service. She is introduced in &quot;Tjuvarnas marknad&quot; (&quot;Market of Thieves&quot;) in 2004, and her story continues in &quot;Fienden inom oss&quot; (&quot;The Enemy Within Us&quot;) in 2007 and &quot;Men inte om det gäller din dotter&quot; (&quot;But Not If It Concerns Your Daughter&quot;) in 2008, a novel which also saw the return of Carl Hamilton.

===The Great Century===
In 2011 Guillou published the first part of a new series meant to depict the 20th century, from 1901 to 2001. In his own words the project is to be his last, and also his biggest and his best, telling the story of humanity&#x27;s greatest, bloodiest and most cruel century. The series follows the family Lauritzen, starting in the late 19th century when three brothers from a poor fishing village in Norway are sent to Dresden in Germany to become engineers. The series then continue with their descendants through the 20th century, and each novel is meant to cover one decade. The plot includes ambitious engineering projects in Scandinavia and Africa, colonialism, communities of artists, underground resistance and espionage during the world wars, the nuclear threat, the impact of American culture on Sweden, the leftist movement in the &#x27;60s and &#x27;70s, Vietnam protests, economy and politics and law. The first three novels are mainly set in Norway, Germany, Eastern Africa and Britain, while the setting moves to Sweden with the fourth novel.

* &quot;Brobyggarna&quot; (&quot;The Bridge Builders&quot;) (2011)
* &quot;Dandy&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Mellan rött och svart&quot; (&quot;Between Red and Black&quot;) (2013)
* &quot;Att inte vilja se&quot; (&quot;Not Wanting to See&quot;) (2014)
* &quot;Blå stjärnan&quot; (&quot;The Blue Star&quot;) (2015)
* &quot;Äkta amerikanska jeans&quot; (&quot;Real American Jeans&quot;) (2016)
* &quot;1968&quot; (2017)
* &quot;De som dödar drömmar sover aldrig&quot; (&quot;Those Who Kill Dreams Never Sleep&quot;) (2018)
* &quot;Den andra dödssynden&quot; (&quot;The Second Deadly Sin&quot;) (2019)
* &quot;Slutet på historien&quot; (&quot;The End of the Story&quot;) (2020)

== Awards and honours ==
* 1984 – Stora Journalistpriset (&quot;Great Journalist Award&quot;), for his writings in the Keith Cederholm-case
* 1984 – Aftonbladets TV-pris (&quot;Aftonbladet TV Award&quot;), in the category &quot;Male Television Person of the Year&quot;
* 1988 – Bästa svenska kriminalroman (&quot;Best Swedish Crime Novel&quot;) from the Swedish Academy of Crime Writers, for &quot;I nationens intresse&quot;
* 1990 – Prix France Culture (&quot;France Culture Award&quot;) from France Culture, for &quot;Ondskan&quot; (awarded as best novel translated into French)
* 1998 – Årets författare (&quot;Author of the Year&quot;) from the Swedish Union of Local Government Officers
* 2000 – Årets bok (&quot;Book of the Year&quot;) from Månadens Bok, for &quot;Riket vid vägens slut&quot;
* 2014 – The Lenin Award

Guillou was also chairman of the Swedish Publicists&#x27; Association (&quot;Publicistklubben&quot;) from 2000 to 2004.

== References ==
== External links ==

*Piratförlaget – Jan Guillou , presentation at book publisher&#x27;s website
*Jan Guillou&#x27;s column in &quot;Aftonbladet&quot; 
*The Salomonsson Agency</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q315773" start="0" end="37" title="Jan Guillou" label="Jan Oskar Sverre Lucien Henri Guillou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585295" start="247" end="258" title="Peter Bratt" label="Peter Bratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q946526" start="331" end="348" title="Informationsbyrån" label="Informationsbyrån"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="441" end="448" title="Tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q389458" start="455" end="466" title="Aftonbladet" label="Aftonbladet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20664331" start="506" end="517" title="spy fiction" label="spy fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q23044693" start="543" end="556" title="Carl Hamilton (fictional character)" label="Carl Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="578" end="596" title="historical fiction" label="historical fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="612" end="626" title="Knight Templar" label="Knight Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364144" start="628" end="641" title="Arn Magnusson" label="Arn Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="713" end="726" title="Piratförlaget" label="Piratförlaget"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="794" end="809" title="Ann-Marie Skarp" label="Ann-Marie Skarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q236660" start="815" end="828" title="Liza Marklund" label="Liza Marklund"/>
<link wikidata="Q26518" start="873" end="883" title="Södertälje" label="Södertälje"/>
<link wikidata="Q104231" start="885" end="901" title="Stockholm County" label="Stockholm County"/>
<link wikidata="Q309197" start="915" end="921" title="Bretons" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="1020" end="1037" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="1065" end="1076" title="Free France" label="Free France"/>
<link wikidata="Q815748" start="1169" end="1182" title="L&amp;#x27;Équipe" label="L&amp;#x27;Équipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="1258" end="1267" title="Norwegians" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164879" start="1294" end="1312" title="French citizenship" label="French citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q13626537" start="1335" end="1350" title="Swedish citizen" label="Swedish citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360970" start="1431" end="1445" title="French embassy" label="French embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="1449" end="1457" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q990771" start="1578" end="1590" title="Saltsjöbaden" label="Saltsjöbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071399" start="1595" end="1604" title="Näsbypark" label="Näsbypark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1663" end="1672" title="Vasa Real" label="Vasa Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827132" start="1759" end="1773" title="physical abuse" label="physical abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34284" start="1785" end="1794" title="blackmail" label="blackmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="1851" end="1866" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285927" start="1966" end="1974" title="Sadistic personality disorder" label="sadistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800524" start="2075" end="2082" title="Ondskan (novel)" label="Ondskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q971383" start="2146" end="2155" title="Expressen" label="Expressen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972594" start="2319" end="2332" title="studentexamen" label="studentexamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928879" start="2430" end="2440" title="Viggbyholm" label="Viggbyholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q221645" start="2473" end="2493" title="Stockholm University" label="Stockholm University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="2751" end="2762" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q703513" start="2812" end="2825" title="Roy Andersson" label="Roy Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q298489" start="2976" end="2985" title="Östermalm" label="Östermalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="2998" end="3007" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q59093" start="3098" end="3120" title="Östhammar Municipality" label="Östhammar Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515626" start="3131" end="3139" title="Roslagen" label="Roslagen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3274" end="3286" title="FIB aktuellt" label="FIB aktuellt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435336" start="3342" end="3367" title="Folket i Bild/Kulturfront" label="Folket i Bild/Kulturfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q389458" start="3464" end="3475" title="Aftonbladet" label="Aftonbladet"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="3725" end="3741" title="War on Terrorism" label="War on Terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="3770" end="3782" title="Palestinians" label="Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331110" start="3788" end="3812" title="Swedish Security Service" label="Swedish Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3937" end="3946" title="Magazinet (television programme)" label="Magazinet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3972" end="3987" title="Rekordmagazinet" label="Rekordmagazinet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4020" end="4032" title="Göran Skytte" label="Göran Skytte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4044" end="4066" title="Grabbarna på Fagerhult" label="Grabbarna på Fagerhult"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4088" end="4101" title="Pär Lorentzon" label="Pär Lorentzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q582603" start="4106" end="4124" title="Leif G. W. Persson" label="Leif G. W. Persson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215363" start="4140" end="4159" title="Sveriges Television" label="Sveriges Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q786846" start="4217" end="4227" title="Talismanen" label="Talismanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466723" start="4235" end="4238" title="TV4 (Sweden)" label="TV4"/>
<link wikidata="Q193346" start="4284" end="4299" title="Henning Mankell" label="Henning Mankell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4407" end="4416" title="Arns rike" label="Arns rike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4445" end="4457" title="Häxornas tid" label="Häxornas tid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10539512" start="4497" end="4517" title="Lenin Award (Sweden)" label="Lenin Award (Sweden)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435336" start="4866" end="4891" title="Folket i Bild/Kulturfront" label="Folket i Bild/Kulturfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585295" start="4975" end="4986" title="Peter Bratt" label="Peter Bratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q946526" start="5048" end="5065" title="Informationsbyrån" label="Informationsbyrån"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858232" start="5766" end="5775" title="headshots" label="headshots"/>
<link wikidata="Q105112" start="6069" end="6100" title="Swedish Social Democratic Party" label="Swedish Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q53713" start="6131" end="6141" title="Olof Palme" label="Olof Palme"/>
<link wikidata="Q953952" start="6160" end="6174" title="Sven Andersson (politician)" label="Sven Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514364" start="6183" end="6228" title="Supreme Commander of the Swedish Armed Forces" label="Supreme Commander of the Swedish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200650" start="6238" end="6253" title="Stig Synnergren" label="Stig Synnergren"/>
<link wikidata="Q321568" start="6640" end="6649" title="in camera" label="in camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010868" start="7036" end="7050" title="solitude" label="solitary cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710909" start="7078" end="7095" title="Långholmen Prison" label="Långholmen Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079075" start="7130" end="7146" title="Österåker Prison" label="Österåker Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="7347" end="7350" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="9303" end="9306" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q971383" start="9372" end="9381" title="Expressen" label="Expressen"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="9437" end="9449" title="secret agent" label="secret agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="10184" end="10196" title="secret agent" label="secret agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743475" start="10230" end="10246" title="Sergei Tretyakov (intelligence officer)" label="Sergey Tretyakov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10549" end="10554" title="Espionage#Agents in espionage" label="Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="10559" end="10562" title="spy" label="spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q169180" start="10972" end="10981" title="Ombudsman" label="Ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980339" start="11004" end="11016" title="Yrsa Stenius" label="Yrsa Stenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="12192" end="12198" title="Maoist" label="Maoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778768" start="12199" end="12205" title="Swedish Clarté League" label="Clarté"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787940" start="12247" end="12272" title="Communist League Marxist-Leninists (Sweden)" label="Communist Party of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q210918" start="12616" end="12634" title="political spectrum" label="political spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q110837" start="12660" end="12670" title="Swedish Left Party" label="Left Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="12823" end="12841" title="Palestinian people" label="Palestinian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="12926" end="12933" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="12955" end="12961" title="racist" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630220" start="12970" end="13023" title="Israel and apartheid" label="the state of Israel is built upon an apartheid system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="13038" end="13050" title="Apartheid" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504847" start="13173" end="13190" title="Svenska Dagbladet" label="Svenska Dagbladet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193151" start="13300" end="13310" title="Armageddon" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179933" start="13519" end="13530" title="Baath Party" label="Baath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="13913" end="13923" title="Arab World" label="Arab World"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="13949" end="13969" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="14187" end="14203" title="living standards" label="living standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q334740" start="14243" end="14260" title="Abu Ghraib prison" label="Abu Ghraib prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q238046" start="14833" end="14853" title="Ahmed Hassan Al Bakr" label="Ahmed Hassan Al Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="14940" end="14960" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q891200" start="15015" end="15033" title="Göteborg Book Fair" label="Göteborg Book Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068056" start="15060" end="15078" title="minutes of silence" label="minutes of silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q389458" start="15167" end="15178" title="Aftonbladet" label="Aftonbladet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982121" start="15365" end="15372" title="Vietnam War casualties" label="claimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="15583" end="15599" title="U.S. imperialism" label="U.S. imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q918162" start="15652" end="15684" title="2006 transatlantic aircraft plot" label="2006 transatlantic aircraft plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="15975" end="15988" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="16120" end="16128" title="al-Qaida" label="al-Qaida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382421" start="16232" end="16236" title="Evil (2003 film)" label="Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="16336" end="16349" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q946526" start="16435" end="16444" title="IB affair" label="IB affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q450630" start="16548" end="16563" title="Mikael Håfström" label="Mikael Håfström"/>
<link wikidata="Q946526" start="16700" end="16709" title="IB affair" label="IB affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914207" start="17082" end="17098" title="radical feminist" label="radical feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q575220" start="17151" end="17163" title="antifeminist" label="antifeminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8812380" start="17689" end="17707" title="pseudo-documentary" label="pseudo-documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="17718" end="17724" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="17776" end="17788" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="17793" end="17801" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="17825" end="17834" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q946526" start="18088" end="18097" title="IB affair" label="IB affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q201662" start="18305" end="18314" title="alter ego" label="alter ego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800524" start="18444" end="18451" title="Ondskan (book)" label="Ondskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="18639" end="18654" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382421" start="18770" end="18774" title="Evil (2003 film)" label="Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="18811" end="18855" title="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q458646" start="18863" end="18882" title="76th Academy Awards" label="76th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359606" start="18905" end="18920" title="Guldbagge Award" label="Guldbagge Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q382371" start="18932" end="18941" title="Guldbagge Award for Best Film" label="Best Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q23044693" start="19068" end="19081" title="Carl Hamilton (fictional character)" label="Carl Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q946526" start="19170" end="19179" title="IB affair" label="IB affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="19335" end="19339" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="19625" end="19634" title="Navy SEAL" label="Navy SEAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="19639" end="19642" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q47913" start="19701" end="19722" title="Intelligence agency" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23044693" start="20186" end="20195" title="Coq Rouge" label="Coq Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707933" start="20739" end="20757" title="Codename Coq Rouge" label="Codename Coq Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q208667" start="20778" end="20795" title="Stellan Skarsgård" label="Stellan Skarsgård"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20811" end="20819" title="Förhöret (film)" label="Förhöret"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20924" end="20972" title="The Democratic Terrorist (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Democratic Terrorist&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20979" end="21002" title="Humberto López y Guerra" label="Humberto López y Guerra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21018" end="21036" title="Enemy&amp;#x27;s Enemy (miniseries)" label="Enemy&amp;#x27;s Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437612" start="21057" end="21068" title="Peter Haber" label="Peter Haber"/>
<link wikidata="Q23044693" start="21100" end="21143" title="The Democratic Terrorist" label="&amp;quot;The Democratic Terrorist&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237232" start="21191" end="21199" title="Vendetta (1995 film)" label="Vendetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095085" start="21220" end="21231" title="Stefan Sauk" label="Stefan Sauk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21290" end="21298" title="Tribunal (film)" label="Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115105" start="21363" end="21371" title="Hamilton (1998 film)" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q295148" start="21392" end="21406" title="Peter Stormare" label="Peter Stormare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21465" end="21496" title="Hamilton – I nationens intresse (film)" label="Hamilton – I nationens intresse"/>
<link wikidata="Q723674" start="21517" end="21534" title="Mikael Persbrandt" label="Mikael Persbrandt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21550" end="21594" title="Hamilton – I nationens intresse (film)" label="Hamilton – Men inte om det gäller din dotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q723674" start="21615" end="21632" title="Mikael Persbrandt" label="Mikael Persbrandt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21648" end="21662" title="Agent Hamilton (series)" label="Agent Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11977902" start="21682" end="21695" title="Jakob Oftebro" label="Jakob Oftebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q23044693" start="22485" end="22493" title="Coq Rouge" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364144" start="22534" end="22550" title="The Knight Templar (Crusades trilogy)" label="medieval trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="22561" end="22569" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827102" start="22707" end="22715" title="Holy War" label="Holy War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="22724" end="22736" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="22741" end="22746" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="22875" end="22889" title="Knight Templar" label="Knight Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="22893" end="22902" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279808" start="23231" end="23252" title="The Road to Jerusalem" label="The Road to Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278822" start="23330" end="23348" title="The Knight Templar" label="The Knight Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278839" start="23422" end="23456" title="The Kingdom at the End of the Road" label="The Kingdom at the End of the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566539" start="23617" end="23636" title="The Heritage of Arn" label="The Heritage of Arn"/>
<link wikidata="Q316828" start="23708" end="23719" title="Birger Jarl" label="Birger Jarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="24036" end="24040" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="24049" end="24062" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="25002" end="25009" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="25013" end="25020" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436850" start="26344" end="26366" title="Stora Journalistpriset" label="Stora Journalistpriset"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26429" end="26444" title="Keith Cederholm" label="Keith Cederholm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26459" end="26479" title="Aftonbladets TV-pris" label="Aftonbladets TV-pris"/>
<link wikidata="Q389458" start="26487" end="26498" title="Aftonbladet" label="Aftonbladet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26588" end="26615" title="Bästa svenska kriminalroman" label="Bästa svenska kriminalroman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26664" end="26696" title="Swedish Academy of Crime Writers" label="Swedish Academy of Crime Writers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26708" end="26728" title="I nationens intresse" label="I nationens intresse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404598" start="26744" end="26763" title="Prix France Culture" label="Prix France Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q19908" start="26804" end="26818" title="France Culture" label="France Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800524" start="26830" end="26837" title="Ondskan (novel)" label="Ondskan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26900" end="26916" title="Årets författare" label="Årets författare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654898" start="26959" end="27001" title="Swedish Union of Local Government Officers" label="Swedish Union of Local Government Officers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27011" end="27020" title="Årets bok" label="Årets bok"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27057" end="27069" title="Månadens Bok" label="Månadens Bok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278839" start="27081" end="27102" title="Riket vid vägens slut" label="Riket vid vägens slut"/>
<link wikidata="Q10539512" start="27118" end="27133" title="Lenin Award (Sweden)" label="The Lenin Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116395" start="27168" end="27204" title="Swedish Publicists&amp;#x27; Association" label="Swedish Publicists&amp;#x27; Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="259000" wikidata="Q15946488" url="?curid=259000" title="Scottish church">
<text>The Scottish church may refer to:

*Church of Scotland, a Presbyterian denomiation
*Scottish Episcopal Church
*Roman Catholic Church in Scotland

==See also==
* Christianity in Scotland
* British church (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15946488" start="4" end="19" title="Scottish church" label="Scottish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="36" end="54" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="84" end="109" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Scottish Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051653" start="111" end="144" title="Roman Catholic Church in Scotland" label="Roman Catholic Church in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q777707" start="161" end="185" title="Christianity in Scotland" label="Christianity in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q110375483" start="188" end="219" title="British church (disambiguation)" label="British church (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="259001" wikidata="Q2551894" url="?curid=259001" title="Walmer">
<text>Walmer is a town in the district of Dover, Kent, in England. Located on the coast, the parish of Walmer is south-east of Sandwich, Kent. The town&#x27;s coastline and castle are popular amongst tourists. It has a population of 6,693 (2001), increasing to 8,178 at the 2011 Census.

Walmer is closely associated with its adjoining neighbour, the town of Deal - sharing many amenities and services and benefiting from Deal&#x27;s High Street shopping area.

Walmer railway station is on the Kent Coast Line.

==History==

===Julius Caesar===
Julius Caesar reputedly landed on the beach here in 55 BC and 54 BC. It is only one possible landing place, proposed judging from the distances given in his account of the landings in his &quot;Gallic Wars&quot;. In the 19th century it was thought that he had landed by Deal Castle – hence a house there with SPQR emblazoned on its gate – but in 1907 the landing point has been proposed to be half a mile further south, beyond the lifeboat station, and marked by a concrete memorial. However, new archaeological excavations performed since 2015 suggest instead that the landing occurred in Pegwell Bay, in Thanet, much further north along the coast.

===Medieval===
The coastal confederation of Cinque Ports during its mediæval period consisted of a confederation of 42 towns and villages in all.
This includes Walmer, as a &#x27;Limb&#x27; of Sandwich, Kent.

===Walmer Castle===

Walmer Castle and its formal gardens are an attraction for visitors. The official residence of Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports since the 18th Century, the building is now an English Heritage property.
Famous Lords Warden have included Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, Sir Winston Churchill, William Pitt the Younger (whose niece Lady Hester Stanhope first created the gardens), and the Duke of Wellington (of the Battle of Waterloo fame). Wellington lived there for 23 years and the castle houses not only a collection of Wellington memorabilia but also the room in which he died.

The Castle was built in 1540 as one of three on this part of the Kent coast by orders of Henry VIII. The others were nearby at Deal (southern Deal) and Sandown (north Deal) - the Deal one survives, the Sandown one has been lost to coastal erosion.

===Walmer Aerodrome===

The flat grassy plateau at Hawkshill Freedown on the southern edge of Walmer parish, adjacent to Walmer Castle, was requisitioned in April 1917 by the War Office for use as an aerodrome to increase capability for the defence of shipping in the English Channel. Wing Captain C. L. Lambe, Officer Commanding Royal Naval Air Service Dover and Dunkirk posted six pilots from different squadrons who had been involved in intense fighting on the Western Front to Walmer. These pilots were:
*Flight Lieutenant Theo Vernon who became Flight Commander
*Flight Sub Lieutenant Arthur.R. Brown
*Flight Sub Lieutenant J.A. Shaw
*Flight Lieutenant Stanley Kemball
*Flight Sub Lieutenant William Lusby
*Flight Sub Lieutenant Harry Chisam.
Once operational the airmen were kept busy fighting German bomber offensives with many victories recorded. Pilots from the Royal Flying Corps were also stationed at the Aerodrome as the RNAS and RFC often flew together on operations over the Western Front.

September 1917 saw the first death of an Officer who had been stationed at Walmer - Squadron Commander T. C. Vernon of 9 Naval Squadron. He had been the Commanding Officer of the Walmer Defence Flight until July 1917.

In November 1917, 3 Naval Squadron was relocated to Walmer from the Western Front. 4 Naval Squadron arrived 2 January 1918 to take over, then in March 1918, it became the home station of 8 Naval Squadron which was absorbed into the Royal Air Force on its creation on 1 April 1918. 
After a few weeks of reduced activity on base a new Fighter Defence Flight was established in May 1918 with a primary mission to engage enemy fighters originating from Belgium and by 20 October 1918, the Belgium Coast was completely re-occupied by Allied Forces.

On 31 August 1918, Major Ronald Graham a WW1 ace took command of the newly formed No.233 Squadron RAF this incorporated the Fighter Defence Flight of Camels at RAF Walmer which was then under the command of Captain W. M. Alexander, another Flight (491)at Dover (Guston Road) and the Seaplane flight (407) Dover, Marine Parade. Flight 491 flying DH9s moved to RAF Walmer in January 1919 and in March 1919 the Squadron moved its headquarters to RAF Walmer. 233 Squadron RAF was disbanded in May 1919 but service records show it took a few months for all planes and pilots to leave.

Walmer remained on the emergency landing list of aerodromes.

RAF Walmer (also known as Hawkshill Down) was reopened during the Second World War as a strategic location for the defence of the UK. It was not used operationally for aircraft, but for some of the most important radar tracking and jamming systems used in the Second World War.

In 1941 Chain Home Low was installed at Walmer by the Army to increase the coverage of coastal radar systems in the South East. During 1942 an outstation of No. 80 (Signals) Wing RAF was opened which operated under the control of Bomber Command. In December 1942 A.M.E. type 9000 radar (Oboe) became fully operational which allowed precision bombing using Mosquito aircraft of 109 Squadron RAF. The Oboe system at Walmer worked jointly with a sister station in Norfolk, RAF Trimingham. They were known as cat and mouse stations. Target-finding aircraft controlled by Walmer were used extensively during the Battle of the Ruhr in March 1943. Oboe was one of the most precise navigational systems employed by any Air Force in the Second World War.
Large numbers of personnel were based at Walmer during this period including many from the WAAF (Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force). In October 1943 a detachment from 2752 Squadron RAF Regiment (anti-aircraft) was deployed to Walmer followed by the full squadron in June 1944. Servicemen from both 2852 and 2844 Squadrons RAF Regiments were recorded as serving at Walmer. From December 1943 until October 1944 Walmer was the site for the second station for an RAF jammer system (Grocer) which was used against German Air Force airborne interception radar (Lichtenstein). The transmitters and monitor were placed strategically at Walmer and further south at Kingsdown so as to not interfere with the work of Oboe. Twin Browning machine guns were used for the defence of the site throughout this period.

From June 1942 until 31 December 1944 Walmer was also used by M Balloon unit of the RAF for propaganda flights with the HQ at a house in St Clare Road (now Generals Meadow) which was used during the First World War as a military hospital. During February 1944 over 5,000,000 leaflets were dropped over Germany and France by 2,478 balloons released from Walmer.

In 1945 RAF Walmer/Hawkshill Down was closed and it returned to agricultural use.

On 12 August 2017 a new commemorative stand was placed on the Freedown on a site looking out over the English Channel. The stand was unveiled by the current Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports Admiral of the Fleet The Lord Boyce KG GCB OBE DL at a service led by the Vicar of Walmer and supported by the Chaplain of the Fleet and the Deputy Chaplain in Chief of the RAF. The new stand lists sixteen officers stationed at Walmer during the First World War and who lost their lives on active service. It also gives the history of the site during two World Wars.

A wooden memorial had been placed on the site of the airfield in 1920 under the direction of the Countess of Beauchamp, wife of the then Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. The location of the memorial has been changed a number of times, with the last site being on private land. There is very little of the original remaining.

In 2019, the VintageAirRally tried to organise the landing, at Walmer of the only De Havilland 9 still flying in the world. The DH9 was the last plane to fly out in 1919 and it was probably piloted by Harry Chisam, whose service records show he was stationed at Walmer in June 1919. Due to the height of trees now surrounding the area this was found to be impossible.

===The Walmer Brewery 1816–1978===

It is believed that Upper Walmer was home to a brewery from Tudor times and possibly earlier. In 1816 a small brewery on the Dover Road just south of the old Walmer Village was acquired by Edmund Thompson who then operated it as Thompson &amp; Sons. In 1867 John Matthews bought the business and greatly expanded and modernised it, although he retained the Thompson Brewery name.

The development of maltings, bottling plants, brew house, stables and blacksmith&#x27;s eventually made it an important local employer. Further houses were bought in Dover Road for use as offices and to house staff, and a long terrace of brick cottages was built in Belmont to house more workers.

During the 1950s, the brewery became part of the Charrington&#x27;s company and its role was reduced to a bottling and distribution plant. It eventually closed in 1972 and was demolished in 1978 to make way for a housing development called Downlands. An old bell, once housed in the belfry at the brewery, was re-sited at The Thompson Bell, the last remaining public house in the village.

==Governance==
An electoral ward in the same name exists. The population of this ward at the 2011 census was 7,434.

==Churches==
*Blessed Mary of Walmer (The Old Church) - (&quot;Church of England&quot;)
*St Saviour&#x27;s Church, Walmer - (&quot;Church of England&quot;)
*St Mary&#x27;s Church, Walmer - (&quot;Church of England&quot;)

==People from Walmer==
People born in Walmer include:
* Dornford Yates
* John Hassall (illustrator)
* Roy Stevens, cricketer
People who died in Walmer include:
* Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington
* Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister

==Lifeboats==
==References==
==External links==

* Walmer Town Council
* Walmer community website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2551894" start="0" end="6" title="Walmer" label="Walmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971967" start="20" end="47" title="Dover District" label="the district of Dover, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q26163" start="121" end="135" title="Sandwich, Kent" label="Sandwich, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="213" end="223" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="268" end="279" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011096" start="353" end="357" title="Deal, Kent" label="Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502336" start="456" end="478" title="Walmer railway station" label="Walmer railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391652" start="489" end="504" title="Kent Coast Line" label="Kent Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="540" end="553" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q742306" start="554" end="570" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s invasions of Britain" label="reputedly landed"/>
<link wikidata="Q106199" start="728" end="751" title="Commentarii de Bello Gallico" label="&amp;quot;Gallic Wars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180981" start="810" end="821" title="Deal Castle" label="Deal Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131306" start="849" end="853" title="SPQR" label="SPQR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425604" start="1130" end="1141" title="Pegwell Bay" label="Pegwell Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752642" start="1146" end="1152" title="Thanet District" label="Thanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q748895" start="1235" end="1247" title="Cinque Ports" label="Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q26163" start="1384" end="1398" title="Sandwich, Kent" label="Sandwich, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543161" start="1422" end="1435" title="Walmer Castle" label="Walmer Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809853" start="1517" end="1548" title="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports" label="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="1596" end="1612" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="1657" end="1689" title="Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon" label="Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="1695" end="1712" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="1714" end="1738" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q73980" start="1752" end="1772" title="Lady Hester Stanhope" label="Lady Hester Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="1805" end="1827" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="the Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="1836" end="1854" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="2094" end="2104" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180981" start="2132" end="2136" title="Deal Castle" label="Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416497" start="2157" end="2164" title="Sandown Castle, Kent" label="Sandown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542312" start="2236" end="2251" title="coastal erosion" label="coastal erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="2584" end="2607" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5067874" start="4955" end="4969" title="Chain Home Low" label="Chain Home Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760015" start="5234" end="5238" title="Oboe (navigation)" label="Oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275640" start="5417" end="5431" title="RAF Trimingham" label="RAF Trimingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q329506" start="5554" end="5572" title="Battle of the Ruhr" label="Battle of the Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914968" start="5790" end="5822" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475132" start="6248" end="6260" title="Lichtenstein radar" label="Lichtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809853" start="7097" end="7128" title="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports" label="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q335407" start="7150" end="7164" title="Michael Boyce, Baron Boyce" label="The Lord Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456885" start="7836" end="7851" title="VintageAirRally" label="VintageAirRally"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7905" end="7919" title="De Havilland 9" label="De Havilland 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="9315" end="9329" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085072" start="9428" end="9467" title="Old St Mary&amp;#x27;s, Walmer" label="Blessed Mary of Walmer (The Old Church)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595433" start="9503" end="9535" title="St Saviour&amp;#x27;s Church, Walmer" label="St Saviour&amp;#x27;s Church, Walmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594444" start="9571" end="9600" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Walmer" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Walmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298118" start="9692" end="9706" title="Dornford Yates" label="Dornford Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776383" start="9709" end="9735" title="John Hassall (illustrator)" label="John Hassall (illustrator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373405" start="9738" end="9749" title="Roy Stevens (cricketer)" label="Roy Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="9798" end="9838" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="9841" end="9872" title="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister" label="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="259017" wikidata="Q5246082" url="?curid=259017" title="Dean Cogan">
<text>Dean Anthony Cogan (1826–1872) was a nineteenth-century Roman Catholic Irish priest (awarded the religious title of &quot;dean&quot;), born in Slane, who wrote a history of the Diocese of Meath in Ireland. Published in two volumes in 1862 and 1867, Cogan&#x27;s &quot;The Diocese of Meath&quot; was an important history of Christianity in Ireland.

Anthony Cogan was born in 1826, one of five sons and three daughters of baker Thomas Coogan and his wife Ann Sillary, his mother converted from the Church of Ireland to Catholicism to marry. Cogan trained for the priesthood in St. Finian&#x27;s Seminary in Navan.

Cogan&#x27;s work, which included a humanitarian dimension, led to the naming of a housing estate in his memory: &#x27;Dean Cogan Place&#x27;, located in Navan, where he had served as a curate.

A plaque unveiled in 2003 adorns the wall of his birthplace on Main Street, Slane.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5246082" start="0" end="18" title="Dean Cogan" label="Dean Anthony Cogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="56" end="70" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="71" end="76" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="77" end="83" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958876" start="122" end="126" title="dean (religion)" label="dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778869" start="143" end="148" title="Slane" label="Slane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278920" start="177" end="193" title="Diocese of Meath" label="Diocese of Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="197" end="204" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730231" start="268" end="288" title="The Diocese of Meath" label="The Diocese of Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="323" end="335" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587913" start="576" end="602" title="St Finian&amp;#x27;s College" label="St. Finian&amp;#x27;s Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="733" end="749" title="Dean Cogan Place" label="Dean Cogan Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q217845" start="768" end="773" title="Navan" label="Navan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753370" start="800" end="806" title="curate" label="curate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="259018" wikidata="Q250890" url="?curid=259018" title="List of cities in Nevada">
<text>Nevada is a state located in the Western United States. According to the 2020 United States Census, it is the 32nd most populous state, with inhabitants, but the 7th largest by land area spanning . Nevada is divided into 17 counties and contains 19 municipalities. Nevada&#x27;s municipalities cover only of the state&#x27;s land mass but are home to of its population.

Municipalities in the state are legally described as cities, except for the state capital Carson City, which has no legal description but is considered an independent city as it is not located in any county. To incorporate, a petition for incorporation can be made to the board of county commissioners, who consider numerous geographic, demographic, and economic factors. Cities are categorized by population for the purpose of determining the number of wards and council election structure as well as the number of city clerks: cities with 50,000 or more inhabitants are in population category one, cities with 5,000 or more but fewer than 50,000 inhabitants are in population category two, and cities having fewer than 5,000 inhabitants are in population category three. Cities are responsible for providing local services such as fire and police protection, road maintenance, water distribution, and sewer maintenance.

The largest municipality by population in Nevada is Las Vegas with 641,903 residents, and the smallest is Caliente with 990 residents. The largest municipality by land area is Boulder City, which spans , while Lovelock is the smallest at . The first place in Nevada to incorporate was Carson City, on , and the most recent place was Fernley, on .

==Municipalities==


==See also==
* List of census-designated places in Nevada
* List of counties in Nevada

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="0" end="6" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="12" end="17" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="33" end="54" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="73" end="98" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="110" end="134" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="32nd most populous state"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="162" end="186" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="7th largest by land area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="224" end="232" title="County (United States)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="249" end="263" title="Municipal corporation" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q40881" start="461" end="472" title="Carson City" label="Carson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="526" end="542" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="825" end="830" title="Ward (electoral subdivision)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q883211" start="887" end="898" title="Municipal clerk" label="city clerks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="1346" end="1355" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q749099" start="1400" end="1408" title="Caliente, Nevada" label="Caliente"/>
<link wikidata="Q858801" start="1470" end="1482" title="Boulder City, Nevada" label="Boulder City"/>
<link wikidata="Q652027" start="1504" end="1512" title="Lovelock, Nevada" label="Lovelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948662" start="1627" end="1634" title="Fernley, Nevada" label="Fernley"/>
<link wikidata="Q28131892" start="1678" end="1720" title="List of census-designated places in Nevada" label="List of census-designated places in Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q876562" start="1723" end="1749" title="List of counties in Nevada" label="List of counties in Nevada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="259019" wikidata="Q1340586" url="?curid=259019" title="Réjean Ducharme">
<text>Réjean Ducharme (August 12, 1941 – August 21, 2017) was a Canadian writer, novelist and playwright who resided in Montreal. He was known for his reclusive personality and did not appear at any public functions since his first successful book was published in 1966. A common theme of his early work was the rejection of the adult world by children.

&quot;&quot; (&quot;Swallowed&quot;), Ducharme&#x27;s first novel, was short-listed for the 1966 Prix Goncourt, even though the author was only 24 years old and unknown. That same year, the book won the 1966 Governor General&#x27;s Award for Poetry or Drama (Poésie et théâtre). &quot;L&#x27;Avalée des avalés&quot; later won the 2005 French version of &quot;Canada Reads&quot;, where it was defended by actress Sophie Cadieux.

In the 1992 movie &quot;Léolo&quot;, the main character spends much of his time reading and thinking about &quot;L&#x27;Avalée des avalés&quot;.

In 2017, Ducharme died of natural causes at age 76 in Montreal.

In summer 2021, the city&#x27;s Sud-Ouest borough renamed its library from the Bibliotheque Georges-Vanier to the Bibliothèque Réjean-Ducharme in his honour.

==Bibliography==
*&quot;L&#x27;Avalée des avalés&quot; – 1966 (winner of the 1966 Governor General&#x27;s Awards)
**translated into English as &quot;The Swallower Swallowed&quot; by Barbara Bray
**translated into English as &quot;Swallowed&quot; by Madeleine Stratford (Montreal: Véhicule Press, 2020).
*&quot;&quot; – 1967
**translated into English as &quot;Miss Take&quot; by Will Browning
*&quot;&quot; – 1968
*&quot;La fille de Christophe Colomb&quot; – 1969
**translated into English as &quot;The Daughter of Christopher Columbus&quot; by Will Browning
*&quot;&quot; – 1973 winner of the 1973 Governor General&#x27;s Award for Fiction)
**translated in English as &quot;Wild to Mild&quot; by Robert Guy Scully
*&quot;&quot; – 1976
*&quot;Good Riddance (Les Bons débarras)&quot; – 1980 (film screenplay)
*&quot;Happy Memories (Les Beaux souvenirs)&quot; – 1982 (film screenplay)
*&quot;Ha ha!...&quot; – 1982 (winner of the 1982 Governor General&#x27;s Award for Drama)
*&quot;Dévadé&quot; – 1990
*&quot;Va savoir&quot; – 1994 (nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award
**translated into English as &quot;Go Figure&quot; by Will Browning
*&quot;Gros mots&quot; – 1999

==See also==
* List of Canadian writers
* List of Quebec writers

== References ==
==External links==

* Réjean Ducharme&#x27;s entry in The Canadian Encyclopedia
* Fonds Réjean Ducharme (R11725) at &quot;Library and Archives Canada&quot;
* Collection Rosette Rohana (lettres de Réjean Ducharme), (R12366) at Library and Archives Canada. The collection consists of 14 letters by Réjean Ducharme sent to Rosette Rohana and to one of her friend.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1340586" start="0" end="15" title="Réjean Ducharme" label="Réjean Ducharme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="75" end="83" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="88" end="98" title="playwright" label="playwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="114" end="122" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q187300" start="446" end="459" title="Prix Goncourt" label="Prix Goncourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405722" start="552" end="626" title="1966 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="1966 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for Poetry or Drama (Poésie et théâtre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031998" start="708" end="720" title="Canada Reads" label="Canada Reads"/>
<link wikidata="Q33999" start="753" end="760" title="actress" label="actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490874" start="761" end="775" title="Sophie Cadieux" label="Sophie Cadieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879405" start="802" end="807" title="Léolo" label="Léolo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1172" end="1196" title="L&amp;#x27;Avalée des avalés" label="L&amp;#x27;Avalée des avalés"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858769" start="1330" end="1342" title="Barbara Bray" label="Barbara Bray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1526" end="1539" title="Will Browning" label="Will Browning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1692" end="1705" title="Will Browning" label="Will Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q728256" start="1741" end="1787" title="1973 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="1973 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231093" start="1890" end="1903" title="Good Riddance (film)" label="Good Riddance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230986" start="1962" end="1976" title="Happy Memories" label="Happy Memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405747" start="2075" end="2119" title="1982 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="1982 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405766" start="2195" end="2224" title="1994 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2279" end="2292" title="Will Browning" label="Will Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047926" start="2339" end="2363" title="List of Canadian writers" label="List of Canadian writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242916" start="2366" end="2388" title="List of Quebec writers" label="List of Quebec writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="2529" end="2556" title="Library and Archives Canada" label="Library and Archives Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="2633" end="2660" title="Library and Archives Canada" label="Library and Archives Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="259021" wikidata="Q1967298" url="?curid=259021" title="National Highway (Australia)">
<text>The National Highway (part of the National Land Transport Network) is a system of roads connecting all mainland states and territories of Australia, and is the major network of highways and motorways connecting Australia&#x27;s capital cities and major regional centres.

==History==

===Legislation===
National funding for roads began in the 1920s, with the federal government contributing to major roads managed by the state and territory governments. However, the Federal Government did not completely fund any roads until 1974, when the Whitlam government introduced the &quot;National Roads Act 1974&quot;. Under the act, the states were still responsible for road construction and maintenance, but were fully compensated for money spent on approved projects.

In 1977, the 1974 Act was replaced by the &quot;State Grants (Roads) Act 1977&quot;, which contained similar provisions for the definition of &quot;National Highways&quot;.

In 1988, the National Highway became redefined under the &quot;Australian Land Transport Development (ALTD) Act 1988&quot;, which had various amendments up to 2003. The 1988 Act was largely concerned with funding road development in cooperation with the state governments. The federal transport minister defined the components of the National Highway, and also a category of &quot;Road of National Importance&quot; (RONI), with federal funding implications. Section 10.5 of the Act required the state road authorities to place frequent, prominent, signs on the National Highways and RONI projects funded by the federal government.

In 2005, the National Highway became the National Land Transport Network, under the &quot;AusLink (National Land Transport) Act 2005&quot;. The criteria for inclusion in the network was similar to the previous legislation, but expanded to include connections to major commercial centres, and inter-modal facilities. All of the roads included in National Land Transport Network as of 2005 were formally defined by regulation in October 2005. The Minister for Transport may alter the list of roads included in the network. Three amendments to the scheduled list of roads have been made, in February 2007, September 2008 and February 2009. The third variation, published in February 2009, is current as of September 2012.

Under AusLink a program that operated between July 2004 and 2009, the &quot;AusLink National Network&quot; had additional links, both road and rail. The Federal Government encouraged funding from state, territory and local governments and public–private partnerships to upgrade the network and requires state government funding contributions on parts of the network, especially for new links. For example, the Pacific Highway and the Calder Highway are part of the National Network, yet new projects are being funded 50/50 by federal and state governments. State contributions (generally 20%) are required on some sections of the old network near major cities.

===Roads and routes===
The various superseded Acts defined National Highways as roads, or a series of connected roads, that were the primary connection between two State or Territory capital cities, as well as between Brisbane and Cairns, and between Hobart and Burnie. The term &quot;Sea Highway&quot; is sometimes used colloquially to describe the sea lines of communication between the state of Victoria on the Australian mainland and island state of Tasmania across the Bass Strait.

The of roads included in the original National Highway system had large variations in road quality. Some sections were no more than dirt tracks, whilst others were four lane dual carriageways. While was sealed, there was also worth of gravel roads. The National Highway was gradually improved, with the sealed proportion increased from 73 per cent in the early 1970s to 88 per cent by 1981. The sealing works were completed in 1989.

Since 2005, National Highways were no longer defined in federal legislation. However, the routes were marked with a National Highway route marker up until 2013. These markers have &quot;NATIONAL&quot; printed in the upper portion of the shield, above the highway&#x27;s number. The shield, text and number are coloured yellow while the background is dark green – the national colours of Australia. In 2014, the route makers retained the national colours, although the word &quot;NATIONAL&quot; was removed in the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, and parts of both Queensland and Victoria.

National Highway numbering originates from the earlier national route network. Many of the routes that are now National Highways with the signature green and gold shields, continue beyond the official National Highway as the black and white shielded national routes. Certain stretches of the National Highways have &quot;A&quot; and &quot;M&quot; tag on their shields; particularly those in Victoria and South Australia. They have completely revised their route numbering, basing it on the British M, A, B, C classifications. These states have retained the original National Highway numbering and shield decal, having added the appropriate M and A classification.

==List of roads on the National Land Transport Network==

*Sydney to Melbourne – Hume Motorway/Hume Highway/Hume Freeway 
*Sydney to Brisbane – the Pacific Motorway (Sydney–Newcastle), New England and Cunningham Highways route and the Pacific Highway route
*Brisbane to Cairns – Bruce Highway
*Brisbane to Darwin – Warrego, Landsborough, Barkly and Stuart Highways
*Brisbane to Melbourne – Warrego, Gore, Newell and Goulburn Valley Highways and Hume Freeway
*Melbourne to Adelaide – Western Freeway, Western Highway, Dukes Highway and South Eastern Freeway
*Adelaide to Darwin – Port Wakefield Road, Augusta Highway and Stuart Highway
*Adelaide to Sydney – Sturt and Hume Highway/Hume Motorway
*Adelaide to Perth – Port Wakefield Road, Augusta Highway, Eyre, Coolgardie-Esperance (part) and Great Eastern Highways
*Perth to Darwin – Great Northern, Victoria and Stuart Highways
*Sydney to Canberra – Hume Motorway/Hume Highway and Federal Highway
*Melbourne to Canberra – Hume Freeway/Hume Highway and Barton Highway
*Hobart to Burnie including the link from Launceston to Bell Bay – Brooker, Midlands and the Bass Highway
*Townsville to Mount Isa – Flinders Highway
*Melbourne to Sale – Princes Highway
*Perth to Bunbury – South Western Highway
*Melbourne to Mildura – Calder Highway
*Sydney to Dubbo – Great Western and Mitchell Highways
*Sydney to Wollongong – Princes Motorway and Princes Highway
*Melbourne to Geelong – Princes Highway
*some urban links in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide, connecting the long distance links to each other and to ports and airports.

==Former National Highway routes==
The following roads were part of the original National Highway network. Most are still signposted with National Highway route markers. In 2013, New South Wales introduced a new alphanumeric route numbering system, which no longer includes national highways.

==History of changes to Australia&#x27;s National Highway network==
Australia&#x27;s National Highway Network has had a number of changes since the &quot;National Roads Act 1974&quot; was originally established in 1974. The 1974 Act empowered the Federal Minister for Transport to declare as a National Highway, any existing or proposed road in a State, which (in the Minister&#x27;s opinion), was the main route between two State capitals; a State capital and Canberra; a State capital and Darwin; Brisbane and Cairns; Hobart and Burnie; or any other road which, in the Minister&#x27;s opinion, was important enough to be a National Highway.

Subsequent replacement legislation in 1977, 1988, and 2005, along with other intervening amendments, contained similar provisions. Notably, important roads to near-metropolitan locations such as Geelong, Bunbury and Wollongong were added in 2005, although not within the original concept of interstate National Highways.

===Original routes included in 1974===
The original components of the National Highway were officially declared on 20 September 1974, as &quot;links&quot; and terminated at the edge of each capital city. The parts of the routes within the major urban areas were not defined as National Highways, and the Sturt and Newell highway routes were not included in the original 1974 network. In June 1995, as a condition of federal funding, the National Highway route in New South Wales was required to remove existing tolling on the former F3 and former F6 inter-urban freeways, even though the former F6 did not become part of a National Highway until 2005.

The Sydney to Adelaide route via the Hume and Sturt highways, and the Melbourne to Brisbane route via the Newell Highway, were added as links of the National Highway network in November 1992 under the 1988 Act, however the decision to use the route from Goondiwindi to Brisbane via the Gore Highway and Toowoomba, rather than the Cunningham Highway (via Warwick), was not finalized until October 1993. These were the only two major routes added to the National Highway network between 1974 and 2005. In addition, the urban ends of intercity routes, and some link roads and ring roads joining national routes, were explicitly added to the National Highway network for the first time.

As sections of existing highways were upgraded or replaced by nearby parallel routes of a new higher standard, the &quot;National Highway&quot; designation was usually moved onto the new part of the route. The principal route between Sydney and Newcastle was shifted from the old Pacific Highway onto the new Sydney-Newcastle freeway in nine separate stages between 1966 and 1999 as the freeway was progressively implemented. Similar changes were made as the Hume Highway was re-developed.

===Routes included in the National Land Transport Network for the first time under the 2005 legislation===

Appendix 1 of the &#x27;Auslink (National Land Transport) Bill&#x27; of 2004, listed the routes which were proposed to be included in &#x27;The Auslink National Network&#x27;. The listing included here distinguished between the components of the &quot;former National Highway system&quot;, and the additional routes to be added to the Auslink National Network after the implementation of the new Act, which occurred in 2005. All of the existing routes of the National Highway prior to 2005 were included in the new network. The routes added with the inception of the 2005 Act (as described in Appendix 1 referenced above, some of the descriptions are somewhat ambiguous but clarified in the ensuing regulations) are:
*the Pacific Highway route between Newcastle and Brisbane
*the route between Townsville and Mt Isa
*the route from Sydney (or Eastern Creek) to Dubbo via the M4, Great Western and Mitchell highway
*the Calder Highway route from Melbourne to Mildura via Bendigo
*the Southern Freeway and Princes Highway route from Sydney to Wollongong
*the Princes Freeway from Melbourne to Geelong
*the Monash Freeway, Princes Freeway and Princes Highway to Taralgon and Sale
*the route between Perth and Bunbury
*the route from Launceston to Bell Bay
*some additional urban connecting routes linking ports and airports and linking the national routes, and forming urban growth corridors, a complete definition of the network as of 2005 is included in the schedule of the 2005 Act

Changes to the National Land Transport Network made in 2007
*The route description for the Cumberland Highway ( Pennant Hills Road ), between the junctions with the M2 motorway and the F3 Sydney-Newcastle Freeway, was altered. Almost all of the original Cumberland Highway route from Prestons to Wahroonga, established in the 2005 network, was deleted due to the opening of the M7 motorway.

Changes to the National Land Transport Network made in 2008
*The route description of the national route consisting of part of the Princes Freeway and Princes Highway between Melbourne and Waurn Ponds (west of Geelong), was altered.
*The proposed Townsville Port Access Road was added.
*The proposed Tiger Brennan Drive extension in suburban Darwin was added.

Changes to the National Land Transport Network made in 2009
*The portion of the M4 Western Motorway in Sydney, between Eastern Creek and Strathfield was added.
*The part of the Princes Freeway, and Princes Highway, west of Melbourne which is included in the National network, was extended from Waurn Ponds to Colac.
*A section of the Great Eastern Highway and the Great Eastern Highway Bypass in suburban Perth was added.
*Alteration to the definition of the South Road route in Adelaide and addition of the access road to Adelaide Airport.
*The Townsville Ring Road was added
*The Karratha–Dampier Road and part of the North West Coastal Highway was added.
*The Bunbury Port Access Road and part of the Wilman Wadandi Highway were added.
*Part of the Hobart–Burnie route was altered.

==Urban components of the national land transport (road) network==

In Sydney, only a subset of the network of motorways and major roads in the Sydney metropolitan area are part of the current National Land Transport (Roads) Network, the rest are not part of the national network and therefore the Federal Government does not contribute funding on the same basis. The following roads in and around Sydney are currently part of the designated National Land Transport Network
*Hume Highway from Melbourne to the junction of the M7 and M5 at Prestons, continuing on the M5 South Western Motorway to General Holmes Drive (near Kyeemagh) and then Foreshore Road to its junction with Botany Road.
*Cumberland Highway (Pennant Hills Road), between the junction with the M2 Hills Motorway at Carlingford, and the junction at the commencement of the Pacific Motorway at Wahroonga. Note: The 2005 network included a route comprising a small part of the old Hume Highway from Prestons to Liverpool, the Cumberland Highway from Liverpool to Northmead, part of James Ruse Drive, and Pennant Hills Road from North Parramatta to the Pacific Motorway junction at Wahroonga. Almost all of this route, except the connection between the M2 and Pacific motorways at the northern end, was removed from the national network in 2007, due to the opening of the M7/M2 route as an alternative.
*Pacific Motorway, north from Wahroonga.
*The whole of the Westlink M7 motorway, from its junction with the M5 at Prestons, to Seven Hills, and then the part of the M2 Hills Motorway from Seven Hills to the junction of the Cumberland Highway (Pennant Hills Road) at Carlingford.
*King Georges Road, from its connection to the Princes Highway at Blakehurst, thence Wiley Avenue, thence Roberts Road to its intersection with the Hume Highway at Greenacre (Chullora).
*The Princes Highway from its intersection with King Georges Road at Blakehurst, the Princes Motorway to its intersection with the Northern Distributor at Gwynneville (Wollongong).
*The M4 Western Motorway, between Strathfield and Emu Plains, continuing onto the Great Western Highway towards Dubbo. The portion of the M4 between Eastern Creek and Strathfield was only added in 2009.

==National highway route numbering==

In addition to the network of federally funded National Highways defined in 1974, there was also a system of &quot;national routes&quot;. This scheme, which predated the National Highways in 1953, was a plan to coordinate State road authorities to allocate consistent highway numbers to major highways which traversed more than one State, for the convenience of travellers. The most notable example is &quot;Highway 1&quot;, which follows the periphery of the continent, and only parts of which form part of the former National Highway and current National Land Transport (Roads) Network.

==See also==

* Highway 1 (Australia)

==References==
==External links==
*AusLink National Network
*National Land Transport Network – Road Corridors</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1967298" start="4" end="20" title="National Highway (Australia)" label="National Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967298" start="34" end="65" title="National Highway (Australia)" label="National Land Transport Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="112" end="147" title="states and territories of Australia" label="states and territories of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="177" end="184" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="190" end="198" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996534" start="541" end="559" title="Whitlam government" label="Whitlam government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675313" start="1864" end="1886" title="Intermodal freight transport" label="inter-modal facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240796" start="2298" end="2305" title="AusLink" label="AusLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="2531" end="2557" title="public–private partnership" label="public–private partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540426" start="2702" end="2717" title="Pacific Highway (Australia)" label="Pacific Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q931216" start="2726" end="2740" title="Calder Highway" label="Calder Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="3172" end="3180" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q189133" start="3185" end="3191" title="Cairns" label="Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="3205" end="3211" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q175262" start="3216" end="3222" title="Burnie" label="Burnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q129408480" start="3239" end="3250" title="Sea Highway" label="Sea Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440075" start="3304" end="3330" title="sea lines of communication" label="sea lines of communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="3352" end="3360" title="Victoria (State)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872203" start="3368" end="3387" title="Australian mainland" label="Australian mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="3408" end="3416" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q171846" start="3428" end="3439" title="Bass Strait" label="Bass Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979571" start="4243" end="4272" title="national colours of Australia" label="national colours of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="4389" end="4417" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="4419" end="4434" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="4454" end="4464" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="4469" end="4477" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="5226" end="5265" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Motorway/Hume Highway/Hume Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="5278" end="5286" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373637" start="5293" end="5328" title="Pacific Motorway (Sydney–Newcastle)" label="Pacific Motorway (Sydney–Newcastle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538677" start="5330" end="5341" title="New England Highway" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144035" start="5346" end="5364" title="Cunningham Highway" label="Cunningham Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540426" start="5380" end="5395" title="Pacific Highway (Australia)" label="Pacific Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q189133" start="5415" end="5421" title="Cairns" label="Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q991666" start="5424" end="5437" title="Bruce Highway" label="Bruce Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="5451" end="5457" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q914124" start="5460" end="5467" title="Warrego Highway" label="Warrego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803741" start="5469" end="5481" title="Landsborough Highway" label="Landsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q808292" start="5483" end="5489" title="Barkly Highway" label="Barkly"/>
<link wikidata="Q120192" start="5494" end="5508" title="Stuart Highway" label="Stuart Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538149" start="5544" end="5548" title="Gore Highway" label="Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q916928" start="5550" end="5556" title="Newell Highway" label="Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540146" start="5561" end="5584" title="Goulburn Valley Highway" label="Goulburn Valley Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="5617" end="5625" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q917533" start="5628" end="5643" title="Western Freeway (Victoria)" label="Western Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q917533" start="5645" end="5660" title="Western Highway, Victoria" label="Western Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264630" start="5662" end="5675" title="Dukes Highway" label="Dukes Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304426" start="5680" end="5701" title="South Eastern Freeway" label="South Eastern Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104793" start="5724" end="5743" title="Port Wakefield Road" label="Port Wakefield Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985657" start="5745" end="5760" title="Augusta Highway" label="Augusta Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q120192" start="5765" end="5779" title="Stuart Highway" label="Stuart Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q916940" start="5802" end="5807" title="Sturt Highway" label="Sturt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="5812" end="5838" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Highway/Hume Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="5852" end="5857" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104793" start="5860" end="5879" title="Port Wakefield Road" label="Port Wakefield Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985657" start="5881" end="5896" title="Augusta Highway" label="Augusta Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q824741" start="5898" end="5902" title="Eyre Highway" label="Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129704" start="5904" end="5924" title="Coolgardie–Esperance Highway" label="Coolgardie-Esperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544264" start="5936" end="5957" title="Great Eastern Highway" label="Great Eastern Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544325" start="5978" end="5992" title="Great Northern Highway" label="Great Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q475712" start="5994" end="6002" title="Victoria Highway" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q120192" start="6007" end="6021" title="Stuart Highway" label="Stuart Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="6034" end="6042" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="6045" end="6071" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Motorway/Hume Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q977654" start="6076" end="6091" title="Federal Highway (Australia)" label="Federal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="6117" end="6142" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Freeway/Hume Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q495004" start="6147" end="6161" title="Barton Highway" label="Barton Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="6163" end="6169" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q175262" start="6173" end="6179" title="Burnie" label="Burnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q339527" start="6204" end="6214" title="Launceston, Tasmania" label="Launceston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883115" start="6218" end="6226" title="Bell Bay, Tasmania" label="Bell Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q928943" start="6229" end="6236" title="Brooker Highway" label="Brooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931978" start="6238" end="6246" title="Midland Highway (Tasmania)" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q684989" start="6255" end="6267" title="Bass Highway (Tasmania)" label="Bass Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q606335" start="6283" end="6292" title="Mount Isa" label="Mount Isa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428773" start="6295" end="6311" title="Flinders Highway, Queensland" label="Flinders Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026976" start="6326" end="6330" title="Sale, Victoria" label="Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478712" start="6333" end="6348" title="Princes Highway" label="Princes Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q256711" start="6359" end="6366" title="Bunbury, Western Australia" label="Bunbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660968" start="6369" end="6390" title="South Western Highway" label="South Western Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q705829" start="6405" end="6412" title="Mildura" label="Mildura"/>
<link wikidata="Q931216" start="6415" end="6429" title="Calder Highway" label="Calder Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q706105" start="6441" end="6446" title="Dubbo" label="Dubbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544396" start="6449" end="6462" title="Great Western Highway" label="Great Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939508" start="6467" end="6483" title="Mitchell Highway" label="Mitchell Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q187861" start="6496" end="6506" title="Wollongong" label="Wollongong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474738" start="6509" end="6525" title="Princes Motorway" label="Princes Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478712" start="6530" end="6545" title="Princes Highway" label="Princes Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q231765" start="6560" end="6567" title="Geelong" label="Geelong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478712" start="6570" end="6585" title="Princes Highway" label="Princes Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865888" start="7282" end="7304" title="Minister for Infrastructure and Transport (Australia)" label="Minister for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="7374" end="7379" title="States and territories of Australia" label="State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994461" start="7452" end="7466" title="List of capitals in Australia" label="State capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="7488" end="7496" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="7518" end="7524" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="7526" end="7534" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q189133" start="7539" end="7545" title="Cairns" label="Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="7547" end="7553" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q175262" start="7558" end="7564" title="Burnie" label="Burnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q231765" start="7866" end="7873" title="Geelong" label="Geelong"/>
<link wikidata="Q256711" start="7875" end="7882" title="Bunbury, Western Australia" label="Bunbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q187861" start="7887" end="7897" title="Wollongong" label="Wollongong"/>
<link wikidata="Q916940" start="8297" end="8302" title="Sturt Highway" label="Sturt"/>
<link wikidata="Q916928" start="8307" end="8313" title="Newell Highway" label="Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373637" start="8519" end="8528" title="Pacific Motorway (Sydney–Newcastle)" label="former F3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474738" start="8533" end="8542" title="Princes Motorway" label="former F6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="8660" end="8668" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="8683" end="8687" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="8716" end="8725" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="8729" end="8737" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021725" start="8900" end="8911" title="Goondiwindi" label="Goondiwindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538149" start="8932" end="8944" title="Gore Highway" label="Gore Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144035" start="8976" end="8994" title="Cunningham Highway" label="Cunningham Highway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9610" end="9625" title="Pacific Highway (Australia)#Route" label="Pacific Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762466" start="12245" end="12264" title="M4 Western Motorway" label="M4 Western Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437529" start="12284" end="12297" title="Eastern Creek, New South Wales" label="Eastern Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8272780" start="12302" end="12313" title="Strathfield, New South Wales" label="Strathfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q204705" start="12342" end="12357" title="Princes Freeway" label="Princes Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478712" start="12363" end="12378" title="Princes Highway" label="Princes Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975212" start="12459" end="12470" title="Waurn Ponds" label="Waurn Ponds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009509" start="12474" end="12479" title="Colac, Victoria" label="Colac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544264" start="12499" end="12520" title="Great Eastern Highway" label="Great Eastern Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457641" start="12624" end="12634" title="South Road" label="South Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354849" start="12711" end="12731" title="Townsville Ring Road" label="Townsville Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309107" start="12747" end="12755" title="Karratha, Western Australia" label="Karratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158897" start="12756" end="12763" title="Dampier, Western Australia" label="Dampier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640721" start="12785" end="12811" title="North West Coastal Highway" label="North West Coastal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q256711" start="12828" end="12835" title="Bunbury, Western Australia" label="Bunbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q116170273" start="12869" end="12891" title="Wilman Wadandi Highway" label="Wilman Wadandi Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q929825" start="13518" end="13543" title="M5 South Western Motorway" label="M5 South Western Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501606" start="13547" end="13567" title="General Holmes Drive" label="General Holmes Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824798" start="13643" end="13661" title="Cumberland Highway" label="Cumberland Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721132" start="13663" end="13681" title="Pennant Hills Road" label="Pennant Hills Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618802" start="13714" end="13731" title="M2 Hills Motorway" label="M2 Hills Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373637" start="13792" end="13808" title="Pacific Motorway (Sydney–Newcastle)" label="Pacific Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373637" start="14320" end="14336" title="Pacific Motorway (Sydney–Newcastle)" label="Pacific Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485091" start="14378" end="14389" title="Westlink M7" label="Westlink M7"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411671" start="14599" end="14616" title="King Georges Road" label="King Georges Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478712" start="14645" end="14660" title="Princes Highway" label="Princes Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762466" start="14970" end="14989" title="M4 Western Motorway" label="M4 Western Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544396" start="15047" end="15068" title="Great Western Highway" label="Great Western Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q304864" start="15813" end="15834" title="Highway 1 (Australia)" label="Highway 1 (Australia)"/>
</links>
</doc>
