<doc id="265949" wikidata="Q19133" url="?curid=265949" title="Qianlong Emperor">
<text>The Qianlong Emperor (25 September 17117 February 1799), also known by his temple name Emperor Gaozong of Qing, personal name Hongli, was the sixth emperor of the Qing dynasty and the fourth Qing emperor to rule over China proper. He reigned officially from 1735 until his abdication in 1796, but retained ultimate power subsequently until his death in 1799, making him one of the longest-reigning monarchs in history as well as one of the longest-lived.

The fourth and favourite son of the Yongzheng Emperor, Qianlong ascended the throne in 1735. A highly ambitious military leader, he led a series of campaigns into Inner Asia, Burma, Nepal and Vietnam and suppressed rebellions in Jinchuan and Taiwan. During his lifetime, he was given the deified title Emperor Manjushri by the Qing&#x27;s Tibetan subjects. Domestically, Qianlong was a major patron of the arts as well as a prolific writer. He sponsored the compilation of the &quot;Siku Quanshu&quot; (&quot;Complete Library of the Four Treasuries&quot;), the largest collection ever made of Chinese history, while also overseeing extensive literary inquisitions that led to the suppression of some 3,100 works.

In 1796, Qianlong abdicated after 60 years on the throne out of respect towards his grandfather, the Kangxi Emperor, who ruled for 61 years, so as to avoid usurping him as the longest-reigning Qing emperor. He was succeeded by his son, who ascended the throne as the Jiaqing Emperor but ruled only in name as Qianlong held on to power as Emperor Emeritus until his death in 1799 at the age of 87.

Qianlong oversaw the High Qing era, which marked the height of the dynasty&#x27;s power, influence, and prosperity. During his long reign, the empire had the largest population and economy in the world and reached its greatest territorial extent. At the same time, years of exhaustive campaigns severely weakened the Qing military, which coupled with endemic corruption, wastefulness in his court and a stagnating civil society, ushered the gradual decline and ultimate demise of the Qing empire.

==Early years==

Hongli was the fourth son of the Yongzheng Emperor and was born to Noble Consort Xi. Hongli was adored by both his grandfather, the Kangxi Emperor, and his father, the Yongzheng Emperor. Some historians argue that the main reason why the Kangxi Emperor appointed the Yongzheng Emperor as his successor was because Hongli was his favorite grandson. He felt that Hongli&#x27;s mannerisms were very similar to his own. As a teenager, Hongli was capable in martial arts and possessed literary ability.

After his father&#x27;s enthronement in 1722, Hongli was made a &quot;qinwang&quot; (first-rank prince) under the title &quot;Prince Bao of the First Rank&quot; (). Like his many uncles, Hongli entered into a battle of succession with his elder half-brother Hongshi, who had the support of a large faction of officials in the imperial court as well as Yunsi, Prince Lian. For many years, the Yongzheng Emperor did not designate any of his sons as the crown prince, but many officials speculated that he favoured Hongli. Hongli went on inspection trips to the south and was an able negotiator and enforcer. He was also appointed as the chief regent on occasions when his father was away from the capital.

==Accession to the throne==
Hongli&#x27;s accession to the throne was already foreseen before he was officially proclaimed emperor before the assembled imperial court upon the death of the Yongzheng Emperor. The young Hongli was the favorite grandson of the Kangxi Emperor and the favorite son of the Yongzheng Emperor; the Yongzheng Emperor had entrusted a number of important ritual tasks to Hongli while the latter was still a prince, and included him in important court discussions of military strategy. In the hope of preventing a succession struggle from occurring, the Yongzheng Emperor wrote the name of his chosen successor on a piece of paper and placed it in a sealed box secured behind the tablet over the throne in the Palace of Heavenly Purity (Qianqing Palace). The name in the box was to be revealed to other members of the imperial family in the presence of all senior ministers only upon the death of the emperor. When the Yongzheng Emperor died suddenly in 1735, the will was taken out and read before the entire Qing imperial court, after which Hongli became the new emperor. Hongli adopted the era name &quot;Qianlong&quot;, which means &quot;Lasting Eminence&quot;.

In 1739, the Prince Hongxi (son of Kangxi&#x27;s deposed crown prince, Yunreng) plotted a coup with five other princes to overthrow Qianlong and replace him with Hongxi. They planned to initiate their coup during an imperial hunt on the Mulan hunting grounds. Hongxi was proclaimed Emperor, but the plot was exposed by Prince Hongpu and the princes were arrested. The rebels were tried; the most prominent conspirators were imprisoned, while lessor offenders were stripped of their titles or demoted. In 1778, the Qianlong Emperor restored the original names to Yunsi, Yuntang, and Hongxi and allowed their descendants to be recorded in the imperial genealogy. However, the emperor did not revoke the decrees depriving those princes of their titles. In 1783, when the imperial chronicles were commissioned, the historians were ordered to emphasise the role of the emperor in quelling the rebellion and to mention that &quot;Hongxi and others wanted to usurp the throne&quot;.

==Frontier wars==


The Qianlong Emperor was a successful military leader. Immediately after ascending the throne, he sent armies to suppress the Miao rebellion. He greatly expanded the territory controlled by the Qing Empire through the Ten Great Campaigns. The Qing empire expanded to twice the size of the prior Ming state, incorporating vast swathes of Inner Asia into its domain. Some scholars consider Qing expansionism to be colonial in nature.

Under the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s reign, the Dzungar Khanate based in Dzungharia was defeated by the Qing state as the climax of the Dzungar-Qing Wars. The Qing state would subsequently conquer the neighbouring Turkic oasis states of the Tarim basin as a byproduct of said conflict. The two regions of Dzungharia and the Tarim basin, which historically were separate geographies and cultures, would be conjoined and renamed as Xinjiang, while to the west, Ili was conquered and garrisoned. 

The incorporation of Xinjiang into the Qing Empire resulted from the final defeat and destruction of the Dzungars (or Zunghars), a coalition of Western Mongol tribes. The Qianlong Emperor then ordered the Dzungar genocide. According to the Qing dynasty scholar Wei Yuan, 40% of the 600,000 Dzungars were killed by smallpox, 20% fled to the Russian Empire or Kazakh tribes, and 30% were killed by the Qing army, in what Michael Edmund Clarke described as &quot;the complete destruction of not only the Zunghar state but of the Zunghars as a people.&quot; Historian Peter Perdue has argued that the decimation of the Dzungars was the result of an explicit policy of genocide launched by the Qianlong Emperor.

The Dzungar genocide has been compared to the Qing extermination of the Jinchuan Tibetan people in 1776, which also occurred during the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s reign. When victorious troops returned to Beijing, a celebratory hymn was sung in their honour. A Manchu version of the hymn was recorded by the Jesuit Amiot and sent to Paris.

The Qing Empire hired Zhao Yi and Jiang Yongzhi at the Military Archives Office, in their capacity as members of the Hanlin Academy, to compile works on the Dzungar campaign, such as &quot;Strategy for the pacification of the Dzungars&quot; (Pingding Zhunge&#x27;er fanglue). Poems glorifying the Qing conquest and genocide of the Dzungar Mongols were written by Zhao, who wrote the &quot;Yanpu zaji&quot; in &quot;brush-notes&quot; style, where military expenditures of the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s reign were recorded. The Qianlong Emperor was praised as being the source of &quot;eighteenth-century peace and prosperity&quot; by Zhao Yi.

Khalkha Mongol rebels under Prince Chingünjav had plotted with the Dzungar leader Amursana and led a rebellion against the Qing Empire around the same time as the Dzungars. The Qing army crushed the rebellion and executed Chingünjav and his entire family.

Throughout this period there were continued Mongol interventions in Tibet and a reciprocal spread of Tibetan Buddhism in Mongolia. After the Lhasa riot of 1750, the Qianlong Emperor sent armies into Tibet and firmly established the Dalai Lama as the ruler of Tibet, with a Qing resident and garrison to preserve Qing presence. Further afield, military campaigns against Nepalese and Gurkhas forced the emperor into stalemate where both parties had to submit.

On 23 January 1751, Tibetan rebels who participated in the Lhasa riot of 1750 against the Qing were sliced to death by Qing Manchu general Bandi, similar to what happened to Tibetan rebels on 1 November 1728 during his father, the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s reign. Six Tibetan rebel leaders plus Tibetan rebel leader Blo-bzan-bkra-sis were sliced to death. The rest of the Tibetan rebel leaders were strangled and beheaded and their heads were displayed to the Tibetan public on poles. The Qing seized the property of the rebels and exiled other Tibetan rebels. Manchu General Bandi sent a report to the Qing Qianlong emperor on 26 January 1751 on how he carried out the slicings and executions of the Tibetan rebels. The Tibetan rebels dBan-rgyas (Wang-chieh), Padma-sku-rje-c&#x27;os-a[&#x27;el (Pa-t&#x27;e-ma-ku-erh-chi-ch&#x27;un-p&#x27;i-lo) and Tarqan Yasor (Ta-erh-han Ya-hsün) were sliced to death for injuring the Manchu ambans with arrows, bows and fowling pieces during the Lhasa riot when they assaulted the building the Manchu ambans (Labdon and Fucin) were in. Tibetan rebel Sacan Hasiha (Ch&#x27;e-ch&#x27;en-ha-shih-ha) was sliced to death for murder of multiple individuals. Tibetan rebels Ch&#x27;ui-mu-cha-t&#x27;e and Rab-brtan (A-la-pu-tan) were sliced to death for looting money and setting fire during the attack on the Ambans. Tibetan rebel Blo-bzan-bkra-sis, the mgron-gner was sliced to death for being the overall leader of the rebels who led the attack which looted money and killed the Manchu ambans. Two Tibetan rebels who had already died before the execution had their dead bodies beheaded, one died in jail, Lag-mgon-po (La-k&#x27;o-kun-pu) and the other killed himself since he was scared of the punishment, Pei-lung-sha-k&#x27;o-pa. Bandi sentenced to strangulation several rebel followers and bKra-sis-rab-brtan (Cha-shih-la-pu-tan) a messenger. He ordered the live beheadings of Man-chin Te-shih-nai and rDson-dpon dBan-rgyal (Ts&#x27;eng-pen Wang-cha-lo and P&#x27;yag-mdsod-pa Lha-skyabs (Shang-cho-t&#x27;e-pa La-cha-pu) for leading the attack on the building by being the first to go to on the staircase to the next floor and setting fire and carrying the straw to fuel the fire besides killing several men on orders from the rebel leader.

In 1762 the Qianlong Emperor came close to war with the Afghan Emir Ahmad Shah Durrani because of Qing China&#x27;s expansions in Central Asia. While Qing and Durrani Empire troops were sent near the frontier in Central Asia, war did not break out. A year later, Durrani sent an envoy to Beijing gifting four splendid horses to Qianlong, which became the subject of a series of paintings, &quot;Four Afghan Steeds&quot;. However, the Afghan envoy failed to make a good impression to Qianlong after refusing to perform the &quot;kowtow&quot;. Qianlong later refused to intervene in the Durrani Empire&#x27;s killing of the Sultan of Badakhshan, who was a vassal of Qing China.

The Qianlong Emperor responded to the vassal Shan States&#x27;s request for military aid against the attacking forces of Burma, but the Sino-Burmese War ended in complete failure. He initially believed that it would be an easy victory against a barbarian tribe, and sent only the Green Standard Army based in Yunnan, which borders Burma. The Qing invasion came as the majority of Burmese forces were deployed in their latest invasion of the Siamese Ayutthaya Kingdom. Nonetheless, battle-hardened Burmese troops defeated the first two invasions of 1765–66 and 1766–67 at the border. The regional conflict now escalated to a major war that involved military manoeuvres nationwide in both countries. The third invasion (1767–1768) led by the elite Manchu Bannermen nearly succeeded, penetrating deep into central Burma within a few days&#x27; march from the capital, Inwa. However, the Manchu Bannermen of northern China could not cope with &quot;unfamiliar tropical terrains and lethal endemic diseases&quot;, and were driven back with heavy losses. After the close-call, King Hsinbyushin redeployed his armies from Siam to the Chinese front. The fourth and largest invasion got bogged down at the frontier. With the Qing forces completely encircled, a truce was reached between the field commanders of the two sides in December 1769. The Qing forces kept a heavy military lineup in the border areas of Yunnan for about one decade in an attempt to wage another war while imposing a ban on inter-border trade for two decades. When Burma and China resumed a diplomatic relationship in 1790, the Qing government unilaterally viewed the act as Burmese submission, and claimed victory. The Qianlong Emperor ordered Manchu general Eledeng&#x27;e (also spelled E&#x27;erdeng&#x27;e (, or possibly )) to be sliced to death after his commander Mingrui was defeated at the Battle of Maymyo in the Sino-Burmese war in 1768 because Eledeng&#x27;i was not able to help flank Mingrui when he did not arrive at a rendezvous.

The circumstances in Vietnam were not successful either. In 1787, Lê Chiêu Thống, the last ruler of the Vietnamese Lê dynasty, fled from Vietnam and formally requested to be restored to his throne in Thăng Long (present-day Hanoi). The Qianlong Emperor agreed and sent a large army into Vietnam to remove the Tây Sơn (rebels who had captured all of Vietnam). The capital, Thăng Long, was conquered in 1788, but a few months later the Qing army was defeated, and the invasion turned into a debacle due to the surprise attack during Tết (Vietnamese New Year) by Nguyễn Huệ, the second and most capable of the three Tây Sơn brothers. The Qing Empire no longer supported Lê Chiêu Thống, and his family were imprisoned in Vietnam. The Qing would not intervene in Vietnam for another 90 years.

Despite setbacks in the south, overall the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s military expansion nearly doubled the area of the already vast Qing Empire, and unified many non-Han peoples—such as Uyghurs, Kazakhs, Kyrgyzs, Evenks and Mongols. It was also a very expensive enterprise; the funds in the Imperial Treasury were almost all put into military expeditions. Though the wars were successful, they were not overwhelmingly so. The Qing army declined noticeably and had a difficult time facing some enemies: the campaign against the Jinchuan hill peoples took 2 to 3 years—at first the Qing army were mauled, though Yue Zhongqi (a descendant of Yue Fei) later took control of the situation. The battle with the Dzungars was closely fought, and caused heavy losses on both sides.s

The Ush rebellion in 1765 by Uyghur Muslims against the Manchus occurred after Uyghur women were gang raped by the servants and son of Manchu official Sucheng. It was said that &quot;Ush Muslims had long wanted to sleep on [Sucheng and son&#x27;s] hides and eat their flesh&quot; because of the rape of Uyghur Muslim women for months by the Manchu official Sucheng and his son. The Manchu Qianlong Emperor ordered that the Uyghur rebel town be massacred, the Qing forces enslaved all the Uyghur children and women and slaughtered the Uyghur men. Manchu soldiers and Manchu officials regularly having sex with or raping Uyghur women caused massive hatred and anger against Manchu rule among Uyghur Muslims. The invasion by Jahangir Khoja was preceded by another Manchu official, Binjing, who raped a Muslim daughter of the Kokan aqsaqal from 1818 to 1820. The Qing sought to cover up the rape of Uyghur women by Manchus to prevent anger against their rule from spreading among the Uyghurs.

At the end of the frontier wars, the Qing army had started to weaken significantly. In addition to a more lenient military system, warlords became satisfied with their lifestyles. Since most of the warring had already taken place, warlords no longer saw any reason to train their armies, resulting in a rapid military decline by the end of the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s reign. This was the main reason for the Qing military&#x27;s failure to suppress the White Lotus Rebellion, which started towards the end of the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s reign and extended into the reign of the Jiaqing Emperor.

==Cultural achievements==

The Qianlong Emperor, like his predecessors, took his cultural role seriously. First, he worked to preserve the Manchu heritage, which he saw as the basis of the moral character of the Manchus and thus of the dynasty&#x27;s power. He ordered the compilation of Manchu language genealogies, histories, and ritual handbooks and in 1747 secretly ordered the compilation of the Shamanic Code, published later in the &quot;Complete Library of the Four Treasuries&quot;. He further solidified the dynasty&#x27;s cultural and religious claims in Central Asia by ordering a replica of the Tibetan Potala Palace, the Putuo Zongcheng Temple, to be built on the grounds of the imperial summer palace in Chengde. In order to present himself in Buddhist terms for appeasing the Mongols and Tibetan subjects, he commissioned a &quot;thangka&quot;, or sacred painting, depicting him as Manjushri, the Bodhisattva of Wisdom. He was also a poet and essayist. His collected writings, which he published in a tenfold series between 1749 and 1800, contain more than 40,000 poems and 1,300 prose texts, which if he had composed them all would make him one of the most prolific writers of all time.

The Qianlong Emperor was a major patron and important &quot;preserver and restorer&quot; of Confucian culture. He had an insatiable appetite for collecting, and acquired much of China&#x27;s &quot;great private collections&quot; by any means necessary, and &quot;reintegrated their treasures into the imperial collection.&quot; He formed a team of cultural advisers to help locate collections of merchant families who needed to sell or whose heirs had lost interest. He sometimes pressured or forced wealthy officials to surrender precious objects by offering to excuse shortcomings in their performance if they made a certain &quot;gift&quot;. On several occasions he claimed that a painting could be secure from theft or fire only if it was taken into the Forbidden City.

The Emperor&#x27;s massive art collection became an intimate part of his life; he took landscape paintings with him on his travels to compare them with the actual landscapes, or to hang them in special rooms in palaces where he lodged, in order to inscribe them on every visit there. &quot;He also regularly added poetic inscriptions to the paintings of the imperial collection, following the example of the emperors of the Song dynasty and the literati painters of the Ming dynasty. They were a mark of distinction for the work, and a visible sign of his rightful role as emperor. Most particular to the Qianlong Emperor is another type of inscription, revealing a unique practice of dealing with works of art that he seems to have developed for himself. On certain fixed occasions over a long period he contemplated a number of paintings or works of calligraphy which possessed special meaning for him, inscribing each regularly with mostly private notes on the circumstances of enjoying them, using them almost as a diary.&quot; In particular, the Qianlong Emperor housed within the Hall of Three Rarities (Sanxitang), a small chamber within the Hall of Mental Cultivation, three calligraphy works: &quot;Timely Clearing After Snowfall&quot; by Wang Xizhi, from the Jin dynasty, &quot;Mid-Autumn&quot; by his son Wang Xianzhi, and &quot;Letter to Boyuan&quot; by Wang Xun.

Most of the several thousand jade items in the imperial collection date from his reign. The Emperor was also particularly interested in collecting ancient bronzes, bronze mirrors and seals,&quot; in addition to pottery, [ceramics and applied arts such as enameling, metal work and lacquer work, which flourished during his reign; a substantial part of his collection is in the Percival David Foundation in London. The Victoria and Albert Museum and British Museum also have collections of art from the Qianlong era.

One of his grandest projects was to assemble a team of scholars to assemble, edit, and print the largest collection ever made of Chinese philosophy, history, and literature. Known as the &quot;Complete Library of the Four Treasuries&quot; (or &quot;Siku Quanshu&quot;), it was published in 36,000 volumes, containing about 3,450 complete works and employing as many as 15,000 copyists. It preserved numerous books, but was also intended as a way to ferret out and suppress political opponents, requiring the &quot;careful examination of private libraries to assemble a list of around eleven thousand works from the past, of which about a third were chosen for publication. The works not included were either summarised or—in a good many cases—scheduled for destruction.&quot;

===Burning of books and modification of texts===


Some 2,300 works were listed for total suppression and another 350 for partial suppression. The aim was to destroy the writings that were anti-Qing or rebellious, that insulted previous &quot;barbarian&quot; dynasties, or that dealt with frontier or defence problems. The full editing of the &quot;Complete Library of the Four Treasuries&quot; was completed in about ten years; during these ten years, 3,100 titles (or works), about 150,000 copies of books were either burnt or banned. Of those volumes that had been categorised into the &quot;Complete Library of the Four Treasuries&quot;, many were subjected to deletion and modification. Books published during the Ming dynasty suffered the greatest damage.

The authority would judge any single character or any single sentence&#x27;s neutrality; if the authority had decided these words, or sentence, were derogatory or cynical towards the rulers, then persecution would begin. In the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s time, there were 53 cases of Literary Inquisition, resulting in the victims executed by beheading or slow slicing (&quot;lingchi&quot;), or having their corpses mutilated (if they were already dead).

===Literary works===
In 1743, after his first visit to Mukden (present-day Shenyang, Liaoning), the Qianlong Emperor used Chinese to write his &quot;Ode to Mukden&quot;, (&quot;Shengjing fu/Mukden-i fujurun bithe&quot;), a &quot;fu&quot; in classical style, as a poem of praise to Mukden, at that point a general term for what was later called Manchuria, describing its beauties and historical values. He describes the mountains and wildlife, using them to justify his belief that the dynasty would endure. A Manchu translation was then made. In 1748, he ordered a jubilee printing in both Chinese and Manchu, using some genuine pre-Qin forms and Manchu styles which had to be invented and which could not be read.

===Languages===
In his childhood, the Qianlong Emperor was tutored in Manchu, Chinese and Mongolian, arranged to be tutored in Tibetan, and spoke Chagatai (Turki or Modern Uyghur). However, he was even more concerned than his predecessors to preserve and promote the Manchu language among his followers, as he proclaimed that &quot;the keystone for Manchus is language.&quot; He commissioned new Manchu dictionaries, and directed the preparation of the &quot;Pentaglot Dictionary&quot; which gave equivalents for Manchu terms in Mongolian, Tibetan and Turkic, and had the Buddhist canon translated into Manchu, which was considered the &quot;national language&quot;. He directed the elimination of loanwords taken from Chinese and replaced them with calque translations which were put into new Manchu dictionaries. Manchu translations of Chinese works during his reign contrasted with supposedly Manchu books of the Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s reign, which were simply Chinese texts written in Manchu script.

The Qianlong Emperor commissioned the &quot;Qin ding Xiyu Tongwen Zhi&quot; (欽定西域同文志; &quot;Imperial Western Regions Thesaurus&quot;) which was a thesaurus of geographic names in Xinjiang, in Oirat Mongol, Manchu, Chinese, Tibetan, and Turki (Modern Uyghur).

===Tibetan Buddhism===
The Qianlong Emperor showed a personal belief in Tibetan Buddhism, following the tradition of Manchu rulers associating with the Bodhisattva Manjushri. He continued their patronage of Tibetan Buddhist art and ordered translations of the Buddhist canon into Manchu. Court records and Tibetan language sources affirm his personal commitment. He learned to read Tibetan and studied Buddhist texts assiduously. His beliefs are reflected in the Tibetan Buddhist imagery of his tomb, perhaps the most personal and private expression of an emperor&#x27;s life. He supported the Yellow Church (the Tibetan Buddhist Gelug sect) to &quot;maintain peace among the Mongols&quot; since the Mongols were followers of the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama of the Yellow Church. He also said it was &quot;merely in pursuance of Our policy of extending Our affection to the weak&quot; which led him to patronize the Yellow Church.

In 1744 he turned the Palace of Harmony (Yonghe Palace) into a Tibetan Buddhist temple for Mongols. To explain the practical reasons for supporting the &quot;Yellow Hats&quot; Tibetan Buddhists and to deflect Han Chinese criticism, he had the &quot;Lama Shuo&quot; stele engraved in Tibetan, Mongol, Manchu and Chinese, which said: &quot;By patronizing the Yellow Church, we maintain peace among the Mongols. This being an important task we cannot but protect this (religion). (In doing so) we do not show any bias, nor do we wish to adulate the Tibetan priests (as it was done during the Yuan dynasty).&quot;

Mark Elliott concludes that these actions delivered political benefits but &quot;meshed seamlessly with his personal faith.&quot;

===Anti-Islam laws===
Qing policy on Muslims and Islam was changed during the reign of the Kangxi, Yongzheng and Qianlong Emperors. While the Kangxi Emperor proclaimed Muslims and Han to be equal, his grandson, the Qianlong Emperor, endorsed Han officials harsh recommendations towards treatment of Muslims. The Kangxi Emperor said that Muslim and Han Chinese were equal when people argued for Muslims to be treated differently. The Yongzheng Emperor held the opinion that &quot;Islam was foolish, but he felt it did not pose a threat&quot; when a judge in Shandong petitioned him to destroy mosques and ban Islam. Yongzheng then fired an official for demanding Muslims be punished more harshly than non-Muslims.

This policy changed in the reign of the Qianlong Emperor. Chen Hongmou, a Qing official, said that Muslims needed to be brought to law and order by being punished more harshly and blaming Muslim leaders for criminal behavior of Muslims in a letter to the Board of Punishments called &quot;Covenant to Instruct and Admonish Muslims&quot; that he wrote in 1751. Although the Board of Punishment did nothing, the Shaanxi-Gansu Governor-General in 1762 then proceeded to implement his recommendation and had Muslim criminals punished severely more than Han Chinese ones. He also implemented the policy that the criminal deeds of Muslim congregants of Mosques ended up with their Imams being punished and held responsible for them. These anti-Muslim policies by the governor general received endorsement from the Qianlong Emperor.Great changes happening to Chinese Muslims, like the introduction of a Sufi order, the Naqshbandiyya to the Hui, causing the Qianlong emperor to adopt this harsh attitude against Muslims in contrast to his grandfather and father. This led to larger connections between the Hui and the broader Islamic world from the west, as the Naqshbandiyya order came east to the Hui when Hui scholars in Suzhou were converted to Naqshbandiyya by Muhammad Yusuf Khoja. Afaq Khoja, Muhammad Yusuf&#x27;s son, also further spread Naqshbandi orders among Chinese Muslims like Tibetan Muslims, Salars, Hui and other Muslim ethnicities in Hezhou, Gansu (now Linxia) and Xining in Qinghai and Lanzhou. Ma Laichi was the leader of one of these orders and he personally studied in the Islamic world in Bukhara to learn Sufism, and Yemen and in Mecca where he was taught by Mawlana Makhdum. This brought him prestige among Chinese Muslims. In an argument over the breaking of fast during Ramadan Ma Laichi said that before praying in the mosque, fast should be broken, not vice versa and this led to him getting many Naqshbandi converts from Hui and Turkic Salars. It came to court in 1731 when the Muslims arguing over how to break Ramadan fast filed lawsuits. The Muslim plaintiffs were told by the Qing authorities at the court to resolve them themselves, as the legal authorities who had no idea about Ramadan fasting. The dispute was not solved and continued to go on and was compounded by even more disputes like how to perform dhikr in Sufism, in a jahri (vocal) as taught by Ma Mingxin, another Sufi who learned in the western Islamic lands like Bukhara, or khufi (silent) like what Ma Laichi did. The Zabid Naqshbandiyyas in Yemen taught Ma Mingxin for two decades. They taught vocal dhikr. Ma Mingxin was also affected by another series of events in the Middle Eastern Muslim world, revivalist movements among Muslims like the Saudis who allied with Muhammad ibn &#x27;Abd al-Wahhab. This renewal tajdid influenced Ma Mingxin in Yemen.

While Ma Mingxin was in Yemen and away from China, all of Muslim Inner Asia was conquered by the &quot;infidel&quot; Qing dynasty giving even more relevance to his situation and views. Ma Laichi and Ma Mingxin again sued each other in court but this second time the Qing passed a verdict in favor of the quiet dhikr faction, the Silentist Khafiyya of Ma Laichi and gave it the status of orthodoxy while damning as heterodox the Aloudist Jahriyya of Ma Mingxin. Ma Mingxin ignored the order and kept proselytizing in Shaanxi, Ningxia and Xinjiang going to Guangchuan from Hezhou in 1769 after being kicked out and banned from Xunhua district. Turkic Salars in Xunhua followed his orders even after the Qing banned him from there and he continued to have further lawsuits and legal issues with the Khafiyya and Ma Laichi as the Qing backed the Khafiyya.

A violent battle where a Qing official and Khafiyya followers were among one hundred slaughtered by a Jahriyya assault headed by Su Forty-three, a supporter of Ma Mingxin in 1781 led to Ma Mingxin declared a rebel and taken to jail in Lanzhou. The Qing executed Ma Mingxin after his release was demanded by the armed followers of Su Forty-three. A Jahriyya rebellion all over northwest China ensued after Ma Mingxin was executed. In response, the Manchus in Beijing sent Manchu Grand Secretary Agui with a battalion to slaughter Jahriyya chiefs and exile the adherents of the Sufi order to the border regions.

Tian Wu led another Jahriyya rebellion 3 years after that, which was crushed by the Qing, and the Ma Datian, the Jahriyya&#x27;s 3rd leader was exiled to Manchuria in 1818 by the Qing and died.
This continual build up of conflict between Muslims and the Qing court led to the 19th century full-scale wars with Muslim rebellions against the Qing in southern and northern China. The change in Manchu attitudes towards Muslims, from tolerating Muslims and regarding them as equal to Han Chinese, before the 1760s, to the violence between the Qing state and Muslims after the 1760s, was due to progressive Qing involvement in the conflict between the Sufi orders Jahriyya and Khafiyya making it no longer possible for the Qing to keep up with the early rhetoric of Muslim equality. The Manchu court under Qianlong began approving and implementing Chen Hongmou&#x27;s anti-Muslim laws that targeted Muslims for practicing their religion and the violence by the Qing state, the communal violence between Jahriyya and Khafiyya coincided with the Jahriyya&#x27;s major expansion.

Chen Hongmou&#x27;s policies were implemented as laws in 1762 by the Qing government&#x27;s Board of Punishments and the Qing Manchu Qianlong emperor leading to severe tensions with Muslims. State authorities were mandated to receive all reports of Muslim criminal behaviour by local officials and all criminal behaviour by Muslims had to be reported by Muslim leaders to Qing authorities under these laws. This led to an inundation of anti-Muslim reports filing in Qing offices as the Qing court received information that Muslims were inherently violent and Muslim bandits were committing crimes as report after report were filed by local officials and Muslim crimes inundated court records. The Qing became even more anti-Muslim after receiving these reports about criminal behavior and started passing even more anti-Muslim laws one of them being that if any weapon was found in a group of 3 or more Muslims all of those Muslims would by sentenced as criminals by the Qing.

A new criminal category or act, brawling (dou&#x27;ou) was designated by the Qing Manchu court of the Manchu Qianlong emperor in the 1770s especially as an anti-Muslim measure to arrest Muslims leading to even non-Jahriyya Muslims to join with Jahriyya against the Qing and leading the Qing court to be even more anti-Muslim, apprehensive of anti-Qing rebellion by Muslims. This led to the execution of Ma Mingxin in 1781 and the rebellion and violence was compounded by lack of Qing intelligence. A Qing official who was tasked with ending the Jahriyya and Khafiyya communal violence mistakenly thought the people he were talking to were Khafiyya when they were in fact Jahriyya, and he told them that the Qing would massacre all Jahriyya adherents. This led to him being murdered by the Jahriyya mob, which led to the Qing sending Manchu Grand Secretary Agui on a full scale pacification crackdown campaign against the Jahriyya.

The military victory of the Qing against the Jahriyya led to even more Jahriyya anger. Officials went overboard in massacring Muslims deemed as state enemies to impress the Qing court, leading to further growth in Jahriyya membership, leading in turn to the 1784 rebellion by Tian Wu.

The Qianlong Emperor asked his minister what was going on as he was puzzled as to how the Muslims from many regions gathered together for revolt. He asked if the investigation of Muslim behavior by Li Shiyao got leaked leading to rebels to incite violence by telling Muslims the government would exterminate them. He then pondered and said none of these could be why and kept asking why. To solve the issue of the 1784 revolt, northwestern China was put under military occupation by the Qing for 50 years until the Taiping rebellion of southern China forced the Qing to move them away from northwest China leading to the massive 1860s and 1870s Muslim revolts in the northwest caused by growing violence.

The sudden questions about halal in Islam that Mongol Buddhists had in the 18th century was caused by all these things, northwestern China right next to Mongolia getting militarized, the Qing government officially declaring Muslims to be anti-Qing and violent and revivalist Islam coming to China.

More than 1000 Hui Muslim children and women from the Sufi Jahriya order in eastern Gansu were massacred by Qing Banner general Li Shiyao during a 1784 uprising by Hui Jahriyya Muslims Zhang Wenqing and Tian Wu, 3 years after an early 1781 rebellion by Salar Sufi Jahriyya members when the Qing executed Jahriya leader Ma Mingxin. The Qing government under Qianlong then ordered the extermination of the Sufi Jahriya &quot;New Teaching&quot; and banned adoption of non-Muslim children by Muslims, converting non-Muslims to Muslim and banning new mosques from being built. Some Sufi Khafiya &quot;Old Teaching&quot; Muslims still served in Qing forces in fighting against the Jahriya Sufi &quot;New Teaching&quot; Muslims despite the fact that those laws forbdding them from spreading their religion applied to them too. Li Shiyao was a member of the Qing Eight Banners and related to the Qing royal family.

===Christianity===

The persecution of Christians by Yongzheng became even worse during the Qianlong reign.

===Palaces===


The Qianlong Emperor was an aggressive builder. In the hills northwest of Beijing, he expanded the villa known as the Garden of Perfect Brightness (or Yuanmingyuan; now known as the Old Summer Palace) originally built by his father. He eventually added two new villas, the &quot;Garden of Eternal Spring&quot; and the &quot;Elegant Spring Garden&quot;. In time, the Old Summer Palace would encompass , five times larger than the Forbidden City. To celebrate the 60th birthday of his mother, Empress Dowager Chongqing, the Qianlong Emperor ordered a lake at the Garden of Clear Ripples (or Qingyiyuan; now known as the Summer Palace) dredged, named it Kunming Lake, and renovated a villa on the eastern shore of the lake.

The Qianlong Emperor also expanded the imperial summer palace in Rehe Province, beyond the Great Wall. Rehe eventually became effectively a third capital and it was at Rehe that the Qianlong Emperor held court with various Mongol nobles. The emperor also spent time at the Mulan hunting grounds north of Rehe, where he held the imperial hunt each year.

====European styles====
For the Old Summer Palace, the Qianlong Emperor commissioned the Italian Jesuit Giuseppe Castiglione for the construction of the &quot;Xiyang Lou&quot;, or Western-style mansion, to satisfy his taste for exotic buildings and objects. He also commissioned the French Jesuit Michel Benoist, to design a series of timed waterworks and fountains complete with underground machinery and pipes, for the amusement of the imperial family. The French Jesuit Jean Denis Attiret also became a painter for the emperor. Jean-Damascène Sallusti was also a court painter. He co-designed, with Castiglione and Ignatius Sichelbart, the &quot;Battle Copper Prints&quot;.

====Other architecture====
During the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s reign, the Emin Minaret was built in Turpan to commemorate Emin Khoja, a Uyghur leader from Turpan who submitted to the Qing Empire as a vassal in order to obtain assistance from the Qing to fight the Dzunghars.

===Descendants of the Ming dynasty&#x27;s imperial family===
In 1725, the Yongzheng Emperor bestowed an hereditary marquis title on a descendant of Zhu Zhilian, a descendant of the imperial family of the Ming dynasty. Zhu was also paid by the Qing government to perform rituals at the Ming tombs and induct the Chinese Plain White Banner into the Eight Banners. Zhu was posthumously awarded the title &quot;Marquis of Extended Grace&quot; in 1750, and the title was passed on for 12 generations in his family until the end of the Qing dynasty. However, it has been argued that Zhu Zhilian, in fact, had no relation to the imperial family at all.

===Banner system===
The Qianlong Emperor instituted a policy of &quot;Manchu-fying&quot; the Eight Banner system, which was the basic military and social organisation of the dynasty. In the early Qing era, Nurhaci and Hong Taiji categorised Manchu and Han ethnic identity within the Eight Banners based on culture, lifestyle and language, instead of ancestry or genealogy. Han Bannermen were an important part of the Banner System. The Qianlong Emperor changed this definition to one of descent, and demobilised many Han Bannermen and urged Manchu Bannermen to protect their cultural heritage, language and martial skills. The emperor redefined the identity of Han Bannermen by saying that they were to be regarded as of having the same culture and being of the same ancestral extraction as Han civilians Conversely, he emphasised the martial side of Manchu culture and reinstituted the practice of the annual imperial hunt as begun by his grandfather, leading contingents from the Manchu and Mongol banners to the Mulan hunting grounds each autumn to test and improve their skills.

The Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s view of the Han Bannermen also differed from that of his grandfather in deciding that loyalty in itself was most important quality. He sponsored biographies which depicted Chinese Bannermen who defected from the Ming to the Qing as traitors and glorifying Ming loyalists. Some of the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s inclusions and omissions on the list of traitors were political in nature. Some of these actions were including Li Yongfang (out of his dislike for Li Yongfang&#x27;s descendant, Li Shiyao) and excluding Ma Mingpei (out of concern for his son Ma Xiongzhen&#x27;s image).

The identification and interchangeability between &quot;Manchu&quot; and &quot;Banner people&quot; (Qiren) began in the 17th century. Banner people were differentiated from civilians (Chinese: &quot;Minren&quot;, Manchu: &quot;Irgen&quot;; or Chinese: &quot;Hanren&quot;, Manchu: &quot;Nikan&quot;) and the term &quot;Bannermen&quot; was becoming identical with &quot;Manchu&quot; in the general perception. The Qianlong Emperor referred to all Bannermen as Manchu, and Qing laws did not say &quot;Manchu&quot;, but &quot;Bannermen&quot;.

Select groups of Han Chinese bannermen were mass transferred into Manchu Banners by the Qing, changing their ethnicity from Han Chinese to Manchu. Han Chinese bannermen of &quot;Tai Nikan&quot; (台尼堪) and &quot;Fusi Nikan&quot; (抚顺尼堪) backgrounds were moved into the Manchu banners in 1740 by order of the Qianlong Emperor. It was between 1618 and 1629 when the Han Chinese from Liaodong who later became the Fusi Nikan and Tai Nikan defected to the Jurchens (Manchus). These Han Chinese origin Manchu clans continued to use their original Han surnames and are marked as of Han origin on the Qing lists of Manchu clans.

===Anti-gun measures===
The Solons were ordered by the Qianlong Emperor to stop using rifles and instead practice traditional archery. The emperor issued an edict for silver taels to be issued for guns turned over to the government.
==Chinese political identity and frontier policy==
Scholars have different perspectives about the Chinese political identity and frontier policy during the reign of the Qianlong Emperor.

According to Emma Jinhua Teng, the prior Ming&#x27;s view of empire was a clear cultural and geographical demarcation between civilized Chinese and surrounding &quot;barbarians&quot;. Due to Qing&#x27;s territorial expansion well beyond Ming borders, a different conception of empire is needed. The Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s view of the Qing emphasized the ideology of &quot;Five Nations Under Heaven&quot;, where the Han Chinese, Manchu, Mongols, Tibetans and Hui Muslims were distinct domains or constituent nations/blocs under the umbrella of the Qing empire. Each constituting nation/bloc or domain was understood to possess their distinct history and civilization that led to the creation of the Qing state. 

According to Zhao Gang, the Qianlong Emperor identified China and the Qing empire as equivalent, and in treaties and diplomatic papers the Qing Empire called itself &quot;China&quot; or &quot;Zhongguo&quot; (lit. Central State). He further points out that the Qianlong Emperor rejected earlier ideas that only Han could be subjects of China and only Han land could be considered as part of China, so he redefined China as multiethnic as a result of territorial expansion, saying in 1755 that &quot;there exists a view of China according to which non-Han people cannot become China&#x27;s subjects and their land cannot be integrated into the territory of China. This does not represent our dynasty&#x27;s understanding of China, but is instead that of the earlier Han, Tang, Song, and Ming dynasties.&quot; The Qianlong Emperor compared his achievements with that of the Han and Tang ventures into Central Asia.

==Han settlement==
Han Chinese farmers were resettled from north China by the Qing government in the area along the Liao River in order to restore the land to cultivation. Wasteland was reclaimed by Han squatters in addition to other Han people who rented land from Manchu landlords. Despite officially prohibiting Han settlement on the Manchu and Mongol lands, by the 18th century the Qing government decided to settle Han refugees from northern China who were suffering from famine, floods, and drought into Manchuria and Inner Mongolia. Due to this, Han people farmed 500,000 hectares in Manchuria and tens of thousands of hectares in Inner Mongolia by the 1780s. The Qianlong Emperor allowed Han peasants suffering from drought to move into Manchuria despite him issuing edicts in favor of banning them from 1740 to 1776. Han tenant farmers rented or even claimed title to land from the &quot;imperial estates&quot; and Manchu Bannerlands in the area. Besides moving into the Liao area in southern Manchuria, the path linking Jinzhou, Fengtian, Tieling, Changchun, Hulun, and Ningguta was settled by Han people during the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s reign, and Han people were the majority in urban areas of Manchuria by 1800. To increase the Imperial Treasury&#x27;s revenue, the Qing government sold lands along the Songhua River which were previously exclusively for Manchus to Han Chinese at the beginning of the Daoguang Emperor&#x27;s reign, and Han people filled up most of Manchuria&#x27;s towns by the 1840s, according to Évariste Régis Huc.

==Later years==
A valet who accompanied a British diplomatic mission to the Qing court in 1793 described Qianlong in his later years:
The Emperor is about five feet ten inches in height, and of a slender but elegant form; his complexion is comparatively fair, though his eyes are dark; his nose is rather aquiline, and the whole of his countenance presents a perfect regularity of feature, which, by no means, announce the great age he is said to have attained; his person is attracting, and his deportment accompanied by an affability, which, without lessening the dignity of the prince, evinces the amiable character of the man. His dress consisted of a loose robe of yellow silk, a cap of black velvet with a red ball on the top, and adorned with a peacock&#x27;s feather, which is the peculiar distinction of mandarins of the first class. He wore silk boots embroidered with gold, and a sash of blue girded his waist.

In his later years, the Qianlong Emperor became spoiled with power and glory, disillusioned and complacent in his reign, and started placing his trust in corrupt officials such as Yu Minzhong and Heshen.

As Heshen was the highest ranked minister and most favoured by the Qianlong Emperor at the time, the day-to-day governance of the country was left in his hands, while the emperor himself indulged in the arts, luxuries and literature. When Heshen was executed by the Jiaqing Emperor, the Qing government discovered that Heshen&#x27;s personal fortune exceeded that of the Qing Empire&#x27;s depleted treasury, amounting to 900 million silver taels, the total of 12 years of Treasury surplus of the Qing imperial court.

The Qianlong Emperor began his reign with about 33.95 million silver taels in Treasury surplus. At the peak of his reign, , even with further tax cuts, the treasury surplus still reached 73.9 million silver taels, a record unmatched by his predecessors, the Kangxi and Yongzheng emperors, both of whom had implemented remarkable tax cut policies.

However, due to numerous factors such as long term embezzlement and corruption by officials, frequent expeditions to the south, huge palace constructions, many war and rebellion campaigns as well as his own extravagant lifestyle, all of these cost the treasury a total of 150.2 million silver taels. This, coupled with his senior age and the lack of political reforms, ushered the beginning of the gradual decline and eventual demise of the Qing Empire, casting a shadow over his political life.

===Macartney Embassy===

Legal trade in the South China Sea was resumed in 1727, but the East India Company&#x27;s discovery that the prices and duties at Ningbo were both much lower than those at Guangzhou prompted them to begin shifting their trade north from 1755 to 1757. The Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s attempt to discourage this through higher fees failed; in the winter of 1757, he declared that—effective the next year—Guangzhou (then romanized as &quot;Canton&quot;) was to be the only Chinese port permitted to foreign traders, beginning the Canton System, with its Cohong and Thirteen Factories.

During the mid-18th century, European powers began to pressure for increases in the already burgeoning foreign trade and for outposts on the Chinese coast, demands which the aging Qianlong emperor resisted. In 1793 King George III sent a large-scale delegation to present their requests directly to the emperor in Beijing, headed by George Macartney, one of the country&#x27;s most seasoned diplomats. The British sent a sample of trade goods that they intended to sell in China; this was misinterpreted as tribute that was adjudged to be of low quality.

Historians both in China and abroad long presented the failure of the mission to achieve its goals as a symbol of China&#x27;s refusal to change and inability to modernize. They explain the refusal first on the fact that interaction with foreign kingdoms was limited to neighbouring tributary states. Furthermore, the worldviews on the two sides were incompatible, China holding entrenched beliefs that China was the &quot;central kingdom&quot;. However, after the publication in the 1990s of a fuller range of archival documents concerning the visit, these claims have been challenged. One historian characterized the emperor and his court as &quot;clearly clever and competent political operators&quot;, and concluded that they acted within the formal Qing claims to universal rule; they reacted prudently to reports of British expansion in India by placating the British with unspecified promises in order to avoid military conflicts and loss of trade.

Macartney was granted an audience with the Qianlong Emperor on two days, the second of which coincided with the emperor&#x27;s 82nd birthday. There is continued debate about the nature of the audience and what level of ceremonials were performed. Macartney wrote that he resisted demands that the British trade ambassadors kneel and perform the kowtow and debate continues as to what exactly occurred, differing opinions recorded by Qing courtiers and British delegates.

Qianlong gave Macartney a letter for the British king stating the reasons that he would not grant Macartney&#x27;s requests:

&lt;poem&gt;Yesterday your Ambassador petitioned my Ministers to memorialise me regarding your trade with China, but his proposal is not consistent with our dynastic usage and cannot be entertained. Hitherto, all European nations, including your own country&#x27;s barbarian merchants, have carried on their trade with our Celestial Empire at Canton. Such has been the procedure for many years, although our Celestial Empire possesses all things in prolific abundance and lacks no product within its own borders.

Your request for a small island near Chusan, where your merchants may reside and goods be warehoused, arises from your desire to develop trade... Consider, moreover, that England is not the only barbarian land which wishes to establish... trade with our Empire: supposing that other nations were all to imitate your evil example and beseech me to present them each and all with a site for trading purposes, how could I possibly comply? This also is a flagrant infringement of the usage of my Empire and cannot possibly be entertained.

Hitherto, the barbarian merchants of Europe have had a definite locality assigned to them at Aomen for residence and trade, and have been forbidden to encroach an inch beyond the limits assigned to that locality... If these restrictions were withdrawn, friction would inevitably occur between the Chinese and your barbarian subjects...

Regarding your nation&#x27;s worship of the Lord of Heaven, it is the same religion as that of other European nations. Ever since the beginning of history, sage Emperors and wise rulers have bestowed on China a moral system and inculcated a code, which from time immemorial has been religiously observed by the myriads of my subjects. There has been no hankering after heterodox doctrines. Even the European (missionary) officials in my capital are forbidden to hold intercourse with Chinese subjects...&lt;/poem&gt;

The letter was unknown to the public until 1914, when it was translated, then later used as a symbol of China&#x27;s refusal to modernize.

Macartney&#x27;s conclusions in his memoirs were widely quoted:

The Empire of China is an old, crazy, first-rate Man of War, which a fortunate succession of able and vigilant officers have contrived to keep afloat for these hundred and fifty years past, and to overawe their neighbours merely by her bulk and appearance. But whenever an insufficient man happens to have the command on deck, adieu to the discipline and safety of the ship. She may, perhaps, not sink outright; she may drift some time as a wreck, and will then be dashed to pieces on the shore; but she can never be rebuilt on the old bottom.

===Titsingh Embassy===
A Dutch embassy arrived at the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s court in 1795, which would turn out to be the last time any European appeared before the Qing imperial court within the context of traditional Chinese imperial foreign relations.

Representing Dutch and Dutch East India Company interests, Isaac Titsingh traveled to Beijing in 1794–95 for celebrations of the 60th anniversary of the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s reign. The Titsingh delegation also included the Dutch-American Andreas Everardus van Braam Houckgeest, whose detailed description of this embassy to the Qing court was soon after published in the United States and Europe. Titsingh&#x27;s French translator, Chrétien-Louis-Joseph de Guignes, published his own account of the Titsingh mission in 1808. &quot;Voyage a Pékin, Manille et l&#x27;Ile de France&quot; provided an alternate perspective and a useful counterpoint to other reports that were then circulating. Titsingh himself died before he could publish his version of events.

In contrast to Macartney, Isaac Titsingh, the Dutch and VOC emissary in 1795 did not refuse to kowtow. In the year following Macartney&#x27;s rebuff, Titsingh and his colleagues were much feted by the Chinese because of what was construed as seemly compliance with conventional court etiquette.

==Abdication==
In October 1795, the Qianlong Emperor officially announced that in the spring of the following year he would voluntarily abdicate and pass the throne to his son. It was said that the Qianlong Emperor had made a promise during the year of his ascension not to rule longer than his grandfather, the Kangxi Emperor, who had reigned for 61 years. The Qianlong Emperor anticipated moving out of the Hall of Mental Cultivation (Yangxindian) in the Forbidden City. The hall had been conventionally dedicated for the exclusive use of the reigning sovereign, and in 1771 the emperor ordered the beginning of construction on what was ostensibly intended as his retirement residence in another part of the Forbidden City: a lavish, two-acre walled retreat called the Palace of Tranquil Longevity (Ningshou Palace), which is today more commonly known as the &quot;Qianlong Garden&quot;. The complex, completed in 1776, is currently undergoing a ten-year restoration led by the Palace Museum in Beijing and the World Monuments Fund (WMF). The first of the restored apartments, the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s Studio of Exhaustion From Diligent Service (Juanqinzhai) began an exhibition tour of the United States in 2010.

The Qianlong Emperor abdicated the throne at the age of 85, after almost 61 years on the throne, to his son, the 36-year-old Jiaqing Emperor, in 1796. For the next three years, he held the title &quot;Taishang Huang&quot; (or Emperor Emeritus; 太上皇) even though he continued to hold on to power and the Jiaqing Emperor ruled only in name. He never moved into his retirement suites in the Qianlong Garden and died in 1799.

== Family ==
Empress

* Empress Xiaoxianchun (孝賢純皇后) of the Fuca clan (富察氏; 28 March 1712 – 8 April 1748)
** &quot;First daughter&quot; (3 November 1728 – 14 February 1730)
** Yonglian (永璉), Crown Prince Duanhui (端慧皇太子; 9 August 1730 – 23 November 1738), second son
** Princess Hejing of the First Rank (固倫和敬公主; 31 July 1731 – 30 September 1792), third daughter
** Yongcong (永琮), Prince Zhe of the First Rank (哲親王; 27 May 1746 – 29 January 1748), seventh son
* Empress (皇后) of the Nara clan (那拉氏; 11 March 1718 – 19 August 1766)
** Yongji (永璂), Prince of the Third Rank (貝勒; 7 June 1752 – 17 March 1776), 12th son
** &quot;Fifth daughter&quot; (23 July 1753 – 1 June 1755)
** Yongjing (永璟; 22 January 1756 – 7 September 1757), 13th son
*Empress Xiaoyichun (孝儀純皇后) of the Weigiya clan (魏佳氏; 23 October 1727 – 28 February 1775)
** Princess Hejing of the First Rank (固倫和靜公主; 10 August 1756 – 9 February 1775), seventh daughter
** Yonglu (永璐; 31 August 1757 – 3 May 1760), 14th son
** Princess Heke of the Second Rank (和碩和恪公主; 17 August 1758 – 14 December 1780), ninth daughter
** &quot;Miscarriage at eight months&quot; (13 November 1759)
** Yongyan (永琰), the Jiaqing Emperor (嘉慶帝; 13 November 1760 – 2 September 1820), 15th son
** &quot;16th son&quot; (13 January 1763 – 6 May 1765) 
** Yonglin (永璘), Prince Qingxi of the First Rank (慶僖親王; 17 June 1766 – 25 April 1820), 17th son

Imperial Noble Consort

*Imperial Noble Consort Huixian (慧賢皇貴妃) of the Gaogiya clan (高佳氏; 1711 – 25 February 1745)
*Imperial Noble Consort Zhemin (哲憫皇貴妃) of the Fuca clan (富察氏; ? – 20 August 1735)
** Yonghuang (永璜), Prince Ding&#x27;an of the First Rank (定安親王; 5 July 1728 – 21 April 1750), first son
** &quot;Second daughter&quot; (1 June 1731 – 6 January 1732)
*Imperial Noble Consort Shujia (淑嘉皇貴妃) of the Gingiya clan (金佳氏; 14 September 1713 – 17 December 1755)
** Yongcheng (永珹), Prince Lüduan of the First Rank (履端親王; 21 February 1739 – 5 April 1777), fourth son
** Yongxuan (永璇), Prince Yishen of the First Rank (仪慎亲王; 31 August 1746 – 1 September 1832), eighth son
** Yongyu (永瑜; 2 August 1748 – 11 June 1749), ninth son
** Yongxing (永瑆), Prince Chengzhe of the First Rank (成哲親王; 22 March 1752 – 10 May 1823), 11th son
* Imperial Noble Consort Chunhui (純惠皇貴妃) of the Su clan (蘇氏; 13 June 1713 – 2 June 1760)
** Yongzhang (永璋), Prince Xun of the Second Rank (循郡王; 15 July 1735 – 26 August 1760), third son
** Yongrong (永瑢), Prince Zhizhuang of the First Rank (質莊親王; 28 January 1744 – 13 June 1790), sixth son
** Princess Hejia of the Second Rank (和碩和嘉公主; 24 December 1745 – 29 October 1767), fourth daughter
* Imperial Noble Consort Qinggong (慶恭皇貴妃) of the Lu clan (陸氏; 12 August 1724 – 21 August 1774)

Noble Consort

* Noble Consort Xin (忻貴妃) of the Daigiya clan (戴佳氏; 26 June 1737 – 28 May 1764)
** &quot;Sixth daughter&quot; (24 August 1755 – 27 September 1758)
** &quot;Eighth daughter&quot; (16 January 1758 – 17 June 1767)
** &quot;Obstructed labour or miscarriage at eight months&quot; (28 May 1764)
*Noble Consort Yu (愉貴妃) of the Keliyete clan (珂里葉特氏; 15 June 1714 – 9 July 1792)
** Yongqi (永琪), Prince Rongchun of the First Rank (榮純親王; 23 March 1741 – 16 April 1766), fifth son
*Noble Consort Xun (循貴妃) of the Irgen-Gioro clan (伊爾根覺羅氏; 29 October 1758 – 10 January 1798)
* Noble Consort Ying (穎貴妃) of the Baarin clan (巴鄰氏; 7 March 1731 – 14 March 1800)
* Noble Consort Wan (婉貴妃) of the Chen clan (陳氏; 1 February 1717 – 10 March 1807)

Consort

*Consort Shu (舒妃) of the Yehe-Nara clan (葉赫那拉; 7 July 1728 – 4 July 1777)
** Yongyue (永玥; 12 June 1751 – 7 July 1753), 10th son
* Consort Yu (豫妃) of the Oirat Borjigin clan (博爾濟吉特氏; 12 February 1730 – 31 January 1774)
** &quot;Miscarriage&quot; (1759 or 1760)
* Consort Rong (容妃) of the Hezhuo clan (和卓氏; 10 October 1734 – 24 May 1788)
* Consort Dun (惇妃) of the Wang clan (汪氏; 27 March 1746 – 6 March 1806)
** Princess Hexiao of the First Rank (固倫和孝公主; 2 February 1775 – 13 October 1823), 10th daughter
** &quot;Miscarriage&quot; (1777 or 1778)
* Consort Fang (芳妃) of the Chen clan (陳氏; ? – 20 September 1801)
* Consort Jin (晉妃) of the Fuca clan (富察氏; ? – 1822)

Concubine

* Concubine Yi (儀嬪) of the Huang clan (黄氏; ? – 1 November 1736)
* Concubine Yi (怡嬪) of the Bo clan (柏氏; 1 May 1721 – 30 June 1757)
* Concubine Shen (慎嬪) of the Bai&#x27;ergesi clan (拜爾葛斯氏; ? – 1765)
* Concubine Xun (恂嬪) of the Huoshuote clan (霍碩特氏; ? – 1761)
* Concubine Cheng (誠嬪) of the Niohuru clan (鈕祜祿氏; ? – 29 May 1784)
* Concubine Gong (恭嬪) of the Lin clan (林氏; 1733–1805)

Noble Lady

* Noble Lady Shun (順貴人) of the Niohuru clan (鈕祜祿氏; 3 January 1748 – 1790)
** &quot;Miscarriage&quot; (1776)
* Noble Lady E (鄂貴人) of the Sirin-Gioro clan (西林覺羅氏; ? – 1808)
* Noble Lady Rui (瑞貴人) of the Socoro clan (索取羅氏; ? – 26 June 1765)
* Noble Lady Bai (白貴人) of the Bo clan (柏氏; 17 June 1730 – 26 May 1803)
* Noble Lady Lu (祿貴人) of the Lu clan (陸氏; ? – 1788)
* Noble Lady Shou (壽貴人) of the Bo clan (柏氏; ? – 1809)
* Noble Lady Xiu (秀貴人; ? – 1745)
* Noble Lady Shen (慎貴人; ? – 9 September 1777)
* Noble Lady (贵人) of the Wu clan (武氏; ? – 1781)
* Noble Lady Jin (金貴人; ? – 1778)
* Noble Lady Xin (新貴人; ? – 1775)
* Noble Lady Fu (福貴人; ? – 1764)

First Class Attendant

* First Class Attendant Kui (揆常在; ? – 26 May 1756)
* First Class Attendant Yu (裕常在) of the Zhang clan (张氏; ? – 1745)
* First Class Attendant Ping (平常在; ? – 1778)
* First Class Attendant Ning (寧常在; ? – 1781)

Second Class Attendant

* Second Class Attendant Xiang (祥答应; ? – 28 March 1773)
* Second Class Attendant Na (那答應)
* Second Class Attendant Wan (莞答應)
* Second Class Attendant Cai (采答應)
* Second Class Attendant (答應)

Mistress

* Mistress (格格; ? – October 1729)
* Mistress (格格; ? – 30 July 1731)

Lady-in-waiting

* Lady-in-waiting (官女子)

==Ancestry==
==In popular culture==
* Portrayed by Tony Liu in &quot;The Adventures Of Emperor Chien Lung&quot; (1977).
* Portrayed by Zhang Tielin in &quot;My Fair Princess&quot; (1998).
* Portrayed by Kwong Wa in &quot;Happy Ever After&quot; (1999).
* Portrayed by Nie Yuan in &quot;World Granary&quot; (2001), &quot;Story of Yanxi Palace&quot; (2018) and &quot;Yanxi Palace: Princess Adventures&quot; (2019).
* Portrayed by Ti Lung in &quot;My Fair Princess III&quot; (2003).
* Portrayed by Chiu Hsinchih in &quot;New My Fair Princess&quot; (2011).
* Portrayed by Wang Wenjie in &quot;Empresses in the Palace&quot; (2011).
* Portrayed by Chen Xu in &quot;Palace II&quot; (2012).
* Portrayed by Kent Tong in &quot;Palace 3: The Lost Daughter&quot; (2014).
* Portrayed by Zhang Guoqiang in &quot;Succession War&quot; (2018).
* Portrayed by Wallace Huo in &quot;Ruyi&#x27;s Royal Love in the Palace&quot; (2018).

==Works by the Qianlong Emperor==

== See also ==

* Jean Joseph Marie Amiot
* Canton System
* Family tree of Chinese monarchs (late)
* Long Corridor
* &quot;Manwen Laodang&quot;
* Putuo Zongcheng Temple
* Qianlong Dynasty
* Qianlong Tongbao
* Portuguese Macau
* Military of Macau under Portuguese rule
* British Hong Kong
* British Forces Overseas Hong Kong
* Mao Zedong&#x27;s cult of personality
* Macartney Embassy
* Liu Yong
* Heshen

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
*

* 

* 
* 
* 

* 
* 

* 
* 
* Robbins, Helen Henrietta Macartney (1908). &quot;Our First Ambassador to China: An Account of the Life of George, Earl of Macartney with Extracts from His Letters, and the Narrative of His Experiences in China, as Told by Himself, 1737–1806, from Hitherto Unpublished Correspondence and Documents.&quot; London : John Murray. [digitized by University of Hong Kong Libraries, Digital Initiatives, &quot;China Through Western Eyes.&quot;

* van Braam Houckgeest, Andreas Everardus. (1797). &quot;Voyage de l&#x27;ambassade de la Compagnie des Indes Orientales hollandaises vers l&#x27;empereur de la Chine, dans les années 1794 et 1795.&quot; Philadelphia: M.L.E. Moreau de Saint-Méry.
* Van Braam Houckgeest, Andreas Everardus. (1798). &quot;An authentic account of the embassy of the Dutch East-India company, to the court of the emperor of China, in the years 1974 and 1795,&quot; Vol. I. London : R. Phillips. [digitized by University of Hong Kong Libraries, Digital Initiatives, &quot;China Through Western Eyes.&quot;



==Further reading==
*
* (alk. paper)
*

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="4" end="20" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q706208" start="75" end="86" title="temple name" label="temple name"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="87" end="110" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Emperor Gaozong of Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="126" end="132" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Hongli"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="148" end="155" title="Emperor of China" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="163" end="175" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="217" end="229" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188573" start="381" end="406" title="longest-reigning monarchs" label="longest-reigning monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q317839" start="492" end="509" title="Yongzheng Emperor" label="Yongzheng Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044456" start="592" end="613" title="Ten Great Campaigns" label="a series of campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q11212956" start="619" end="629" title="Inner Asia" label="Inner Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="631" end="636" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="638" end="643" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="648" end="655" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q338033" start="685" end="693" title="Jinchuan County" label="Jinchuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11080008" start="758" end="775" title="Emperor Manjushri" label="Emperor Manjushri"/>
<link wikidata="Q19359745" start="783" end="811" title="Qing&amp;#x27;s Tibetan subjects" label="Qing&amp;#x27;s Tibetan subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q699477" start="939" end="951" title="Siku Quanshu" label="Siku Quanshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203086" start="1098" end="1118" title="literary inquisition" label="literary inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="1271" end="1285" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q333178" start="1437" end="1452" title="Jiaqing Emperor" label="Jiaqing Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44731715" start="1508" end="1524" title="Taishang Huang" label="Emperor Emeritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367193" start="1589" end="1602" title="High Qing era" label="High Qing era"/>
<link wikidata="Q478024" start="1726" end="1744" title="List of largest empires" label="largest population"/>
<link wikidata="Q317839" start="2116" end="2133" title="Yongzheng Emperor" label="Yongzheng Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q573546" start="2150" end="2166" title="Empress Xiaoshengxian" label="Noble Consort Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="2215" end="2229" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991064" start="2646" end="2685" title="Bei Le" label="&amp;quot;qinwang&amp;quot; (first-rank prince)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896018" start="2840" end="2847" title="Hongshi" label="Hongshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260294" start="2934" end="2952" title="Yunsi" label="Yunsi, Prince Lian"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="3223" end="3229" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q317839" start="3476" end="3493" title="Yongzheng Emperor" label="Yongzheng Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="3545" end="3559" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q219087" start="3776" end="3793" title="military strategy" label="military strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126241" start="4019" end="4044" title="Palace of Heavenly Purity" label="Palace of Heavenly Purity"/>
<link wikidata="Q934262" start="4127" end="4142" title="House of Aisin-Gioro" label="imperial family"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="4319" end="4323" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q845538" start="4402" end="4410" title="Chinese era name" label="era name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356233" start="4496" end="4502" title="Hongxi (prince)" label="Hongxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076775" start="4547" end="4554" title="Yunreng" label="Yunreng"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702266" start="4566" end="4570" title="Coup of Hongxi" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840223" start="4692" end="4705" title="Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty" label="imperial hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825602" start="4802" end="4808" title="Hongpu" label="Hongpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260294" start="5038" end="5043" title="Yunsi" label="Yunsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359299" start="5045" end="5052" title="Yuntang" label="Yuntang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827726" start="5599" end="5613" title="Miao Rebellion (1735–1736)" label="Miao rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044456" start="5691" end="5710" title="Ten Great Campaigns" label="Ten Great Campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="5885" end="5893" title="Colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923401" start="5951" end="5966" title="Dzungar Khanate" label="Dzungar Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q284027" start="5976" end="5986" title="Dzungaria" label="Dzungharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808293" start="6039" end="6056" title="Dzungar–Qing Wars" label="Dzungar-Qing Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="6333" end="6341" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q848127" start="6362" end="6365" title="Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture" label="Ili"/>
<link wikidata="Q369870" start="6503" end="6511" title="Dzungar people" label="Dzungars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462644" start="6603" end="6619" title="Dzungar genocide" label="Dzungar genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q597003" start="6659" end="6667" title="Wei Yuan" label="Wei Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="6712" end="6720" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="6738" end="6752" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="6756" end="6762" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077510" start="6962" end="6974" title="Peter C. Perdue" label="Peter Perdue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7062" end="7070" title="Genocides in history#Qing-dynasty China" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7157" end="7209" title="Ten Great Campaigns#Suppression of the Jinchuan hill peoples (1747–1749, 1771–1776)" label="extermination of the Jinchuan Tibetan people in 1776"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="7411" end="7417" title="Jesuit China missions" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q725600" start="7418" end="7423" title="Jean Joseph Marie Amiot" label="Amiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388724" start="7466" end="7473" title="Zhao Yi" label="Zhao Yi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7478" end="7491" title="Jiang Yongzhi" label="Jiang Yongzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q546633" start="7561" end="7575" title="Hanlin Academy" label="Hanlin Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115408" start="8113" end="8130" title="Chingünjav" label="Prince Chingünjav"/>
<link wikidata="Q372192" start="8167" end="8175" title="Amursana" label="Amursana"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="8443" end="8459" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2765370" start="8483" end="8501" title="Lhasa riot of 1750" label="Lhasa riot of 1750"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="8574" end="8584" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253483" start="8615" end="8628" title="List of Qing ambans in Tibet" label="Qing resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q207962" start="8725" end="8731" title="Gurkha" label="Gurkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2765370" start="8861" end="8879" title="Lhasa riot of 1750" label="Lhasa riot of 1750"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049098" start="8902" end="8917" title="lingchi" label="sliced to death"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8959" end="9009" title="Yongzheng Emperor#Expansion in the northwest" label="what happened to Tibetan rebels on 1 November 1728"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="11139" end="11145" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="11146" end="11169" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Emir Ahmad Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="11242" end="11256" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q58360150" start="11478" end="11496" title="Four Afghan Steeds" label="Four Afghan Steeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779222" start="11611" end="11617" title="kowtow" label="kowtow"/>
<link wikidata="Q32056" start="11715" end="11725" title="Badakhshan" label="Badakhshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765854" start="11805" end="11816" title="Shan States" label="Shan States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237019" start="11896" end="11912" title="Sino-Burmese War" label="Sino-Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552020" start="12040" end="12059" title="Green Standard Army" label="Green Standard Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="12069" end="12075" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31307" start="12178" end="12193" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1765–1767)" label="latest invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="12209" end="12226" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q340803" start="12506" end="12522" title="Eight Banners" label="Manchu Bannermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199759" start="12625" end="12629" title="Inwa" label="Inwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395046" start="12831" end="12847" title="Hsinbyushin" label="King Hsinbyushin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864813" start="13594" end="13601" title="Mingrui" label="Mingrui"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065263" start="13622" end="13638" title="Battle of Maymyo" label="Battle of Maymyo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13646" end="13662" title="Sino-Burmese War#Third invasion (1767–1768)" label="Sino-Burmese war"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506724" start="13836" end="13850" title="Lê Chiêu Thống" label="Lê Chiêu Thống"/>
<link wikidata="Q10800789" start="13885" end="13895" title="Lê dynasty" label="Lê dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="13994" end="13999" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034173" start="14079" end="14086" title="Tây Sơn dynasty" label="Tây Sơn"/>
<link wikidata="Q912988" start="14301" end="14304" title="Tết" label="Tết"/>
<link wikidata="Q379775" start="14330" end="14340" title="Quang Trung" label="Nguyễn Huệ"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="14743" end="14750" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="14752" end="14759" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="14761" end="14768" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyzs"/>
<link wikidata="Q191730" start="14770" end="14776" title="Evenks" label="Evenks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="14781" end="14788" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15063" end="15105" title="Ten Great Campaigns#Suppression of the Jinchuan hill peoples (1747–1749, 1771–1776)" label="campaign against the Jinchuan hill peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q15295213" start="15167" end="15178" title="Yue Zhongqi" label="Yue Zhongqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q334398" start="15196" end="15203" title="Yue Fei" label="Yue Fei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15336" end="15349" title="Ush rebellion" label="Ush rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="15361" end="15367" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="15388" end="15395" title="Manchu people" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126346" start="16042" end="16068" title="Āfāqī Khoja Holy War" label="invasion by Jahangir Khoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q997220" start="16775" end="16796" title="White Lotus Rebellion" label="White Lotus Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q333178" start="16900" end="16915" title="Jiaqing Emperor" label="Jiaqing Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="17057" end="17063" title="Manchu people" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17319" end="17332" title="Shamanism in the Qing dynasty#The &amp;quot;Shamanic Code&amp;quot; of 1747" label="Shamanic Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q699477" start="17363" end="17402" title="Complete Library of the Four Treasuries" label="Complete Library of the Four Treasuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="17484" end="17496" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q71229" start="17534" end="17547" title="Potala Palace" label="Potala Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683898" start="17553" end="17575" title="Putuo Zongcheng Temple" label="Putuo Zongcheng Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046818" start="17611" end="17633" title="Chengde Mountain Resort" label="imperial summer palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q58675" start="17637" end="17644" title="Chengde" label="Chengde"/>
<link wikidata="Q916651" start="17764" end="17771" title="thangka" label="thangka"/>
<link wikidata="Q471696" start="17816" end="17825" title="Manjushri" label="Manjushri"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="17831" end="17842" title="Bodhisattva" label="Bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="18985" end="19003" title="landscape painting" label="landscape painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642706" start="20047" end="20073" title="Hall of Mental Cultivation" label="Hall of Mental Cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q378564" start="20146" end="20156" title="Wang Xizhi" label="Wang Xizhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="20167" end="20178" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q559425" start="20214" end="20226" title="Wang Xianzhi (calligrapher)" label="Wang Xianzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15902305" start="20264" end="20272" title="Wang Xun (calligrapher)" label="Wang Xun"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="20458" end="20463" title="seal (emblem)" label="seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q213371" start="20530" end="20539" title="Vitreous enamel" label="enameling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432383" start="20652" end="20677" title="Percival David Foundation of Chinese Art" label="Percival David Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="20693" end="20719" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="20724" end="20738" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q699477" start="20985" end="21024" title="Complete Library of the Four Treasuries" label="Complete Library of the Four Treasuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774261" start="21758" end="21767" title="Anti-Qing sentiment" label="anti-Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="22288" end="22300" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203086" start="22613" end="22633" title="Literary inquisition" label="Literary Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049098" start="22705" end="22712" title="lingchi" label="lingchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="22860" end="22868" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="22870" end="22878" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472357" start="23014" end="23016" title="Fu (poetry)" label="fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="23129" end="23138" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="23418" end="23421" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="23571" end="23577" title="Manchu language" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="23579" end="23586" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="23591" end="23600" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641150" start="23628" end="23635" title="Tibetic languages" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36831" start="23647" end="23655" title="Chagatai language" label="Chagatai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11071220" start="23960" end="23980" title="Pentaglot Dictionary" label="Pentaglot Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023673" start="24073" end="24087" title="Chinese Buddhist canon" label="Buddhist canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="24251" end="24257" title="calque" label="calque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24549" end="24574" title="Qin ding Xiyu Tongwen Zhi" label="Qin ding Xiyu Tongwen Zhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="24684" end="24692" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q56959" start="24697" end="24709" title="Oirat language" label="Oirat Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q471696" start="24929" end="24938" title="Manjushri" label="Manjushri"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023673" start="25025" end="25039" title="Chinese Buddhist canon" label="Buddhist canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q319218" start="25395" end="25405" title="Gelug" label="Gelug sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="25495" end="25505" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q157310" start="25510" end="25522" title="Panchen Lama" label="Panchen Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q692723" start="25719" end="25736" title="Yonghe Temple" label="Palace of Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641150" start="25980" end="25987" title="Tibetic languages" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055705" start="25989" end="25995" title="Mongolian script" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q122888" start="25997" end="26003" title="Manchu alphabet" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="26286" end="26298" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15434178" start="26308" end="26320" title="Mark Elliott (historian)" label="Mark Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136787" start="27563" end="27593" title="Viceroy of Shaan-Gan" label="Shaanxi-Gansu Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q32078" start="28065" end="28075" title="Naqshbandi" label="Naqshbandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19853179" start="28411" end="28431" title="Muhammad Yusuf Khoja" label="Muhammad Yusuf Khoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076837" start="28433" end="28443" title="Afaq Khoja" label="Afaq Khoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720758" start="28660" end="28669" title="Ma Laichi" label="Ma Laichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764" start="28758" end="28765" title="Bukhara" label="Bukhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="28800" end="28805" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="28943" end="28950" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="28993" end="28999" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q948437" start="29489" end="29494" title="dhikr" label="dhikr"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="35468" end="35473" title="halal" label="halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q957902" start="36059" end="36069" title="Ma Mingxin" label="Ma Mingxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q907894" start="36891" end="36919" title="Old Summer Palace" label="Garden of Perfect Brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="37202" end="37216" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q573546" start="37264" end="37289" title="Empress Xiaoshengxian" label="Empress Dowager Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132" start="37334" end="37357" title="Summer Palace" label="Garden of Clear Ripples"/>
<link wikidata="Q116311780" start="37424" end="37436" title="Kunming Lake" label="Kunming Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046818" start="37534" end="37556" title="Chengde Mountain Resort" label="imperial summer palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148671" start="37560" end="37573" title="Rehe Province" label="Rehe Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840223" start="37823" end="37836" title="Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty" label="imperial hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q907894" start="37881" end="37898" title="Old Summer Palace" label="Old Summer Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q458671" start="37953" end="37973" title="Giuseppe Castiglione (Jesuit painter)" label="Giuseppe Castiglione"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598393" start="38008" end="38018" title="Xiyang Lou" label="Xiyang Lou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042948" start="38146" end="38160" title="Michel Benoist" label="Michel Benoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="38190" end="38200" title="Water supply" label="waterworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q483453" start="38205" end="38213" title="fountain" label="fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403458" start="38322" end="38340" title="Jean Denis Attiret" label="Jean Denis Attiret"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204032" start="38380" end="38403" title="Jean-Damascène Sallusti" label="Jean-Damascène Sallusti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657543" start="38467" end="38486" title="Ignatius Sichelbart" label="Ignatius Sichelbart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38498" end="38518" title="Battle Copper Prints" label="Battle Copper Prints"/>
<link wikidata="Q674778" start="38600" end="38612" title="Emin Minaret" label="Emin Minaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q868527" start="38626" end="38632" title="Turpan" label="Turpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19854030" start="38648" end="38658" title="Emin Khoja" label="Emin Khoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="38662" end="38668" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q868527" start="38681" end="38687" title="Turpan" label="Turpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185064" start="38983" end="38998" title="House of Zhu" label="imperial family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="39006" end="39018" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41135" start="39087" end="39097" title="Ming tombs" label="Ming tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q340803" start="39149" end="39162" title="Eight Banners" label="Eight Banners"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289329" start="39209" end="39234" title="Marquis of Extended Grace" label="Marquis of Extended Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185064" start="39424" end="39439" title="House of Zhu" label="imperial family"/>
<link wikidata="Q311189" start="39655" end="39662" title="Nurhaci" label="Nurhaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q296367" start="39667" end="39677" title="Hong Taiji" label="Hong Taiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q11097172" start="40981" end="40992" title="Li Yongfang" label="Li Yongfang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41073" end="41083" title="Ma Mingpei" label="Ma Mingpei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="41325" end="41332" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="41354" end="41360" title="Manchu language" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="41384" end="41391" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="41413" end="41419" title="Manchu language" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589210" start="42272" end="42298" title="List of Manchu clans" label="Qing lists of Manchu clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558831" start="42329" end="42335" title="Solon people" label="Solons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451688" start="42498" end="42532" title="Gun control in China" label="guns turned over to the government"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="44333" end="44345" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q559661" start="44464" end="44474" title="Liao River" label="Liao River"/>
<link wikidata="Q44854" start="44551" end="44560" title="Squatting" label="squatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="44858" end="44867" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="44872" end="44886" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28996" start="45378" end="45385" title="Jinzhou" label="Jinzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="45387" end="45395" title="Shenyang" label="Fengtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q75268" start="45397" end="45404" title="Tieling" label="Tieling"/>
<link wikidata="Q92161" start="45406" end="45415" title="Changchun" label="Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q571033" start="45417" end="45422" title="Hulunbuir" label="Hulun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321612" start="45428" end="45436" title="Ning&amp;#x27;an" label="Ningguta"/>
<link wikidata="Q210326" start="45666" end="45679" title="Songhua River" label="Songhua River"/>
<link wikidata="Q334351" start="45765" end="45781" title="Daoguang Emperor" label="Daoguang Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q291281" start="45879" end="45897" title="Évariste Régis Huc" label="Évariste Régis Huc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722675" start="45942" end="45968" title="Macartney Embassy" label="British diplomatic mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q970198" start="46186" end="46213" title="Aquiline nose" label="his nose is rather aquiline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6855764" start="47003" end="47014" title="Yu Minzhong" label="Yu Minzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q700179" start="47019" end="47025" title="Heshen" label="Heshen"/>
<link wikidata="Q333178" start="47294" end="47309" title="Jiaqing Emperor" label="Jiaqing Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q876244" start="47469" end="47473" title="tael" label="tael"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="48481" end="48499" title="British East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="48547" end="48553" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="48589" end="48598" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q117073" start="48831" end="48840" title="romanization of Chinese" label="romanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617767" start="48940" end="48953" title="Canton System" label="Canton System"/>
<link wikidata="Q845741" start="48964" end="48970" title="Cohong" label="Cohong"/>
<link wikidata="Q371818" start="48975" end="48993" title="Thirteen Factories" label="Thirteen Factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="49211" end="49226" title="George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q335019" start="49329" end="49345" title="George Macartney, 1st Earl Macartney" label="George Macartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241965" start="49835" end="49850" title="tributary state" label="tributary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044828" start="49975" end="49990" title="Names of China" label="central kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779222" start="50854" end="50860" title="kowtow" label="kowtow"/>
<link wikidata="Q58324" start="51658" end="51664" title="Zhoushan" label="Chusan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="52250" end="52255" title="Macau" label="Aomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="52538" end="52552" title="Jesus" label="Lord of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="52903" end="52913" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q892367" start="53255" end="53265" title="first-rate" label="first-rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="54043" end="54067" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q332779" start="54079" end="54093" title="Isaac Titsingh" label="Isaac Titsingh"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="54106" end="54113" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755417" start="54261" end="54299" title="Andreas Everardus van Braam Houckgeest" label="Andreas Everardus van Braam Houckgeest"/>
<link wikidata="Q286730" start="54455" end="54487" title="Chrétien-Louis-Joseph de Guignes" label="Chrétien-Louis-Joseph de Guignes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="54839" end="54842" title="Dutch East India Company" label="VOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="55391" end="55405" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642706" start="55488" end="55514" title="Hall of Mental Cultivation" label="Hall of Mental Cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="55536" end="55550" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126256" start="55850" end="55878" title="Palace of Tranquil Longevity" label="Palace of Tranquil Longevity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297150" start="56092" end="56112" title="World Monuments Fund" label="World Monuments Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q27966772" start="56186" end="56228" title="Juanqinzhai" label="Studio of Exhaustion From Diligent Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q333178" start="56424" end="56439" title="Jiaqing Emperor" label="Jiaqing Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44731715" start="56500" end="56514" title="Taishang Huang" label="Taishang Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186062" start="56745" end="56765" title="Empress Xiaoxianchun" label="Empress Xiaoxianchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023928" start="56781" end="56790" title="Fuca clan" label="Fuca clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814011" start="56897" end="56905" title="Yonglian" label="Yonglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901993" start="56990" end="57023" title="Princess Hejing (born 1731)" label="Princess Hejing of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q575362" start="57182" end="57189" title="Empress Nara" label="Empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q10801964" start="57202" end="57211" title="Nara clan" label="Nara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q461124" start="57458" end="57476" title="Empress Xiaoyichun" label="Empress Xiaoyichun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478741" start="57550" end="57583" title="Princess Hejing (born 1756)" label="Princess Hejing of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004407" start="57702" end="57734" title="Princess Heke" label="Princess Heke of the Second Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q333178" start="57878" end="57893" title="Jiaqing Emperor" label="Jiaqing Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901429" start="58006" end="58013" title="Yonglin" label="Yonglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11074221" start="58020" end="58051" title="Prince Qing" label="Prince Qingxi of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q575326" start="58125" end="58155" title="Imperial Noble Consort Huixian" label="Imperial Noble Consort Huixian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773119" start="58216" end="58245" title="Imperial Noble Consort Zhemin" label="Imperial Noble Consort Zhemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023928" start="58261" end="58270" title="Fuca clan" label="Fuca clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813500" start="58300" end="58309" title="Yonghuang" label="Yonghuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10948704" start="58316" end="58353" title="Prince Ding" label="Prince Ding&amp;#x27;an of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185731" start="58464" end="58493" title="Imperial Noble Consort Shujia" label="Imperial Noble Consort Shujia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13083721" start="58509" end="58521" title="Kim (Korean surname)" label="Gingiya clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814474" start="58569" end="58578" title="Yongcheng (prince)" label="Yongcheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q11043526" start="58585" end="58616" title="Prince Lü" label="Prince Lüduan of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822603" start="58672" end="58680" title="Yongxuan" label="Yongxuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27940633" start="58687" end="58718" title="Prince Yi (儀)" label="Prince Yishen of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824142" start="58832" end="58840" title="Yongxing (prince)" label="Yongxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11074617" start="58847" end="58880" title="Prince Cheng of the First Rank" label="Prince Chengzhe of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392113" start="58929" end="58959" title="Imperial Noble Consort Chunhui" label="Imperial Noble Consort Chunhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814257" start="59019" end="59028" title="Yongzhang" label="Yongzhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11071278" start="59035" end="59064" title="Prince Xun (循)" label="Prince Xun of the Second Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821688" start="59116" end="59124" title="Yongrong" label="Yongrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11074087" start="59131" end="59165" title="Prince Shen" label="Prince Zhizhuang of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771969" start="59219" end="59252" title="Princess Hejia" label="Princess Hejia of the Second Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q731741" start="59317" end="59348" title="Imperial Noble Consort Qinggong" label="Imperial Noble Consort Qinggong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685607" start="59428" end="59445" title="Noble Consort Xin" label="Noble Consort Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774133" start="59716" end="59732" title="Noble Consort Yu (Qianlong)" label="Noble Consort Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021962" start="59799" end="59805" title="Yongqi, Prince Rong" label="Yongqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11120538" start="59812" end="59845" title="Prince Rong" label="Prince Rongchun of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045706" start="59896" end="59913" title="Noble Consort Xun (Qianlong)" label="Noble Consort Xun"/>
<link wikidata="Q54593665" start="59927" end="59943" title="Irgen Gioro" label="Irgen-Gioro clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915462" start="59990" end="60008" title="Noble Consort Ying" label="Noble Consort Ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q20607721" start="60022" end="60033" title="Baarins" label="Baarin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685606" start="60072" end="60089" title="Dowager Noble Consort Wan" label="Noble Consort Wan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625151" start="60162" end="60173" title="Consort Shu (Qianlong)" label="Consort Shu"/>
<link wikidata="Q985700" start="60186" end="60200" title="Yehe Nara clan" label="Yehe-Nara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774502" start="60291" end="60301" title="Consort Yu (Borjigin)" label="Consort Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="60314" end="60319" title="Oirats" label="Oirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="60320" end="60333" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10951024" start="60423" end="60435" title="Consort Rong (Qianlong)" label="Consort Rong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432691" start="60448" end="60459" title="Khoja (Turkestan)" label="Hezhuo clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190774" start="60499" end="60510" title="Consort Dun" label="Consort Dun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447443" start="60571" end="60604" title="Princess Hexiao (Qianlong)" label="Princess Hexiao of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774555" start="60708" end="60720" title="Consort Fang" label="Consort Fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023928" start="60797" end="60806" title="Fuca clan" label="Fuca clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811912" start="60837" end="60849" title="Concubine Yi (Qianlong)" label="Concubine Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812345" start="61096" end="61111" title="Concubine Cheng (Qianlong)" label="Concubine Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q994197" start="61124" end="61136" title="Niohuru" label="Niohuru clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045736" start="61230" end="61245" title="Noble Lady Shun" label="Noble Lady Shun"/>
<link wikidata="Q994197" start="61259" end="61271" title="Niohuru" label="Niohuru clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210991" start="61364" end="61380" title="Sirin Gioro" label="Sirin-Gioro clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553058" start="61429" end="61440" title="Socoro" label="Socoro clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8991882" start="62487" end="62495" title="Tony Liu" label="Tony Liu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070329" start="62571" end="62583" title="Zhang Tielin" label="Zhang Tielin"/>
<link wikidata="Q715815" start="62593" end="62609" title="My Fair Princess" label="My Fair Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692593" start="62639" end="62647" title="Kwong Wa" label="Kwong Wa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652689" start="62657" end="62673" title="Happy Ever After (Hong Kong TV series)" label="Happy Ever After"/>
<link wikidata="Q835003" start="62703" end="62711" title="Nie Yuan" label="Nie Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55540000" start="62755" end="62776" title="Story of Yanxi Palace" label="Story of Yanxi Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q700405" start="62863" end="62870" title="Ti Lung" label="Ti Lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128350" start="62880" end="62900" title="My Fair Princess III" label="My Fair Princess III"/>
<link wikidata="Q15895399" start="62953" end="62973" title="New My Fair Princess" label="New My Fair Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q11070218" start="63024" end="63047" title="Empresses in the Palace" label="Empresses in the Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126182" start="63094" end="63103" title="Palace II" label="Palace II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041593" start="63133" end="63142" title="Kent Tong" label="Kent Tong"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63152" end="63179" title="Palace 3: The Lost Daughter" label="Palace 3: The Lost Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070192" start="63209" end="63223" title="Zhang Guoqiang" label="Zhang Guoqiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q28415916" start="63233" end="63247" title="Succession War (TV series)" label="Succession War"/>
<link wikidata="Q710487" start="63277" end="63288" title="Wallace Huo" label="Wallace Huo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24276183" start="63298" end="63334" title="Ruyi&amp;#x27;s Royal Love in the Palace" label="Ruyi&amp;#x27;s Royal Love in the Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q725600" start="63403" end="63426" title="Jean Joseph Marie Amiot" label="Jean Joseph Marie Amiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617767" start="63429" end="63442" title="Canton System" label="Canton System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100764" start="63445" end="63483" title="Family tree of Chinese monarchs (late)" label="Family tree of Chinese monarchs (late)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378518" start="63486" end="63499" title="Long Corridor" label="Long Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753262" start="63508" end="63522" title="Manwen Laodang" label="Manwen Laodang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683898" start="63531" end="63553" title="Putuo Zongcheng Temple" label="Putuo Zongcheng Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267644" start="63556" end="63572" title="Qianlong Dynasty" label="Qianlong Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q57414446" start="63575" end="63591" title="Qianlong Tongbao" label="Qianlong Tongbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916279" start="63594" end="63610" title="Portuguese Macau" label="Portuguese Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q56271544" start="63613" end="63652" title="Military of Macau under Portuguese rule" label="Military of Macau under Portuguese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="63655" end="63672" title="British Hong Kong" label="British Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11668274" start="63675" end="63708" title="British Forces Overseas Hong Kong" label="British Forces Overseas Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q24831013" start="63711" end="63748" title="Mao Zedong&amp;#x27;s cult of personality" label="Mao Zedong&amp;#x27;s cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722675" start="63751" end="63768" title="Macartney Embassy" label="Macartney Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653873" start="63771" end="63779" title="Liu Yong (Qing dynasty)" label="Liu Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q700179" start="63782" end="63788" title="Heshen" label="Heshen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15568" start="64217" end="64240" title="University of Hong Kong" label="University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64241" end="64250" title="University of Hong Kong#Libraries and museums" label="Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755417" start="64316" end="64336" title="Andreas Everardus van Braam Houckgeest" label="van Braam Houckgeest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15568" start="64803" end="64826" title="University of Hong Kong" label="University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64827" end="64836" title="University of Hong Kong#Libraries and museums" label="Libraries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="265950" wikidata="Q317839" url="?curid=265950" title="Yongzheng Emperor">
<text>The Yongzheng Emperor (13 December 1678 – 8 October 1735), also known by his temple name Emperor Shizong of Qing, personal name Yinzhen, was the fifth emperor of the Qing dynasty, and the third Qing emperor to rule over China proper.

The fourth son of the Kangxi Emperor, Yongzheng ascended the throne following prolonged disputes over succession. A hard-working ruler, he aimed to create a more effective government, cracked down on corruption and reformed the personnel and financial administration. His reign also saw the formation of the Grand Council, an institution that had a major impact on the future of the dynasty. Militarily, Yongzheng continued his father&#x27;s efforts to consolidate Qing&#x27;s position in Outer Mongolia and Tibet through force.

The Yongzheng Emperor died in 1735 at the age of 56 and was succeeded by his fourth son, who assumed the throne as the Qianlong Emperor. Although his reign was much shorter than that of both his father and his son, the Yongzheng era was a period of peace and prosperity.

==Birth and early life==
Yinzhen was the eleventh recorded son of the Kangxi Emperor, and the fourth prince to survive into adulthood. His mother, historically known as Empress Xiaogongren, was originally a court attendant from the Manchu Uya clan. Around the time when Yinzhen was born, his mother was of low status and did not have the right to raise her own children. For most of his childhood, Yinzhen was raised by Noble Consort Tong, the daughter of Tong Guowei, the Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s maternal uncle and an eminent official in the early part of the Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s reign. She died when Yinzhen was just 9 years old. After she gave birth to more children, Yinzhen&#x27;s mother was promoted to a &quot;pin&quot; and then to a &quot;fei&quot;, and became known as &quot;defei&quot; or &quot;Virtuous Consort&quot;. The Kangxi Emperor did not raise his children only inside the palace. He also exposed his sons (including Yinzhen) to the outside world and gave them a rigorous education. Yinzhen accompanied his father on several inspection trips around the Beijing area, as well as one further south. He became the honorary leader of the Plain Red Banner during the Battle of Jao Modo between the Qing Empire and the Mongol Dzungar Khanate led by Galdan Khan. Yinzhen was made a &quot;beile&quot; in 1689 along with several brothers and promoted to &quot;junwang&quot; (second-rank prince) in 1698.

In 1709, the Kangxi Emperor stripped his second son Yinreng of his position as crown prince. Yinreng had been the crown prince for his whole life; his removal left the position of heir open to competition among the Emperor&#x27;s remaining sons (the Kangxi Emperor had 24 sons who reached adulthood). In the same year, the Kangxi Emperor promoted Yinzhen from &quot;junwang&quot; to &quot;qinwang&quot; (first-rank prince) under the title &quot;Prince Yong of the First Rank&quot; (; Manchu: &quot;hošoi hūwaliyasun cin wang&quot;). Yinzhen maintained a low profile during the initial stages of the succession struggle. To appoint a new heir, the Kangxi Emperor decreed that officials in his imperial court would nominate a new crown prince. The Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s eighth son, Yinsi, was the candidate preferred by the majority of the court as well as many of the Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s other sons. The Kangxi Emperor, however, opted not to appoint Yinsi as his heir apparent largely due to apprehension that Yinsi&#x27;s political clout at court was beginning to overshadow that of himself. Thereafter, Yinzhen sensed that his father was in favour of re-instating Yinreng as heir apparent, thus he supported Yinreng and earned the trust of his father.

===Yongzheng&#x27;s quote===
Yinzhen (: 13 December 1678 – 8 October 1735) had the highest honor to orchestrate the imperial ceremonies and rituals during the reign of the Kangxi emperor, which illustrated that Yinzhen was well acquainted with the Confucianism traditions and customs. In the imperial court, Yinzhen was also deeply immersed in the state&#x27;s affairs and heavily engaged in the political debates where he acquired diplomatic skills. As the Yongzheng Emperor (: r. 1723–1735 CE) of Qing China, Yinzhen was indubitably a very diplomatically inclined ruler who created an institution of a &quot;moral government&quot; based on the Confucian principles. Yinzhen sought four distinctive qualities: loyalty—, fairness—, sincerity—, and capability—, from his subjects in order to run an effective court and to achieve stability. Li Wei ( : February 2, 1687 – December 3, 1738) was a recruit among the Qing officials to possess the desired virtues, and was regarded highly by Yongzheng.

A notable quote from Yinzhen captured during his reign as the Yongzheng Emperor in the 1720s expresses his imperial will:
:— page 190, lines 7–10

If it is a trivial matter, do not just simply neglect the issue because it seems insignificant. If it is a complex matter, do not just simply conceal away the issue because it could become a challenge. To have good governance and dissuade seditionists, is all in the ruler&#x27;s wish. If civilians see a judicious court that is loyal and wholeheartedly for the country, and see that the court embraces its people; and civilians feel the virtue in their court marshalls, then the people would not perceive the court as a threat. Thus, there would be no reason to have seditionaries.

In short, after several years of political chaos, Yongzheng earnestly strived to restore a functional court with &quot;good government&quot;, immediately after he ascended the throne in 1723 CE, to stabilize Qing into a unified and harmonious empire. In 1733 CE, Yongzheng successfully institutionalized the Grand Council, which allows Qing to relay communication effectively and efficiently from region to region, thereby enabling the implementation of his domestic reform policy.

With the establishment of his Grand Council, Yongzheng was not only able to discourage corruption, but he was in a position to launch several domestic reforms beneficial to the empire and its people. Canals and irrigation systems were reconstructed to support agriculture and maintain farmlands. During famines, he provided relief to the affected regions by distributing resources. In reparation to the people, who were the backbone of the country, he issued an imperial decree to emancipate slaves under his reign. One of the several tax reform policies Yongzheng introduced was to shift the head taxation to the property taxation on landowners, which greatly reduced the tax burden on civilians. Additionally, Yongzheng was indeed in full support with the construction of orphanages to shelter orphans, in building elementary schools to educate children, and poorhouses to house paupers. Perhaps the Yongzheng era (雍正: r. 1723–1735 CE) may have been overshadowed by his predecessor&#x27;s accomplishments, the Kangxi Emperor, and his achievements may not have been as glorious as his successor, the Qianlong Emperor; however, the Yongzheng era did serve as a remediation to the people, and resentments began to gradually decrease. Hence the Yongzheng era was a peaceful and prosperous reign of Qing China.

==Struggle for the crown prince&#x27;s position==


===Kangxi&#x27;s choices of the crown princes===
In 1712, the Kangxi Emperor deposed Yinreng again, and chose not to designate an heir apparent for the remaining years of his reign. This resulted in competition among his sons for the position of crown prince. Those considered &#x27;frontrunners&#x27; were Yinzhi, Yinsi, and Yinti (the third, eighth and 14th princes, respectively). Of these, Yinsi received the most support from the Mandarins, but not from his father. Yinzhen had supported Yinreng as heir, and did not build a large political base for himself until the final years of the Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s reign. Unlike Yinsi&#x27;s high-profile cultivation of a partisan base of support, Yinzhen did so largely away from the limelight. When the Kangxi Emperor died in December 1722, the field of contenders shrank to three princes after Yinsi pledged his support to the 14th prince, Yinti.

At the time of the Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s death, Yinti, who held the appointment of Border-Pacification General-in-Chief (), was leading a military campaign in northwestern China. He was also awarded an apparently grandiose title of &quot;Fuyuan General-in-chief Prince&quot; (撫遠大将軍王) and his departure ceremony was solemnly held. Some other princes, such as Yinsi and his clique, interpreted that Yinti might be chosen as heir and, therefore, pledged their support to Yinti and encouraged him to make military achievements to prove his &quot;worthiness&quot;.

However, Yi Zhongtian argued that such a &quot;promotion&quot; was Kangxi&#x27;s way of protecting Yinzhen, Kangxi&#x27;s secret chosen heir, by distracting the public&#x27;s attention away from Yinzhen. The court officials, who believed that Yinti would be chosen as the heir, would also no longer pester Kangxi about the crown prince issue. Sending Yinti away to the northwestern border was also meant to separate him from Yinsi, his newly formed ally, and potential flatterers who wanted to curry favour with Yinti. Yinti would also be unable to use his commanded troops to make a coup d&#x27;état, since Nian Gengyao, Yinzhen&#x27;s close aide, controlled the food supply and the return route of Yinti&#x27;s troops. Promoting Yinti was also a way for Kangxi to control Yinzhen: if Kangxi&#x27;s &quot;investment&quot; to Yinzhen turned out to be a failure, he still had Yinti as alternative choice. With Yinti as a potential competitor, Yinzhen would not fall into self-complacency and turn against Kangxi. Yinsi&#x27;s clique, clinging to the hope of Yinti&#x27;s future prospect, would also not do anything reckless. As a result, Yinti&#x27;s &quot;General-in-chief Prince&quot; title appeared grandiose, but was actually hollow and dubious; it was neither &quot;general&quot; nor &quot;prince&quot; and could be interpreted in various ways, which could be used in favour of either Yinti or Yinzhen should the situation arise. Such dubious words with multiple interpretations was a traditional trick in Chinese politics.

The popular history writer Yi Zongtian think that there were signs that showed Yinzhen as Kangxi&#x27;s secret choice. First, according to Yongzheng&#x27;s edicts and official historical account, Kangxi mentioned that Yinzhen alone was raised by Kangxi and how he expressed filial piety to Kangxi. In another occasion though, Yongzheng said that he was not a prince who was raised in the palace. Professor Lin Qian on the other hand notes that the fourteenth prince was the only son Kangxi always kept with him, until his death, despite the fact he already married (the fourteenth prince&#x27;s wife lived inside his father&#x27;s palace too) and had a princely mansion outside.

Second, according to Yi, at Kangxi&#x27;s 60th regnal year (1721) memorial event, Yinzhen was given the task of holding the ritual ceremonies for the royal family&#x27;s ancestors in Three Great Mausoleums in Shenyang. Shortly after that, Yinzhen was also tasked to organize the Sacrifice to the Heaven (南郊禮), the most sacred ceremony in Confucian tradition, on the day of winter solstice. Others note that the third prince Yinzhi also had presided over these ceremonies before, the fifth prince Yinqi was presiding over the Veneration of Ancestor ceremony at the time Kangxi was dying, and even eighth prince Yinsi (who had had many clashes with Kangxi) made the lists of candidates. The onky one among adult princes who was put aside was Yinxiang, Yongzheng&#x27;s important ally. Lin Qian also suspects that Yongzheng organizing the Sacrifice of Heaven of the sixty first year was an event invented later to justify Prin Yong&#x27;s strange behaviours at that time, since no other records mention it other than &quot;Shilu&quot;, which was written under the supervision of Yongzheng and Zhang Tingyu .
Yi also says that Kangxi highly favoured Yinzhen&#x27;s son Hongli (future Qianlong Emperor) and that might also contribute to Kangxi&#x27;s support for Yinzhen as his heir, similar to how Yongle Emperor chose his heir due to his favour to the crown prince&#x27;s son. Historian Yang Zhen though notes that Kangxi was kind to his grandchildren in general but especially to the sons of the second and the fourteenth princes.

Official court records state that on 20 December 1722 the ailing Kangxi Emperor called seven of his sons and the general commandant of the Beijing gendarmerie, Longkodo, to his bedside. Longkodo read the will and declared that Yinzhen would be the Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s successor. Some evidence has suggested that Yinzhen contacted Longkodo months before the will was read in preparation for his succession through military means, although in their official capacities frequent encounters were expected.

Historian Qin Hui writes that it is largely recognized that Yongzheng forged the succession edicts together with Nian Gengyao. Qin Hui criticizes Feng Erkang, who also recognizes the forgery, for failing to explain why Yongzheng would have needed a forged edict if he had truly been the legal heir. Yongzheng also changed his story several times. When he punished Longkodo (who was supposed to be the only person who was informed of Kangxi&#x27;s succession plan and informed Yongzheng and others about it after Kangxi&#x27;s death), Yongzheng himself said that Longkodo was not present by the emperor&#x27;s side on that day. According to historian Dai Yi, a report by Longkodo to Yongzheng also shows that the prince Yunli (who was cited by Yongzheng as one of the witnesses in his later version of the events; this prince did not participate in the fight for the throne but later became Yongzheng&#x27;s ally during the latter&#x27;s reign) was not present – when he was rushing to Kangxi&#x27;s resident after being informed of his father&#x27;s death, the prince met Longkodo who told him about Yongzheng&#x27;s ascension and became so horrified that he returned to his house immediately, looking like a mad man.
Dai Yi, Meng Shen, Wang Zhonghan, Lin Qian and Yang Zhen are the notable historians who maintain that the fourteenth prince Yinzheng (later renamed Yunti) was Kangxi&#x27;s intended heir. They point out that the conflict against the Zhungar was of such an existential importance to the Qing dynasty (which threatened to rip half of their territories apart together with the Mongol-Manchu alliance) that it is hard to imagine Kangxi would have sent anyone but his most trusted son to deal with the crisis. Due to this, the &quot;Fuyuan General-in-chief&quot; position (which was already bestowed on Kangxi on his trusted generals several times before and carried with it exceptional powers) was raised to an unprecedented level of power and prestige unseen since the beginning of the dynasty. The deposed crown prince, Yinreng, and Yinzhen fought for the position too, but failed to get it. Lin Qian writes that there are many signs that show Yongzheng did alter records to make the title &quot;General-in-chief Prince&quot; less impressive, and that the fourteenth prince&#x27;s rank was actually Prince (&quot;wang&quot;). Kangxi even made the apparently longterm investment by sending several young members of the imperial family to the fourteenth prince so he could raise them as his apprentices. This intent was shown, when the fourteenth prince requested them to be sent back to the capital, Kangxi refused and told him that they needed to be trained (obviously to serve the fourteenth later). Yin Qian notes that with sixteen people holding titles ranging from &quot;beizi&quot; to &quot;wang&quot; and other important officials sent to follow the fourteenth prince, Kangxi had already organized a mini imperial court for him. Yang Zhen opines that when Kangxi encouraged his son to engage with the local chiefs, the emperor did not think about their usefulness in the current campaign alone, as he told the prince that their dedication to the person of the prince &quot;will be of use later&quot;, and that their service would be more valuable to that of the Han.

===Yinzhen&#x27;s tactics===
Yinzhen&#x27;s tactics during the struggle for crown prince&#x27;s position were to do practically nothing and to stay out of the limelight. Instead, he focused on filial piety towards Kangxi and dutifully performed the given tasks as a subordinate of the Emperor. Compared to other siblings (Yinzhi, Yinsi, Yinti, Yinreng), Yinzhen had no clear advantage. Unlike Yinsi, Yinzhen had neither a close association nor a good relationship with the majority of court officers and magistrates, he was also shunned due to his cold appearance and the legalist-style harsh treatment for any kinds of moral sin and legal violation of the magistrates. Acknowledging that fact, Yinzhen intentionally showed no ambition to be the heir in order to not attract any unnecessary attention and animosity; he watched as other contenders fought each other to the death, a policy more beneficial for him. Yinzhen even pleaded many times for Kangxi&#x27;s mercy and pardon for other princes, including the deposed Yinreng, which gained him the praise and favour from Kangxi.

As an experienced player in politics, Kangxi himself knew that Yinzhen&#x27;s humbleness and filial piety was not really sincere and more of a cover to protect himself, nonetheless Kangxi still made lavish praise to Yinzhen and enjoyed the apparently good relationship with his son. In the situation when his offspring openly trampled on family relationships, Yinzhen&#x27;s &quot;false&quot; filial piety and kindness was already a haven for Kangxi. Kangxi also hoped that Yinzhen, despite being pretentious, might not actually mistreat his deceased father and the deposed Yinreng in the future, which was proven to be relatively correct. As a result, Kangxi not only didn&#x27;t expose Yinzhen, but also became the accomplice with Yinzhen&#x27;s act.

===Disputes over succession===
Although Kangxi&#x27;s meticulous plan enabled Yinzhen later to be crowned as emperor, it also created many disputes about Yinzhen&#x27;s succession as there was no direct, intuitive way to prove Yinzhen&#x27;s legitimacy. Kangxi&#x27;s choice as Yinzhen was a shock to many other princes (even Yinzhen also pretended to be shocked). Kangxi also did not make any mention about his choice for the crown prince position, his will was only known via the deceased emperor&#x27;s testament provided by Longkodo, and there was no decisive evidence proved that the testament was not fabricated. For the contemporary public, there was also no evidence to directly infer, or to explain why, Kangxi thought of Yinzhen as his choice. As a result, Yinzhen&#x27;s succession faced fierce opposition from former contenders such as Yinti, Yinzhi and Yinsi. Purging the dissidents and solidifying his own position occupied much of Yinzhen&#x27;s initial reign as emperor.

Researchers at Academia Sinica have disproved the theory, as official Qing documents, when mentioning sons of the Emperor, always list the son&#x27;s title, as well as the son&#x27;s rank amongst the emperor&#x27;s sons and the son&#x27;s name. In this case, the will mentions &quot;Prince Yong, Emperor&#x27;s Fourth Son, Yinzhen&quot; (), as well as Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s high regards for Yinzhen, and his belief that Yinzhen can succeed on the throne.

The problem with the will, or at least the Chinese version, as currently preserved, is that it was not Kangxi&#x27;s creation. It was drafted three days after Kangxi&#x27;s death by Longkodo under Yongzheng&#x27;s instruction. Yongzheng&#x27;s order is still preserved by Museum of the Institute of History &amp; Philology, Academia Sinica There are debates about the authenticity of extant copies of the Manchu version, but not only the part that mentions the heir&#x27;s name is destroyed, the important sentence that praises Yinzhen&#x27;s virtues also does not appear at all.

====Legends about the will====
There is a widely circulated legend, persisting even to the present day, that Yinzhen was crowned emperor after he modified Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s final will that detailed who will succeed him. There are two versions of the legend, both of which involves the Chinese character &quot; (), and by extension, Yunti, Prince Xun. One version involves changing the &quot; in the phrase &quot;transfer the throne to the Fourteenth Prince&quot; () to &quot;&quot; (), which changed the phrase to &quot;pass the throne on to the Fourth Prince&quot; ). Another version states the character &quot; was changed to &quot; (), which means &quot;sequence number&quot; (四 = four, 第四 = the fourth / number four), thus changing the phrase to &quot;transfer the throne to the Fourth Prince&quot; ().

==Reign==
After ascending the throne in December 1722, Yinzhen adopted the era name &quot;Yongzheng&quot; ( lit. &quot;Harmonious Justice&quot;) in 1723 from his peerage title &quot;yong&quot; ( lit. &quot;harmonious&quot;) and &quot;zheng&quot; ( lit. &quot;just, correct, upright&quot;). It has been suggested that the second character of his era name was an attempt to cover up his illegal claim to the throne by calling himself &quot;justified&quot;. Immediately after succeeding to the throne, the Yongzheng Emperor chose his new governing council. It consisted of the eighth prince Yinsi, 13th prince Yinxiang, Zhang Tingyu, Ma Qi, and Longkodo. Yinsi was given the title &quot;Prince Lian&quot; while Yinxiang was given the title &quot;Prince Yi&quot;, and these two held the highest positions in the land.

===Continued battle against princes===

The nature of his succession remained a subject of controversy and overshadowed the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s reign. As many of his surviving brothers did not see his succession as legitimate, the Yongzheng Emperor became increasingly paranoid that they would plot to overthrow him. The earlier players in the battle for succession, Yinzhi, the eldest, and Yinreng, the former crown prince, continued to live under house arrest. Yinreng died two years after the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s reign began.

The Yongzheng Emperor continued to perceive Yinsi and his party, consisting of the princes Yintang, Yin&#x27;e, Yinti, and their associates, as his greatest political challenge in the early years of his reign. To diffuse their political clout, the Yongzheng Emperor undertook a &#x27;divide and conquer&#x27; strategy. Immediately after ascending the throne, the emperor bestowed on Yinsi the title &quot;Prince Lian&quot;, nominally of the highest noble rank. Yinsi was also then appointed as the Minister of the &quot;Lifan Yuan&quot; (Feudatory Affairs Office) and the top-ranking member of the imperial council assisting the Yongzheng Emperor; some historians believe his position at the time was essentially that of a &quot;Chancellor or Prime Minister&quot;. By ostensibly elevating Yinsi to a more prominent political role, the Yongzheng Emperor held Yinsi under close watch and kept him busy with affairs of state, reducing the chance of him conducting behind-the-scenes political maneuvers. Yinsi&#x27;s allies received notably different treatment. Yintang was sent to Qinghai under the pretext of military service, but in reality was watched over by the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s trusted protégé, Nian Gengyao. Yin&#x27;e, the tenth prince, was told to leave the capital to send off a departing Mongol prince, but since he refused to complete this trip as the emperor commanded, the Yongzheng Emperor stripped him of all his titles in May 1724 and sent him north to Shunyi to languish in solitude.

The 14th prince, Yinti, born to the same mother as the Yongzheng Emperor, was recalled to Beijing from his military post. The emperor selected Nian Gengyao to replace Yinti as the commander of the northwestern expeditionary force. Yinti, who expected to be placed on the throne himself, was reluctant to recognise the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s succession as legitimate. Yinti was accused of violating imperial decorum at the funeral proceedings of the late emperor, and placed under house arrest by the Yongzheng Emperor at the imperial tombs in western Beijing. Historians believe that their mother, Empress Dowager Renshou, favoured Yinti partly because she raised him herself, while she did not raise the Yongzheng Emperor. Nonetheless, the increasingly sharp conflict between her two surviving sons caused their mother great sorrow. She died less than six months after the Kangxi Emperor.

By forcibly dispatching Yinsi&#x27;s party to separate locations geographically, the Yongzheng Emperor made it extremely inconvenient for his rivals to link up and conspire against him. While some of Yinsi&#x27;s subordinates were appointed to high office, others were demoted or banished, making it difficult for Yinsi&#x27;s party to maintain the same set of partisan interests. The Yongzheng Emperor publicly reprimanded Yinsi in 1724 for mishandling an assignment, eventually removing him from office and then sending him into house arrest. Yinsi was forced to rename himself &quot;Acina&quot;, a derogatory slur in the Manchu language. The emperor also confiscated the assets of Yintang and Yin&#x27;e.

===Descendants of the Ming dynasty&#x27;s imperial family===
In line with his father the Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s wish for an integrated Manchu—Han Chinese nation, the Yongzheng Emperor in 1725 bestowed a hereditary marquis title on Zhu Ming, a descendant of the imperial family of the Ming dynasty. This action was also seen as fulfilling a long-standing Chinese custom (purportedly dating back to the Shang dynasty) for the Emperors of a new dynasty to enfeoff a member of the overthrown previous dynasty with a noble title, the so-called &quot;Two Crownings and Three Respects.&quot;

Zhu was also paid by the Qing government to perform rituals at the Ming tombs and induct the Chinese Plain White Banner into the Eight Banners. Later in 1750, during the reign of the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s successor, the Qianlong Emperor, Zhu Ming was posthumously honoured as &quot;Marquis of Extended Grace&quot;. The marquis title was passed on to Zhu&#x27;s descendants for 12 generations until the end of the Qing dynasty in the early 20th century.

===Nian Gengyao and Longkodo===
Nian Gengyao was a supporter of the Yongzheng Emperor long before the latter ascended the throne. In 1722, when he was recalling his brother Yinti from the northwest border in Xinjiang, the Yongzheng Emperor appointed Nian as the commander of the Qing army in Xinjiang. The situation in Xinjiang at the time was volatile, and a strong general was needed in the area. After several military conquests, however, Nian&#x27;s stature and power grew. Some said he began seeing himself as equal to the emperor. Seeing Nian as no longer within his control, the Yongzheng Emperor issued an imperial edict demoting Nian to the position of a general of the Hangzhou Command. As Nian continued to remain unrepentant, he was eventually given an ultimatum and forced to commit suicide by consuming poison in 1726.

Longkodo was the commander of the militias stationed at the capital at the time of the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s succession. He fell into disgrace in 1728 and died while under house arrest.

After taking the throne, the Yongzheng Emperor suppressed writings he deemed unfavorable to his court, particularly those with an anti-Manchu bias. Foremost among these were those of Zeng Jing, an unsuccessful degree candidate heavily influenced by the 17th-century scholar Lü Liuliang. Zeng had been so affected by what he read that he attempted to incite the governor-general of Shaanxi-Sichuan, Yue Zhongqi (a descendant of anti-Jurchen General Yue Fei), to rebel against the Qing government. Yue Zhongqi promptly turned him in, and in 1730 news of the case reached the Yongzheng Emperor. Highly concerned with the implications of the case, the emperor had Zeng Jing brought to Beijing for trial. The emperor&#x27;s verdict seemed to demonstrate a Confucian sovereign&#x27;s benevolence: He ascribed Zeng&#x27;s actions to the gullibility and naïveté of a youth taken in by Lü Liuliang&#x27;s abusive and overdrawn rhetoric. In addition, the emperor suggested that Lü Liuliang&#x27;s original attack on the Manchus was misplaced, since they had been transformed by their long-term exposure to the civilising force of Confucianism.

The Yongzheng Emperor is also known for establishing a strict autocratic-style rule during his reign. He detested corruption, and punished officials severely when they were found guilty of an offense. In 1729, he issued an edict prohibiting the smoking of madak, a blend of tobacco and opium. The Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s reign saw the Qing dynasty further establish itself as a powerful empire in Asia. He was instrumental in extending what became known as a &quot;Kangqian Period of Harmony&quot; (; cf. &quot;Pax Romana&quot;). In response to the tragedy of the succession struggle during his father&#x27;s reign, the Yongzheng Emperor created a sophisticated procedure for choosing a successor. He was known for his trust in Mandarin officials. Li Wei and Tian Wenjing governed China&#x27;s southern areas with the assistance of Ortai.

==Cultural and economic achievements==
===Rationalization of personnel appointment system===
In the early Qing period, the majority of middle-to-low government posts were subject to a mechanical appointment procedure managed by the Board of Personnel, which was a lottery rule. More specifically, candidates would first be classified into three categories, namely degree holders, office purchasers, and officials waiting for promotion, based on their sources of candidature. These candidates or so-called offices-in-waiting were then assigned to different posts by drawing lots on a monthly basis, known as month selection. This random appointment procedure stemmed from the late Ming dynasty. Sun Piyang, a minister of the Board of Personnel during the Wanli emperor&#x27;s reign of Ming, was said to have invented the method of drawing lots with the intention of introducing fairness into personnel selection when the Ming court was mired in faction politics. It was apparent that this rule-based appointment procedure was conducive to curtailing patronage-network building and rent-seeking, although at the cost of flexibility.

Considering the limitation of monthly selection, the Yongzheng Emperor, inspired by a memorial of Jin Hong, the provincial administrative commissioner of Guangxi province, decided to launch a structural reform to the appointment system in 1731. In the new appointment system, local jurisdictions first were classified into two groups according to governance difficulties. More specifically, to prioritize local jurisdictions and allocate appointment power accordingly, the governability of each jurisdiction was decomposed into four elements, or four &quot;characters&quot;: Chong, Fan, Pi, and Nan. &quot;Chong&quot; (thoroughfare) referred to places at busy highways and was designed to capture the characteristics of commercial potential or military significance. “Fan” (troublesome) stood for places with a great deal of onerous official business. “Pi” (wearisome) indicated areas having difficulty collecting taxes. “Nan” (difficult) referred to the places with crime-prone subjects and recurring violent engagement. Moreover, posts of jurisdictions containing all four elements would be ranked as very important positions and posts of places with three elements would be rated as important posts, whereas posts of places having less than two elements would be tagged as middle-level positions (two elements) or easy posts (one-zero element) respectively.

In this way, the post designation (Chong, Fan, Pi, and Nan) was linked to the importance rating system hand in hand. The appointment power then was allocated based on the importance rating system; posts marked as very important and important were subject to the discretionary appointment by the emperor or provincial leaders, whereas other less important posts still were assigned by drawing lots. As a result, the high-quality officials were matched to the important positions and in turn promoted local governance.

Yi Zhongtian commented that Yongzheng had a very flexible and pragmatic tastes of talent enrollment, based on the advice of Ortai: &quot;Amongst affairs, there are both essential and trivial, easy and challenging. Amongst people, there are both soft and hard, long and short.&quot; The emperor, therefore, did not use dogmatic and abstract criteria of &quot;talents&quot; and &quot;morality&quot;, instead he acknowledged that every person has both strengths and defects and the tasks given to him should be tailored to suit his specific traits. For example, Li Wei had a very rude personality, but he was brave and clever, Yongzheng assigned him tasks related to law enforcement, criminal punishment and rebel liquidation. Zhu Shih, a scholar with upright and good personality, was appointed as teacher for the future Qianlong Emperor. Tian Wenjing had many personality defects and was heavily criticized by contemporaries, but was favoured by Yongzheng due to his hard-work, devotion and loyalty. Chang Sanle, Wuqiao district chief, had upright and transparent moral conduct, but lacked fervor in work, hence he was re-assigned to an educational post and removed from administrative work. However, the most critical criterion for the government magistrate was &quot;sincerity&quot; towards the emperor. The magistrate&#x27;s works, reports, criticisms, suggestion, even flattery and blandishment, should be performed with sincere devotion to and sympathy with the emperor&#x27;s interests and stance. Suggestion and criticism with adequate &quot;sincerity&quot;, even if they were flawed and incorrect, was usually praised by Yongzheng. On the other hand, suggestions which were considered to only serve the magistrate&#x27;s selfish interests and fame, or to only curry favour from the emperor, even if the suggestions were accurate and reasonable, would be heavily criticized by Yongzheng and the magistrate could be punished severely. That was the reason behind Yongzheng&#x27;s apparently &quot;erratic&quot; and &quot;unpredictable&quot; behaviors in punishing and rewarding his subordinates.

===Corruption crackdown and financial reform===
Emperor Kangxi&#x27;s long reign left lasting achievements, but also many flaws and maladies, including budget deficit, inadequate tax revenues, and huge debts. Corruption was widespread, and magistrates and aristocrats frequently borrowed money from the national treasure without any sign of returning the money. Therefore, immediately after his enthronement, Yongzheng began a crackdown against corruption and financial issues. Utilizing his experience during the time as a prince, the emperor used an unconventional approach: first he anticipated the counter-measures that corrupt magistrates might employ to evade state punishment, and then devised the emperor&#x27;s own counter-measures against the magistrates.

To counter the local magistrated well-built networks, Yongzheng organized a group of inspectors consisted of independent Imperial Commissioners and &quot;clean&quot; local chiefs, assisted with a group of regional officer-to-be. When a regional magistrate was found guilty, he would be replaced by a corresponding member amongst the inspector group who had no connection of interest with the local clique and therefore would naturally do his best to continue the purge. Furthermore, local people were forbidden to lend money to their magistrates, preventing them from temporarily transferring the borrowed money to the local treasure to mask the deficits. Yongzheng also created an independent Inquisition Association to examine all the spending and revenue documents to prevent local officers from bribing the Ministry of Revenue to fabricate financial reports. To prevent the magistrates from fabricating the corruption cases as merely &quot;deificit spending&quot;, Yongzheng demanded that the case of deficit spending must be investigated first, and punishment, sanction and compensation should be performed first in the case of deficit spending. Equivocation between deficit spending and corruption was strictly prohibited.

To prevent the guilty magistrates from further exploiting the people to compensate for their deficit spending, Yongzheng immediately dismissed the magistrate before compensation began. Dismissed magistrates no longer had authority over the people and had no choice but to use their own properties to compensate. As the punished magistrate might use other connections as an alternative for their lost authority, paying compensation on behalf of them was also strictly prohibited. The properties of their families and relatives were also confisticated for the compensation payment if necessary. In the cases of magistrates committing suicide to avoid punishment, Yongzheng demanded that their family and descendants should shoulder the punishment and compensation for the deceased magistrate. The emperor himself admitted that he wanted to see the guilty magistrate&#x27;s descendants &quot;live in poverty and misery.&quot; Yongzheng&#x27;s drastic punishment earned him the nickname &quot;Emperor of confiscation&quot;.

Beside harsh punishment, Yongzheng also improved the state officer&#x27;s income to remove their incentive for corruption. He created a &quot;Fund for transparency nurturing&quot; from government additional revenues, which was now regulated and controlled by the central government, to provide copious allowance for state magistrate, enabling their daily expenses to be covered without accepting bribes. Magistrates not eligible for the Fund&#x27;s money also received other kinds of allowances, and officers on business trips were also provide an allowance to cover their essential expenses, which had to be reported to the government. The &quot;transparency nurturing&quot; allowances beside removing the corruption incentive, also helped to publicized the magistrate&#x27;s incomes, enabled the state to monitor, evaluate and detect any potential signs of corruption. Furthermore, all kinds of gifts and &quot;ritual fees&quot; was now strictly prohibited.

===The &quot;secret report&quot; system===
To effectively grasp the situation of his subordinates, Yongzheng utilized the &quot;secret report&quot; system which originated from the Shunzhi Era, which also suited his own tastes of having personal connection separately with each subordinate. The emperor recruited secret informants from the trusted subordinates who had the privilege to privately report to the Emperor whatever they felt suspicious. The components of secret informants was quite varied, including even some low-ranked officers, and was widely distributed all over the empire. To encourage the sincerity and eagerness of informants, their identity and reports&#x27; content was kept strictly confidential; even informants did not know each other, and the procedures and writing style requirements were greatly simplified. Such &quot;secret reporters&quot; enabled the emperor to maintain an extensive information network without a specialized internal espionage bureau. The secret informants also had no privileges beside the secret reports and the reports had no legal authority, which prevented authority abuse from informants like the Ming internal espionage agents. Also, to avoid false accusation and incorrect reports from informants, Yongzheng collected information from various sources, and the accused person also had a chance to defend their actions and prove their innocence. Under a capable ruler, secret reports actually protected innocent magistrates from wrong accusations, as the reports provided alternative information sources beside the official charges.

===Farming and land tax===
During the massive population growth in the Qing dynasty and increasing demand from peasant and military populations for grain, the Yongzheng emperor launched a grain campaign in which he incentivized officials in local and provincial governments to compete in buying land meant specifically for farming. The Yongzheng emperor offered officials 5-10 year tax holidays in which they were free from paying taxes. This campaign led to more than one million new acres of farmable land. While these campaigns led to more food and land for the population to use for farming, it also led to officials lying about the amount of farmable land they were contributing in order to win the tax holidays. These tax holidays also pushed the burden of paying taxes elsewhere.

===Local charity===
Ethnicity in Qing China could vary depending on where one was from even locally in China. This ethnic separation along with the booming population led to reduced access to the Civil Service Examinations based on ethnicity and locality. The Yongzheng emperor, in an attempt to allow as many people to take the Civil Service Examination as possible, set up special exams for people in rural China. These special exams were called Miao exams and were located in Yunnan. In the 1730s, landholding shed people such as the Hakka were still not allowed to take the exams, Yongzheng made it legal for these people to take the exams in an attempt to dispel anger at being excluded from the exams.

A growing number of orphaned children or poor families came with the massive Qing population growth. The Yongzheng emperor sought to remedy this by mandating that orphanages (also called poor houses) be built in every county. These were funded not by local, provincial or high level government but privately funded and maintained. These orphanages existed less to help the local population out of poverty and more to model how wealthy officials should act towards the impoverished populations.

===Gentry privileges===
The Kangxi Emperor mandated that scholars that had passed the Civil Service Examination at any level were able to bypass punishments from the legal system depending on which level of the exams they had passed. Instead of legal repercussions for crimes, criminal officials were instead recommended to the county education commissioner for counseling. This led to corruption among officials who were no longer bound by law. In an attempt to stop this the Yongzheng emperor made it illegal to offer privileges to officials going through the legal system. This did not last long as the Qianlong Emperor reinstated legal privileges for officials that had passed the Civil Service Examination shortly after becoming emperor after Yongzheng.

===Tax privileges===
In the mid-1720s Qing empire, complex levels of tax hierarchies put in place by the Kangxi emperor existed to separate the population into different tax brackets. Households with government officials were in privileged tax brackets that brought with it tax exemptions for not only the immediate family in the household but also for extended family members. The Yongzheng emperor removed these privileged tax brackets as he saw the local gentry as competition to the throne. Just like the legal privileges that passing the Civil Service Examination offered, soon after the end of the Yongzheng emperor&#x27;s reign, the Qianlong Emperor quickly reinstated the privileged tax brackets.

===Religious policy===
Growing distrust of Jesuit missionaries by the Kangxi emperor and later by Yongzheng in the early 1720s led to prohibition and action against the Christian presence in China. The Kangxi emperor had banned foreign missions (outside of Beijing and Guangzhou), and Yongzheng took this one step further by removing all foreign priests from China. All Christian churches were shut down and repurposed as local public offices.

===Cohong===
Chinese merchant houses belonging to Canton station were grouped together under a larger organization by Yongzheng called Cohong in 1725. This group was responsible for policing all trade within the Canton system.

===Meltage fees and silver===
As silver became more widely used as a currency in Qing China, the validity and purity of the currency being exchanged had to be verified. Silver taels were sent to official appraisers to do the job of verification. During the appraisal some silver was lost in the process, this lost silver had to be covered by the payer. This extra charge on the lost silver became known as a meltage fee. These meltage fees were a very important source of income for local governments. It became a practice to bribe appraisers to avoid meltage fees. Yongzheng attempted to ban all bribing to avoid these fees and also officially mandated meltage fees as a source of local income. These mandates helped silver become a major part of the Qing economy.

==Expansion in the northwest==

Like his father, the Yongzheng Emperor used military force in order to preserve the Qing Empire&#x27;s position in Outer Mongolia. When Tibet was torn by civil war in 1727–1728, he intervened. After withdrawing, he left a Qing Resident (the amban) and a military garrison to safeguard the dynasty&#x27;s interests.

On 1 November 1728, after the Qing reconquest of Lhasa in Tibet, several Tibetan rebels were sliced to death by Qing Manchu officers and officials. The Qing Manchu President of the Board of Civil Office, Jalangga, Mongol sub-chancellor Sen-ge and brigadier-general Manchu Mala ordered the Tibetan rebels Lum-pa-nas and Na-p&#x27;od-pa to be sliced to death. They ordered gZims-dpon C&#x27;os-ac&#x27;ad (Hsi-mu-pen ch&#x27;ui-cha-t&#x27;e), son of Lum-pa-nas and rNog Tarqan bsKal-bzajn-c&#x27;os-adar and dKon-mc&#x27;og-lha-sgrub (Kun-ch&#x27;u-k&#x27;o-la-ku-pu) and dGa&#x27;-ldan-p&#x27;un-ts&#x27;ogs (K&#x27;a-erh-tan-p&#x27;en-ch&#x27;u-k&#x27;o), sons of Na-p&#x27;od-pa to be beheaded. Byams-pa (Cha-mu-pa) and his brother Lhag-gsan (La-k&#x27;o-sang) and their brothers, younger and older, daughters, wives and mother were exiled after their father sByar-ra-nas was beheaded. The Manchus wrote that they &quot;set an example&quot; by forcing the Tibetans to publicly watch the executions of Tibetan rebels of slicing like Na-p&#x27;od-pa since they said it was the Tibetan&#x27;s nature to be cruel. The exiled Tibetans were given as slaves to soldiers in Ching-chou (Jingzhou), K&#x27;ang-zhou (Kangzhou) and Chiang-ning (Jiangning) in the marshall-residences there. The Tibetan rNam-rgyal-grva-ts&#x27;an college administrator (gner-adsin) and sKyor&#x27;lun Lama were tied together with Lum-pa-nas and Na-p&#x27;od-pa on 4 scaffolds (k&#x27;rims-sin) to be sliced. The Manchus used musket matchlocks to fire 3 salvoes and then the Manchus strangled the 2 Lamas while slacing (Lingchi) Lum-pa-nas and Na-p&#x27;od-pa to death while they beheaded the 13 other rebels leaders. The Tibetan population was depressed by the scene and the writer of MBTJ continued to feel sad as he described it 5 years later. All relatives of the Tibetan rebels including little children were executed by the Qing Manchus except the exiled and deported family of sByar-ra-ba which was condemned to be slaves and most exiles sentenced to deportation died in the process of deportation. The public executions spectacle worked on the Tibetans since they were &quot;cowed into submission&quot; by the Qing. Even the Tibetan collaborator with the Qing, Polhané Sönam Topgyé (P&#x27;o-lha-nas) felt sad at his fellow Tibetans being executed in this manner and he prayed for them. All of this was included in a report sent to the Qing emperor at the time, the Yongzheng Emperor. Qing Han Chinese general Yue Zhongqi interviewed the Tibetan collaborator with the Qing, Polhané Sönam Topgyé (P&#x27;o-lha-nas) concerning his involvement in crushing the Tibetan rebels and sent a report to the Qing Yongzheng emperor on 17 August 1728.

For the Tibetan campaign, the Yongzheng Emperor sent an army of 230,000 led by Nian Gengyao against the Dzungars and their army of 80,000. Due to geography, the Qing army (although superior in numbers) was at first unable to engage their more mobile enemy. Eventually, they engaged the Dzungars and defeated them. This campaign cost the treasury at least eight million silver taels. Later in the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s reign, he sent a small army of 10,000 to fight the Dzungars again. However, that army was annihilated and the Qing Empire faced the danger of losing control of Mongolia. A Khalkha ally of the Qing Empire would later defeat the Dzungars.

Following the reforms of 1729, the treasury&#x27;s income increased from 32,622,421 taels in 1721 to about 60 million taels in 1730, surpassing the record set during the Kangxi Emperor&#x27;s reign; but the pacification of the Qinghai area and the defence of border areas were heavy burdens on the treasury. Safeguarding the country&#x27;s borders cost 100,000 taels per year. The total military budget came up to about 10 million taels a year. By the end of 1735, military spending had depleted half the treasury, leaving 33.95 million taels. It was because of the cost of war that the Yongzheng Emperor considered making peace with the Dzungars.

==Identification of Qing with China==
Since the Shunzhi Emperor&#x27;s time, the Qing emperors had identified China and the Qing Empire as the same, and in treaties and diplomatic papers the Qing Empire called itself &quot;China&quot;. During the Kangxi and Yongzheng emperors&#x27; reigns, &quot;China&quot; (&quot;Dulimbai Gurun&quot; in Manchu) was used as the name of the Qing Empire in official Manchu language documents, identifying the Qing Empire and China as the same entity, with &quot;Dulimbai Gurun&quot; appearing in 160 official diplomatic papers between the Qing Empire and the Russian Empire. The term &quot;China&quot; was redefined by the Qing emperors to be a multi-ethnic entity which included non-Han Chinese ethnic groups and their territories. China and Qing were noticeably and increasingly equated with each other during the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s reign, with the Qianlong Emperor and the Qing government writing poems and documents using both the Chinese name &quot;Zhongguo&quot; and the Manchu name &quot;Dulimbai Gurun&quot;. Compared to the reigns of previous Qing emperors such as the Yongzheng and Kangxi emperors, the use of China to refer to the Qing Empire appears most during the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s reign, according to scholars who examined documents on Sino-Russian relations.

The Yongzheng Emperor spoke out against the claim by anti-Qing rebels that the Qing were only rulers of Manchus and not China, saying &quot;The seditious rebels claim that we are the rulers of Manchus and only later penetrated central China to become its rulers. Their prejudices concerning the division of their and our country have caused many vitriolic falsehoods. What these rebels have not understood is the fact that it is for the Manchus the same as the birthplace is for the people of the central plain. Shun belonged to the Eastern Yi, and King Wen to the Western Yi. Does this fact diminish their virtues?&quot; (

==Religion==
Commoners throughout Qing China were extremely diverse and multi-ethnic because not every region underwent sinification under the Manchu&#x27;s suzerain. In accordance to the Book of Rites, Manchus of Qing chose to respect the local&#x27;s cultural heritage and decided not to force their subjects to acculturate and sinicize. Manchus of Qing acknowledged that each region had the prerogative to preserve their identity, heritage, and cultural tradition and their religious faith. Hence, each region was allowed to keep their beliefs and way of worshipping the heavens. On the other hand, since the commoners preserved their ways, Qing, Yongzheng in particular, highly encouraged that Manchu elites should also preserve their ethnic identity and their distinctive ways of worshipping the heaven as well. The Yongzheng Emperor stated: &quot;The Lord of Heaven is Heaven itself... In the empire we have a temple for honouring Heaven and sacrificing to Him. We Manchus have Tiao Tchin. The first day of every year we burn incense and paper to honor Heaven. We Manchus have our own particular rites for honouring Heaven; the Mongols, Chinese, Russians, and Europeans also have their own particular rites for honouring Heaven. I have never said that he [Urcen, a son of Sunu] could not honour heaven but that everyone has his way of doing it. As a Manchu, Urcen should do it like us.&quot; Evidently, the Qing state practiced various religions, which was similar to the previous dynasty, the Ming. During the Ming, in the mid-1580s an Italian Jesuit, Matteo Ricci not only studied the Chinese language to understand the people and the Chinese culture, he also delved into the Confucian classics and adopted the scholar&#x27;s official-literati robe during his stay near the Canton trading province. Introducing China to his religious faith was in Matteo Ricci&#x27;s mission, and he successfully built a church in 1601 at Beijing, called Cathedral of Immaculate Conception. Johann Adam Schall von Bell, who was a German Jesuit, went to China in 1619, learned the Chinese language in 1623 in Macau, and was later appointed into the Imperial Astronomical Bureau in 1630 by the Ming, even after the fall of Ming to the rise of Qing, Schall&#x27;s presence was welcomed by the Manchu of Qing and he was appointed as the head of the Imperial Astronomical Bureau. The accounts of Matteo establishing the institution of his Church during the Ming dynasty and Jesuits such as Schall who was able to acquire a bureaucratic position in the Qing&#x27;s court make evident that China at one point did welcome things beyond its borders, such as religious faith that was brought by the missionaries. Even though the Catholic church condemned the practice of the Chinese rites in 1645 throughout China, Catholic missionaries continued their practice until the Rites Controversy was concluded in 1742 CE.

The Yongzheng Emperor was firmly against Christian converts among the Manchus. He warned them that the Manchus must follow only the Manchu way of worshipping Heaven since different peoples worshipped Heaven differently.

In 1724, the Yongzheng Emperor issued a decree proscribing Catholicism. This was followed by the persecution of Chinese Christians that steadily increased during the reign of the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s son, the Qianlong Emperor.

Ancestral worship was understood as the Chinese customary tradition rather than as a religious ritual. However, since the Catholic Church condemned the Chinese rites and the decision by the &quot;Church to ban the acceptance of the Chinese rites by the Jesuits&quot; in Qing China, because the Church deemed the practice to be incompatible with the Catholic faith, led to the banishing of missionaries by the Qianlong Emperor in 1742 CE as a response to the Catholic Church&#x27;s decision.

Jan Jakob Maria wrote &quot;Nor did the Islamitic heretics escape the notice of this potentate. It has frequently been reported to me, he writes in a decree of the 7th of the fourth month (May 4) 1729 (Sh. h. 7), that these Mohammedans all follow one doctrine, that they use a peculiar language and dress, and constantly behave contrary to the laws, so that severe measures should be taken for their repression. But I desire that they shall be looked upon as my ordinary subjects, as “babes of the dynasty&quot; (國家之赤子); for although they have their own mosques, and a peculiar language and religion handed down to them by their forefathers, they have the same manners and customs as the rest of the people; for their religion alone it would not do to prosecute them. There are, moreover, several state-servants among them, who are not without their good qualities. They muster strongest in Shensi, and there they are persecuted more than anywhere else, on account of their clubbing together to gamble, their secreting weapons, and for various other illegal acts. There they also unreservedly give expression to their wrath about the Imperial decrees forbidding the slaughter of horned cattle which are so indispensable to agriculture. They should therefore constantly be reminded to be kind and tolerant, not wantonly to oppress the weaker, nor by their greater intelligence to take in the ignorant, nor on the plea of their special religion to further their own interests, etc. Our will in this matter shall be proclaimed by the Viceroys and Governors throughout all the provinces.&quot;

==Destruction of ethnic minority autonomy==
The Yongzheng Emperor appointed the Manchu official Ortai who violently abolished hereditary ethnic minority states such as those belonging to ethnic minority Miao people across southwest China in Yunnan, Guizhou and Guangxi.

==Death and succession==
The Yongzheng Emperor ruled the Qing Empire for 13 years before dying suddenly in 1735 at the age of 56. Legend holds that he was assassinated by Lü Siniang, a daughter or granddaughter of Lü Liuliang, whose family was executed for literary crimes against the Qing government. Another theory was that Lü Siniang was the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s lover, and the real mother of the Qianlong Emperor, but he refused to let her become the empress.

It is generally accepted that he died while reading court documents, and it is likely that his death was the result of elixir poisoning from an overdose of the elixir of immortality he was consuming in the belief that it would prolong his life. According to Zhang Tingyu, Yongzheng on his deathbed exhibited symptoms of poisoning, and in the wake of his death, his successor the Qianlong Emperor evicted all Taoist priests from the palace, possibly as punishment for this incident.

To prevent a succession crisis like he had faced, the Yongzheng Emperor was said to have ordered his third son Hongshi (an ally of Yinsi) to commit suicide. He also devised a system for his successors to choose their heirs in secret. He wrote his chosen successor&#x27;s name on two scrolls, placed one scroll in a sealed box and had the box stored behind the stele in the Qianqing Palace. He kept the other copy with him or hid it. After his death, the officials would compare the scroll in the box with the copy he had kept. If they were deemed identical, the person whose name was on the paper would be the new emperor.

The Yongzheng Emperor was interred in the Western Qing tombs southwest of Beijing, in the Tai (泰) mausoleum complex (known in Manchu as the &quot;Elhe Munggan&quot;). His fourth son Hongli, then still known as &quot;Prince Bao (of the First Rank)&quot;, succeeded him as the Qianlong Emperor. The Qianlong Emperor rehabilitated many figures who had been purged during his father&#x27;s reign, including restoring honours to many of his uncles who were formerly his father&#x27;s rivals in the succession struggle.

== Family ==
Empress

* Empress Xiaojingxian (孝敬憲皇后) of the Ula-Nara clan (烏拉那拉氏; 28 June 1681 – 29 October 1731), personal name Duoqimuli (多棋木理)
** Honghui (弘暉), Prince Duan of the First Rank (端親王; 17 April 1697 – 7 July 1704), first son
* Empress Xiaoshengxian (孝聖憲皇后) of the Niohuru clan (鈕祜祿氏; 12 January 1692 – 2 March 1777)
** Hongli (弘曆), the Qianlong Emperor (乾隆帝; 25 September 1711 – 7 February 1799), fifth (fourth) son

Imperial Noble Consort

* Imperial Noble Consort Dunsu (敦肅皇貴妃) of the Nian clan (年氏; ? – 23 December 1725)
** &quot;Fourth daughter&quot; (15 April 1715 – June/July 1717)
** Fuyi (福宜; 30 June 1720 – 9 February 1721), seventh son
** Fuhui (福惠), Prince Huai of the First Rank (懷親王; 27 November 1721 – 11 October 1728), eighth son
** Fupei (福沛; 12 June 1723 – ?), ninth son
* Imperial Noble Consort Chunque (純愨皇貴妃) of the Geng clan (耿氏; December 1689/January 1690 – 27 January 1785)
** Hongzhou (弘晝), Prince Hegong of the First Rank (和恭親王; 5 January 1712 – 2 September 1770), sixth (fifth) son

Consort

* Consort Qi (齊妃) of the Li clan (李氏; 1676 – 31 May 1739)
** Princess Huaike of the Second Rank (和碩懷恪公主; 15 August 1695 – April/May 1717), second daughter
*** Married Xingde (星德; ? – 1739) of the Manchu Nara clan in September/October 1712
** Hongfen (弘昐; 19 July 1697 – 30 March 1699), second son
** Hongyun (弘昀; 19 September 1700 – 10 December 1710), third (second) son
** Hongshi (弘時; 18 March 1704 – 20 September 1727), fourth (third) son
* Consort Ning (寧妃) of the Wu clan (武氏; ? – 25 June 1734), personal name Lingyuan (令媛)
* Consort Qian (謙妃) of the Liugiya clan (劉佳氏; 1714 – 17 June 1767), personal name Xiangyu (香玉)
** Hongyan (弘曕), Prince Guogong of the Second Rank (果恭郡王; 9 May 1733 – 27 April 1765), 10th (sixth) son

Concubine

* Concubine Mao (懋嬪) of the Song clan (宋氏; 1677 – October/November 1730)
** &quot;First daughter&quot; (10 April 1694 – April/May 1694)
** &quot;Third daughter&quot; (8 January 1707 – January/February 1707)

Noble Lady

* Noble Lady Guo (郭貴人)
* Noble Lady Li (李贵人)
* Noble Lady An (安贵人)
* Noble Lady Hai (海贵人)
* Noble Lady Zhang (张贵人)
* Noble Lady Lao (老貴人)

First Class Attendant

* First Class Attendant Na (那常在)
* First Class Attendant Li (李常在)
* First Class Attendant Ma (馬常在)
* First Class Attendant Chun (春常在)
* First Class Attendant Gao (高常在)
* First Class Attendant Chang (常常在)
* First Class Attendant Gu (顧常在)

Second Class Attendant

* Second Class Attendant Su (蘇答應)
* Second Class Attendant Yun (雲答應)

Lady

* Lady of Qixiang Palace (啟祥宮姑娘)

Mistress

* Mistress Yi (伊格格)
* Mistress Zhang (張格格)
* Mistress Su (蘇格格)

==Ancestry==
==In fiction and popular culture==
* The Yongzheng Emperor appears in the flying guillotine-themed &quot;wuxia&quot; films and also in Qing gong qi shi lu (The Lady Assassin) produced by the Shaw Brothers Studio.
* The Yongzheng Emperor is mentioned in the &quot;wuxia&quot; novel &quot;Ernü Yingxiong Zhuan&quot; (兒女英雄傳) by Wenkang (文康). It was adapted into the 1983 Hong Kong television series &quot;The Legend of the Unknowns&quot; (十三妹) and the 1986 Chinese film &quot;Lucky 13&quot; (侠女十三妹).
* A popular legend tells of the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s death at the hands of a female assassin, Lü Siniang (呂四娘), a fictitious granddaughter (or daughter, in some accounts) of Lü Liuliang. She committed the murder to avenge her grandfather (or father), who was wrongly put to death by the emperor. The legend was adapted into many films and television series.
* There are two legends about the origins of the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s son and successor, Hongli (the Qianlong Emperor). The first, more widely circulated in southern China, says that Hongli is actually the son of Chen Shiguan (陳世倌), an official from Haining, Zhejiang. Shortly after he was born, Hongli switched places with one of the Yongzheng Emperor&#x27;s daughters, was raised as the emperor&#x27;s son, and eventually inherited the throne. The &quot;wuxia&quot; writer Louis Cha adapted this legend for his novel &quot;The Book and the Sword&quot;. The second legend about the Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s origins, more popular in northern China, stated that during a trip to the Mulan Hunting Grounds (木蘭圍場) in Rehe Province, the Yongzheng Emperor had an illegitimate affair with a palace maid and they conceived a son, who became the Qianlong Emperor.
* The Yongzheng Emperor is featured as an important character in Tong Hua&#x27;s novel &quot;Bu Bu Jing Xin&quot; and he had a romantic relationship with the protagonist, Ma&#x27;ertai Ruoxi. He is referred to as the &quot;Fourth Prince&quot; in the novel. Taiwanese actor Nicky Wu portrayed the Fourth Prince in &quot;Scarlet Heart&quot;, a 2011 Chinese television series adapted from the novel.
* The Yongzheng Emperor appears in the romance fantasy novel series &quot;Meng Hui Da Qing&quot; (梦回大清) by Yaoye (妖叶).

==See also==

* Chinese emperors family tree (late)
* &quot;Treason by the Book&quot;
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===


==Further reading==
* Bartlett, Beatrice S. (1991). &quot;Monarchs and Ministers: The Grand Council in Mid-Ch&#x27;ing China, 1723–1820&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q317839" start="4" end="21" title="Yongzheng Emperor" label="Yongzheng Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q706208" start="77" end="88" title="temple name" label="temple name"/>
<link wikidata="Q317839" start="89" end="112" title="Yongzheng Emperor" label="Emperor Shizong of Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q317839" start="128" end="135" title="Yongzheng Emperor" label="Yinzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q886953" start="151" end="158" title="List of emperors of the Qing dynasty" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="166" end="178" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="220" end="232" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="257" end="271" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347854" start="543" end="556" title="Grand Council (Qing dynasty)" label="Grand Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q909566" start="724" end="738" title="Outer Mongolia" label="Outer Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="743" end="748" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="884" end="900" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205144" start="1206" end="1225" title="Empress Xiaogongren" label="Empress Xiaogongren"/>
<link wikidata="Q15888864" start="1276" end="1279" title="Uya" label="Uya"/>
<link wikidata="Q848858" start="1457" end="1475" title="Empress Xiaoyiren" label="Noble Consort Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="2108" end="2115" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q340803" start="2189" end="2205" title="Eight Banners" label="Plain Red Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874305" start="2217" end="2235" title="Battle of Jao Modo" label="Battle of Jao Modo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923401" start="2275" end="2290" title="Dzungar Khanate" label="Dzungar Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395045" start="2298" end="2309" title="Galdan Boshugtu Khan" label="Galdan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2330" end="2347" title="Royal and noble ranks of the Qing dynasty#Male members" label="&amp;quot;beile&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2400" end="2440" title="Royal and noble ranks of the Qing dynasty#Male members" label="&amp;quot;junwang&amp;quot; (second-rank prince)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076775" start="2503" end="2510" title="Yinreng" label="Yinreng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2834" end="2873" title="Royal and noble ranks of the Qing dynasty#Male members" label="&amp;quot;qinwang&amp;quot; (first-rank prince)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="2935" end="2941" title="Manchu language" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260294" start="3231" end="3236" title="Yinsi" label="Yinsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="3879" end="3893" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="4206" end="4210" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q842241" start="4547" end="4553" title="Li Wei (Qing dynasty)" label="Li Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347854" start="5744" end="5757" title="Grand Council (Qing dynasty)" label="Grand Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="6931" end="6945" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="7020" end="7036" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="7215" end="7219" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076775" start="7365" end="7372" title="Yinreng" label="Yinreng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355646" start="7587" end="7593" title="Yinzhi, Prince Zhi" label="Yinzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260294" start="7595" end="7600" title="Yunsi" label="Yinsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375172" start="7606" end="7611" title="Yunti, Prince Xun" label="Yinti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126165" start="7715" end="7724" title="Mandarin (bureaucrat)" label="Mandarins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808293" start="8316" end="8357" title="Dzungar–Qing War" label="a military campaign in northwestern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1833845" start="9349" end="9361" title="Nian Gengyao" label="Nian Gengyao"/>
<link wikidata="Q614263" start="10544" end="10556" title="filial piety" label="filial piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="11159" end="11167" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q207932" start="11323" end="11338" title="winter solstice" label="winter solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="12130" end="12146" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9965" start="12244" end="12258" title="Yongle Emperor" label="Yongle Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="12627" end="12638" title="gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674050" start="12640" end="12648" title="Longkodo" label="Longkodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950606" start="12985" end="13002" title="Qin Hui (historian)" label="Historian Qin Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209051" start="13635" end="13641" title="Dai Yi" label="Dai Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361552" start="13704" end="13709" title="Yunli" label="Yunli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674050" start="18640" end="18648" title="Longkodo" label="Longkodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q337266" start="19115" end="19130" title="Academia Sinica" label="Academia Sinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375172" start="20473" end="20490" title="Yunti, Prince Xun" label="Yunti, Prince Xun"/>
<link wikidata="Q845538" start="21024" end="21032" title="Chinese era name" label="era name"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260294" start="21537" end="21542" title="Yunsi" label="Yinsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q831169" start="21556" end="21564" title="Yinxiang (prince)" label="Yinxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q197295" start="21566" end="21578" title="Zhang Tingyu" label="Zhang Tingyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674050" start="21591" end="21599" title="Longkodo" label="Longkodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355646" start="22136" end="22142" title="Yinzhi, Prince Zhi" label="Yinzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359299" start="22395" end="22402" title="Yuntang" label="Yintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359492" start="22404" end="22414" title="Yin&amp;#x27;e" label="Yin&amp;#x27;e"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375172" start="22416" end="22421" title="Yunti, Prince Xun" label="Yinti"/>
<link wikidata="Q660643" start="22824" end="22834" title="Lifan Yuan" label="Lifan Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275294" start="23033" end="23043" title="Chancellor (China)" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="23382" end="23389" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1833845" start="23510" end="23522" title="Nian Gengyao" label="Nian Gengyao"/>
<link wikidata="Q393482" start="23779" end="23785" title="Shunyi District" label="Shunyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683260" start="24339" end="24372" title="Western Qing tombs" label="imperial tombs in western Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205144" start="24412" end="24435" title="Empress Xiaogongren" label="Empress Dowager Renshou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185064" start="25674" end="25689" title="House of Zhu" label="imperial family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="25697" end="25709" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="25814" end="25827" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25958" end="25990" title="Chinese_nobility#Two_crownings_and_three_respects" label="Two Crownings and Three Respects"/>
<link wikidata="Q41135" start="26066" end="26076" title="Ming tombs" label="Ming tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q340803" start="26128" end="26141" title="Eight Banners" label="Eight Banners"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="26222" end="26238" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289329" start="26284" end="26309" title="Marquis of Extended Grace" label="Marquis of Extended Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1833845" start="26488" end="26500" title="Nian Gengyao" label="Nian Gengyao"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="26664" end="26672" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="27135" end="27143" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674050" start="27290" end="27298" title="Longkodo" label="Longkodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q836027" start="27754" end="27765" title="Lü Liuliang" label="Lü Liuliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q334398" start="27928" end="27935" title="Yue Fei" label="Yue Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726191" start="28871" end="28876" title="madak" label="madak"/>
<link wikidata="Q75207" start="29127" end="29137" title="Pax Romana" label="Pax Romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q842241" start="29364" end="29370" title="Li Wei (Qing dynasty)" label="Li Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q12246513" start="29375" end="29387" title="Tian Wenjing" label="Tian Wenjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q839282" start="29448" end="29453" title="Ortai" label="Ortai"/>
<link wikidata="Q452256" start="32468" end="32480" title="Yi Zhongtian" label="Yi Zhongtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q839282" start="32592" end="32597" title="Ortai" label="Ortai"/>
<link wikidata="Q842241" start="33027" end="33033" title="Li Wei (Qing dynasty)" label="Li Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="33287" end="33303" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12246513" start="33305" end="33317" title="Tian Wenjing" label="Tian Wenjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q310453" start="38729" end="38740" title="Shunzhi Emperor" label="Shunzhi Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="40209" end="40221" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="40959" end="40969" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="41029" end="41034" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="41122" end="41148" title="Imperial examination" label="Civil Service Examinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="41405" end="41411" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="41463" end="41468" title="Hakka people" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="42158" end="42172" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="42736" end="42752" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q845741" start="44176" end="44182" title="Cohong" label="Cohong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617767" start="44253" end="44266" title="Canton system" label="Canton system"/>
<link wikidata="Q909566" start="45183" end="45197" title="Outer Mongolia" label="Outer Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q456615" start="45309" end="45314" title="amban" label="amban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026100" start="45433" end="45438" title="Lhasa" label="Lhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q889249" start="47623" end="47643" title="Polhané Sönam Topgyé" label="Polhané Sönam Topgyé"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="47852" end="47863" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15295213" start="47872" end="47883" title="Yue Zhongqi" label="Yue Zhongqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q889249" start="47936" end="47956" title="Polhané Sönam Topgyé" label="Polhané Sönam Topgyé"/>
<link wikidata="Q369870" start="48206" end="48214" title="Dzungars" label="Dzungars"/>
<link wikidata="Q876244" start="48478" end="48482" title="tael" label="tael"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="48695" end="48702" title="Khalkha Mongols" label="Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="48988" end="48995" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q310453" start="49458" end="49473" title="Shunzhi Emperor" label="Shunzhi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="50003" end="50017" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="50128" end="50139" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q313342" start="51243" end="51247" title="Emperor Shun" label="Shun"/>
<link wikidata="Q333910" start="51264" end="51274" title="Dongyi" label="Eastern Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q698909" start="51280" end="51288" title="King Wen of Zhou" label="King Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q125445" start="52270" end="52322" title="Temple of Heaven" label="a temple for honouring Heaven and sacrificing to Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188864" start="53302" end="53336" title="Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, Beijing" label="Cathedral of Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q76732" start="53338" end="53365" title="Johann Adam Schall von Bell" label="Johann Adam Schall von Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627640" start="54400" end="54418" title="Heaven worship" label="worshipping Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191842" start="54534" end="54545" title="Catholicism in China" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="54688" end="54704" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q839282" start="56886" end="56891" title="Ortai" label="Ortai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56896" end="56949" title="Tusi#Gaitu Guiliu" label="violently abolished hereditary ethnic minority states"/>
<link wikidata="Q209959" start="56993" end="57004" title="Miao people" label="Miao people"/>
<link wikidata="Q836027" start="57275" end="57286" title="Lü Liuliang" label="Lü Liuliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203086" start="57318" end="57333" title="Literary inquisition" label="literary crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="57465" end="57481" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28419338" start="57649" end="57665" title="Chinese alchemical elixir poisoning" label="elixir poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q912502" start="57690" end="57711" title="elixir of immortality" label="elixir of immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896018" start="58124" end="58131" title="Hongshi" label="Hongshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126241" start="58386" end="58401" title="Qianqing Palace" label="Qianqing Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683260" start="58679" end="58697" title="Western Qing tombs" label="Western Qing tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="58711" end="58718" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="58912" end="58928" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036533" start="59176" end="59196" title="Empress Xiaojingxian" label="Empress Xiaojingxian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59212" end="59225" title="Nara clan#Ula Nara" label="Ula-Nara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q573546" start="59393" end="59414" title="Empress Xiaoshengxian" label="Empress Xiaoshengxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q994197" start="59430" end="59442" title="Niohuru" label="Niohuru clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="59502" end="59518" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q573752" start="59609" end="59637" title="Imperial Noble Consort Dunsu" label="Imperial Noble Consort Dunsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675166" start="59956" end="59986" title="Imperial Noble Consort Chunque" label="Imperial Noble Consort Chunque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896081" start="60066" end="60074" title="Hongzhou (prince)" label="Hongzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q10921658" start="60081" end="60112" title="Prince He" label="Prince Hegong of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163356" start="60186" end="60196" title="Consort Qi (Yongzheng)" label="Consort Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10801964" start="60387" end="60396" title="Nara clan" label="Nara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896018" start="60558" end="60565" title="Hongshi" label="Hongshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16603269" start="60628" end="60640" title="Consort Ning" label="Consort Ning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675445" start="60715" end="60727" title="Consort Qian" label="Consort Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733079" start="60811" end="60818" title="Hongyan (prince)" label="Hongyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11107430" start="60825" end="60858" title="Prince Guo" label="Prince Guogong of the Second Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675613" start="60926" end="60939" title="Concubine Mao" label="Concubine Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q754803" start="61870" end="61875" title="wuxia" label="wuxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469950" start="61900" end="61939" title="Lady Assassin" label="Qing gong qi shi lu (The Lady Assassin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q947354" start="61956" end="61976" title="Shaw Brothers Studio" label="Shaw Brothers Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363884" start="62052" end="62072" title="Ernü Yingxiong Zhuan" label="Ernü Yingxiong Zhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="62729" end="62745" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q286266" start="62878" end="62885" title="Haining City" label="Haining"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="62887" end="62895" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q180626" start="63103" end="63112" title="Jin Yong" label="Louis Cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314499" start="63153" end="63175" title="The Book and the Sword" label="The Book and the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148671" start="63341" end="63354" title="Rehe Province" label="Rehe Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820925" start="63548" end="63556" title="Tong Hua (writer)" label="Tong Hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982058" start="63576" end="63590" title="Bu Bu Jing Xin (novel)" label="Bu Bu Jing Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q706667" start="63756" end="63764" title="Nicky Wu" label="Nicky Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q707356" start="63802" end="63815" title="Scarlet Heart" label="Scarlet Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100764" start="64016" end="64051" title="Chinese emperors family tree (late)" label="Chinese emperors family tree (late)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836651" start="64060" end="64079" title="Treason by the Book" label="Treason by the Book"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="265952" wikidata="Q852947" url="?curid=265952" title="Brain in a vat">
<text>In philosophy, the brain in a vat (BIV) is a scenario used in a variety of thought experiments intended to draw out certain features of human conceptions of knowledge, reality, truth, mind, consciousness, and meaning. Gilbert Harman conceived the scenario, which Hilary Putnam turned into a modernized version of René Descartes&#x27;s evil demon thought experiment. Following many science fiction stories, the scenario involves a mad scientist who might remove a person&#x27;s brain from the body, suspend it in a vat of life-sustaining liquid, and connect its neurons by wires to a supercomputer that would provide it with electrical impulses identical to those a brain normally receives. According to such stories, the computer would then be simulating reality (including appropriate responses to the brain&#x27;s own output) and the &quot;disembodied&quot; brain would continue to have perfectly normal conscious experiences, like those of a person with an embodied brain, without these being related to objects or events in the real world. According to Putnam, the thought of &quot;being a brain-in-a-vat&quot; is either false or meaningless.

Considered a cornerstone of semantic externalism, the argument produced significant literature. &quot;The Matrix&quot; franchise and other fictional works (below) are considered inspired by Putnam&#x27;s argument.

== Intuitive version ==
Putnam&#x27;s argument is based on the causal theory of reference, where a word describing a spatio-temporal object is meaningful if and only if it possesses an information-carrying causal relation to whatever it denotes. Next, an &quot;envatted&quot; brain is one whose entire world is composed of (say) electric manipulations performed by a computer simulation to which it is connected. With this much in place, consider the sentence &quot;I am a brain in a vat&quot; (BIV). In case you are not a brain in a vat, the sentence is false by definition. In case you are a brain in a vat, the terms &quot;brain&quot; and &quot;vat&quot; fail to denote actual brains and actual vats with whom you had an information-carrying causal interaction since, again by definition, the only interaction available is with the computer simulation, which is not information carrying. By the causal theory of reference, such references do not carry referential meaning. Thus, the sentence &quot;I am a brain in a vat&quot; is either false or meaningless.

== Uses ==
The simplest use of brain-in-a-vat scenarios is as an argument for philosophical skepticism and solipsism. A simple version of this runs as follows: since the brain in a vat gives and receives exactly the same impulses as it would if it were in a skull, and since these are its only way of interacting with its environment, then it is not possible to tell, &quot;from the perspective of that brain&quot;, whether it is in a skull or a vat. Yet in the first case, most of the person&#x27;s beliefs may be true (if they believe, say, that they are walking down the street, or eating ice-cream); in the latter case, their beliefs are false. Since the argument says if one cannot know whether one is a brain in a vat, then one cannot know whether most of one&#x27;s beliefs might be completely false. Since, in principle, it is impossible to rule out oneself being a brain in a vat, there cannot be good grounds for believing any of the things one believes; a skeptical argument would contend that one certainly cannot &quot;know&quot; them, raising issues with the definition of knowledge. Other philosophers have drawn upon sensation and its relationship to meaning in order to question whether brains in vats are really deceived at all, thus raising wider questions concerning perception, metaphysics, and the philosophy of language.

The brain-in-a-vat is a contemporary version of the argument given in Hindu Maya illusion, Plato&#x27;s Allegory of the Cave, Zhuangzi&#x27;s &quot;Zhuangzi dreamed he was a butterfly&quot;, and the evil demon in René Descartes&#x27; &quot;Meditations on First Philosophy&quot;.

Recently, many contemporary philosophers believe that virtual reality will seriously affect human autonomy as a form of brain in a vat. But another view is that VR will not destroy our cognitive structure or take away our connection with reality. On the contrary, VR will allow us to have more new propositions, new insights and new perspectives to see the world.

== Philosophical debates ==
While the disembodied brain (the brain in a vat) can be seen as a helpful thought experiment, there are several philosophical debates surrounding the plausibility of the thought experiment. If these debates conclude that the thought experiment is implausible, a possible consequence would be that we are no closer to knowledge, truth, consciousness, representation, etc. than we were prior to the experiment.

=== Argument from biology ===

One argument against the BIV thought experiment derives from the idea that the BIV is not – and cannot be – biologically similar to that of an embodied brain (that is, a brain found in a person). Since the BIV is &quot;dis&quot;embodied, it follows that it does not have similar biology to that of an embodied brain. That is, the BIV lacks the connections from the body to the brain, which renders the BIV neither neuroanatomically nor neurophysiologically similar to that of an embodied brain. If this is the case, we cannot say that it is even possible for the BIV to have similar experiences to the embodied brain, since the brains are not equal. However, it could be counter-argued that the hypothetical machine could be made to also replicate those types of inputs.

=== Argument from externalism ===
A second argument deals directly with the stimuli coming into the brain. This is often referred to as the account from externalism or ultra-externalism. In the BIV, the brain receives stimuli from a machine. In an embodied brain, however, the brain receives the stimuli from the sensors found in the body (via touching, tasting, smelling, etc.) which receive their input from the external environment. This argument oftentimes leads to the conclusion that there is a difference between what the BIV is representing and what the embodied brain is representing. This debate has been hashed out, but remains unresolved, by several philosophers including Uriah Kriegel, Colin McGinn, and Robert D. Rupert, and has ramifications for philosophy of mind discussions on (but not limited to) representation, consciousness, content, cognition, and embodied cognition.

=== Argument from incoherence ===
A third argument against BIV comes from a direction of incoherence, which was presented by the philosopher Hilary Putnam. He attempts to demonstrate this through the usage of a transcendental argument, in which he tries to illustrate that the thought experiment&#x27;s incoherence lies on the basis that it is self-refuting. To do this, Putnam first established a relationship that he refers to as a &quot;causal connection&quot; which is sometimes referred to as &quot;a causal constraint&quot;. This relationship is further defined, through a theory of reference that suggested reference can not be assumed, and words are not automatically intrinsically connected with what it represents. This theory of reference would later become known as semantic externalism. This concept is further illustrated when Putnam establishes a scenario in which a monkey types out Hamlet by chance; however, this does not mean that the monkey is referring to the play, because the monkey has no knowledge of &quot;Hamlet&quot; and therefore can not refer back to it. He then offers the &quot;Twin Earth&quot; example to demonstrate that two identical individuals, one on the Earth and another on a &quot;twin Earth&quot;, may possess the exact same mental state and thoughts, yet refer to two different things. For instance, when people think of cats, the referent of their thoughts would be the cats that are found on Earth. However, people&#x27;s twins on twin Earth, though possessing the same thoughts, would instead be referring not to Earth&#x27;s cats, but to twin Earth&#x27;s cats. Bearing this in mind, he writes that a &quot;pure&quot; brain in a vat, i.e., one that has never existed outside of the simulation, could not even truthfully say that it was a brain in a vat. This is because the BIV, when it says &quot;brain&quot; and &quot;vat&quot;, can only refer to objects within the simulation, not to things outside the simulation it does not have a relationship with. Putnam refers to this relationship as a &quot;causal connection&quot; which is sometimes referred to as &quot;a causal constraint&quot;. Therefore, what it says is demonstrably false. Alternatively, if the speaker is not actually a BIV, then the statement is also false. He concludes, then, that the statement &quot;I&#x27;m a BIV&quot; is necessarily false and self-refuting. This argument has been explored at length in philosophical literature since its publication. A potential loophole in Putnam&#x27;s reference theory is that a brain on Earth that is &quot;kidnapped&quot;, placed into a vat, and subjected to a simulation could still refer to brains and vats which are real in the sense of Putnam, and thus correctly say it is a brain in a vat according to Putnamian reference theory. However, the notion that the &quot;pure&quot; BIV is incorrect and the reference theory underpinning it remains influential in the philosophy of mind, language and metaphysics. Anthony L. Brueckner has formulated an extension of Putnam&#x27;s argument which rules out this loophole by employing a disquotational principle. It will be discussed in the following two sections.

=== Reconstructions of Putnam&#x27;s argument ===
An issue that has arisen with Putnam&#x27;s argument is that his premises only imply the metalinguistic statement that &quot;my utterances of &#x27;I am a BIV&#x27; are false&quot;. But a skeptic may demand the object-language statement &#x27;I am a BIV&#x27; to be proven. In order to combat this issue, various philosophers have taken on the task of reconstructing Putnam&#x27;s argument. Some philosophers like Anthony L. Brueckner and Crispin Wright have taken on approaches that utilize disquotational principles. While others like Ted A. Warfield have taken on approaches that focus on the concepts of self-knowledge and priori.

==== The disjunctive argument ====
One of the earliest but influential reconstructions of Putnam&#x27;s transcendental argument was suggested by Anthony L. Brueckner. Brueckner&#x27;s reconstruction is as follows: &quot;(1) Either I am a BIV (speaking vat-English) or I am a non-BIV (speaking English). (2) If I am a BIV (speaking vat-English), then my utterances of &#x27;I am a BIV&#x27; are true if I have sense impressions as of being a BIV. (3) If I am a BIV (speaking vat-English), then I do not have sense impressions as of being a BIV. (4) If I am a BIV (speaking vat-English), then my utterances of &#x27;I am a BIV&#x27; are false. [(2), (3)] (5) If I am a non-BIV (speaking English), then my utterances of &#x27;I am a BIV&#x27; are true if I am a BIV. (6) If I am a non-BIV (speaking English), then my utterances of &#x27;I am a BIV&#x27; are false. [(5)] (7) My utterances of &#x27;I am a BIV&#x27; are false. [(1), (4), (6)]&quot; A key thing to note is that although these premises further define Putnam&#x27;s argument, they do not so far prove &#x27;I am not a BIV&#x27;, because, although the premises imply the meta-linguistic statement that &quot;my utterances &#x27;I am a BIV&#x27; are false&quot;, they do not yet imply the object language statement that &#x27;I am not a BIV&#x27;. In order to achieve the Putnamian conclusion, Brueckner thus further strengthens his argument by employing the disquotational principle of &quot;My utterances of &#x27;I am not a BIV&#x27; are true if I am not a BIV.&quot; This statement is justified since the metalanguage which contains the tokens for the disquotational principle also contains the object language tokens to which the utterances &#x27;I am not a BIV&#x27; belong.

== In fiction ==

* &quot;Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.&quot;, Season 4
* &quot;Avatar&quot;
* &quot;Bliss&quot;
* &quot;The Brain of Colonel Barham&quot;, a 1965 episode of the TV series &quot;The Outer Limits&quot;
* &quot;The Brain of Morbius&quot;
* &quot;Brain (novel)&quot;
* &quot;Brainstorm&quot;
* &quot;Caprica&quot;
* &quot;Chappie&quot;
* &quot;The City of Lost Children&quot;
* &quot;Cold Lazarus&quot;
* &quot;The Colossus of New York&quot;
* &quot;Dark Star&quot;
* &quot;Donovan&#x27;s Brain&quot;
* &quot;Existenz&quot;
* &quot;Fallout series&quot;
** &quot;Point Lookout&quot;, an expansion pack for &quot;Fallout 3&quot;
** &quot;Old World Blues&quot;, an expansion pack for &quot;&quot;
** &quot;Automatron&quot;, an expansion pack for &quot;Fallout 4&quot;
* &quot;Futurama&quot;
* Gangers in &quot;Doctor Who&quot;
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;
* &quot;Inception&quot;
* &quot;Lobotomy Corporation&quot;
* &quot;Flashes Before Your Eyes&quot;, an episode of &quot;Lost&quot;
* &quot;The Man with Two Brains&quot;
* &quot;The Matrix&quot; film series
* &quot;Out of Time&quot;, an episode of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;
* &quot;Possible Worlds&quot;
* &quot;Psycho-Pass&quot;
* &quot;Repo Men&quot;
* &quot;RoboCop&quot;
* &quot;Saints Row IV&quot;
* &quot;Ship in a Bottle&quot;, an episode of &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;
* &quot;Sid Meier&#x27;s Alpha Centauri&quot;
* &quot;Soma&quot;
* &quot;Source Code&quot;
* &quot;Spock&#x27;s Brain&quot;, an episode of &quot;Star Trek: The Original Series&quot;
* &quot;Steins;Gate 0 &quot;
* &quot;The Star Diaries&quot;
* &quot;Strange Days&quot;
* &quot;The Inner Light&quot;, an episode of &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;
* &quot;The Thirteenth Floor&quot;
* &quot;Total Recall&quot;
* &quot;Transcendence&quot;
* &quot;Tron&quot;
* &quot;The Vacation Goo&quot;, an episode of &quot;American Dad!&quot;
* &quot;The Whisperer in Darkness&quot;
* &quot;Upload (TV series)&quot;
* &quot;Where am I?&quot;, written by Daniel Dennett
* &quot;William and Mary&quot; by Roald Dahl
** Adapted into the first episode of &quot;Way Out&quot; in 1961
** Adapted again for &quot;Tales of the Unexpected&quot; in 1979
* &quot;White Christmas - Part II&quot;, an episode of &quot;Black Mirror&quot;
* &quot;World on a Wire&quot;
== See also ==

* Boltzmann brain
* Borg (Star Trek)
* Dream argument
* Evil demon
* Experience machine
* Floating man (Avicenna thought experiment)
* Human Brain Project
* Internalism and externalism
* Isolated brain
* Metaverse
* Mind uploading
* Neurally controlled animat
* Red pill
* Simulation hypothesis
* Skeptical hypothesis
* Technological singularity
* Transhumanism
* Wirehead (science fiction)
==References==
==External links==

Philosophy
* 
* Inverse &quot;brain in a vat&quot;
* Putnam&#x27;s discussion of the &quot;brains in a vat&quot; in chapter one of 
* &#x27;Where Am I?&#x27; by Daniel Dennett
* &quot;Brain in a Vat Brain Teaser&quot; – &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot; (1996)

Science
* &quot;Adaptive flight control with living neuronal networks on microelectrode arrays&quot;
* &quot;Architecture for Neuronal Cell Control of a Mobile Robot&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="3" end="13" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q852947" start="19" end="33" title="Brain in a vat" label="brain in a vat"/>
<link wikidata="Q852947" start="35" end="38" title="Brain in a vat" label="BIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="75" end="94" title="thought experiments" label="thought experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="157" end="166" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="168" end="175" title="reality" label="reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="177" end="182" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="184" end="188" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="190" end="203" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877777" start="209" end="216" title="Meaning (philosophy of language)" label="meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q962148" start="218" end="232" title="Gilbert Harman" label="Gilbert Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q221697" start="263" end="276" title="Hilary Putnam" label="Hilary Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="313" end="327" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502279" start="335" end="345" title="evil demon" label="evil demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="430" end="443" title="mad scientist" label="mad scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q897410" start="549" end="577" title="brain–computer interface" label="connect its neurons by wires"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="624" end="643" title="action potential" label="electrical impulses"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="744" end="762" title="simulated reality" label="simulating reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q631616" start="1176" end="1196" title="semantic externalism" label="semantic externalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014087" start="1244" end="1276" title="The Matrix (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;The Matrix&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q221697" start="1387" end="1393" title="Hilary Putnam" label="Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054575" start="1426" end="1452" title="causal theory of reference" label="causal theory of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8171" start="1462" end="1466" title="word" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="1730" end="1749" title="computer simulation" label="computer simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189753" start="2029" end="2035" title="denotation" label="denote"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="2198" end="2217" title="computer simulation" label="computer simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054575" start="2261" end="2287" title="causal theory of reference" label="causal theory of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q186619" start="2490" end="2498" title="argument" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="2503" end="2527" title="philosophical skepticism" label="philosophical skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181020" start="2532" end="2541" title="solipsism" label="solipsism"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610517" start="3498" end="3521" title="definition of knowledge" label="definition of knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="3712" end="3722" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="3724" end="3735" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q484761" start="3745" end="3767" title="philosophy of language" label="philosophy of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="3840" end="3845" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q223890" start="3846" end="3859" title="Maya (illusion)" label="Maya illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="3861" end="3866" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q22738" start="3874" end="3894" title="Allegory of the Cave" label="Allegory of the Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q47739" start="3896" end="3904" title="Zhuang Zhou" label="Zhuangzi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3918" end="3953" title="Zhuangzi (book)#&amp;quot;The Butterfly Dream&amp;quot;" label="Zhuangzi dreamed he was a butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502279" start="3969" end="3979" title="evil demon" label="evil demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="3983" end="3997" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q605790" start="4010" end="4041" title="Meditations on First Philosophy" label="Meditations on First Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129066" start="5228" end="5266" title="Proprioception" label="connections from the body to the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q948647" start="5298" end="5315" title="Neuroanatomy" label="neuroanatomically"/>
<link wikidata="Q660910" start="5320" end="5340" title="Neurophysiology" label="neurophysiologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408329" start="5809" end="5820" title="externalism" label="externalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q742827" start="6356" end="6368" title="Colin McGinn" label="Colin McGinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q95991610" start="6374" end="6390" title="Robert D. Rupert" label="Robert D. Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="6418" end="6436" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145290" start="6473" end="6487" title="Mental representation" label="representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="6489" end="6502" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="6513" end="6522" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335050" start="6528" end="6546" title="embodied cognition" label="embodied cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q221697" start="6690" end="6703" title="Hilary Putnam" label="Hilary Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q487132" start="7429" end="7464" title="Infinite monkey theorem" label="a monkey types out Hamlet by chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q244774" start="7653" end="7675" title="Twin Earth thought experiment" label="&amp;quot;Twin Earth&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="9475" end="9493" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q484761" start="9495" end="9503" title="Philosophy of language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="9508" end="9519" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282709" start="9641" end="9665" title="disquotational principle" label="disquotational principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193983" start="9859" end="9873" title="metalanguage" label="metalinguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178161" start="10397" end="10404" title="A priori and a posteriori" label="priori."/>
<link wikidata="Q7833865" start="10510" end="10533" title="Transcendental arguments" label="transcendental argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q537911" start="12172" end="12194" title="Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." label="Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q24871" start="12219" end="12225" title="Avatar (2009 film)" label="Avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q73547335" start="12240" end="12245" title="Bliss (2021 film)" label="Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299588" start="12260" end="12287" title="The Brain of Colonel Barham" label="The Brain of Colonel Barham"/>
<link wikidata="Q839437" start="12333" end="12349" title="The Outer Limits (1963 TV series)" label="The Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288757" start="12364" end="12384" title="The Brain of Morbius" label="The Brain of Morbius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457910" start="12399" end="12412" title="Brain (novel)" label="Brain (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493657" start="12427" end="12437" title="Brainstorm (1983 film)" label="Brainstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q579554" start="12452" end="12459" title="Caprica (TV series)" label="Caprica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209986" start="12474" end="12481" title="Chappie (film)" label="Chappie"/>
<link wikidata="Q749988" start="12496" end="12521" title="The City of Lost Children" label="The City of Lost Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142301" start="12536" end="12548" title="Cold Lazarus" label="Cold Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726871" start="12563" end="12587" title="The Colossus of New York" label="The Colossus of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q506580" start="12602" end="12611" title="Dark Star (film)" label="Dark Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708365" start="12626" end="12646" title="Donovan&amp;#x27;s Brain (film)" label="Donovan&amp;#x27;s Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050838" start="12661" end="12669" title="Existenz" label="Existenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q125507102" start="12684" end="12698" title="Fallout (franchise)" label="Fallout series"/>
<link wikidata="Q221164" start="12763" end="12772" title="Fallout 3" label="Fallout 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q10493813" start="12901" end="12910" title="Fallout 4" label="Fallout 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="12925" end="12933" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12942" end="12949" title="List of Doctor Who universe creatures and aliens#Gangers" label="Gangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="12959" end="12969" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q92580" start="12984" end="13002" title="Ghost in the Shell" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25188" start="13017" end="13026" title="Inception" label="Inception"/>
<link wikidata="Q65050157" start="13041" end="13061" title="Lobotomy Corporation" label="Lobotomy Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q870306" start="13076" end="13100" title="Flashes Before Your Eyes" label="Flashes Before Your Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23567" start="13122" end="13138" title="Lost (2004 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Lost&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q499050" start="13147" end="13170" title="The Man with Two Brains" label="The Man with Two Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014087" start="13179" end="13213" title="The Matrix (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;The Matrix&amp;quot; film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111653" start="13222" end="13233" title="Out of Time (Red Dwarf)" label="Out of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902" start="13261" end="13270" title="Red Dwarf" label="Red Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233425" start="13285" end="13300" title="Possible Worlds (play)" label="Possible Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315951" start="13315" end="13326" title="Psycho-Pass" label="Psycho-Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460779" start="13341" end="13349" title="Repo Men" label="Repo Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080591" start="13364" end="13371" title="RoboCop (franchise)" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q13060351" start="13386" end="13399" title="Saints Row IV" label="Saints Row IV"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13414" end="13430" title="Ship in a Bottle (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="Ship in a Bottle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13458" end="13488" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q372412" start="13503" end="13534" title="Sid Meier&amp;#x27;s Alpha Centauri" label="Sid Meier&amp;#x27;s Alpha Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121353" start="13549" end="13553" title="Soma (video game)" label="Soma"/>
<link wikidata="Q266209" start="13568" end="13579" title="Source Code" label="Source Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488820" start="13594" end="13612" title="Spock&amp;#x27;s Brain" label="Spock&amp;#x27;s Brain"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13640" end="13670" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek: The Original Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q21775901" start="13685" end="13698" title="Steins;Gate 0" label="Steins;Gate 0"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452666" start="13714" end="13730" title="The Star Diaries" label="The Star Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q550529" start="13745" end="13757" title="Strange Days (film)" label="Strange Days"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13772" end="13787" title="The Inner Light (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="The Inner Light"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13815" end="13845" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q630289" start="13860" end="13880" title="The Thirteenth Floor" label="The Thirteenth Floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q222018" start="13889" end="13913" title="Total Recall (1990 film)" label="&amp;quot;Total Recall&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q10384115" start="13922" end="13935" title="Transcendence (2014 film)" label="Transcendence"/>
<link wikidata="Q626483" start="13950" end="13954" title="Tron" label="Tron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771880" start="13969" end="13985" title="The Vacation Goo" label="The Vacation Goo"/>
<link wikidata="Q210311" start="14013" end="14026" title="American Dad!" label="American Dad!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152214" start="14041" end="14066" title="The Whisperer in Darkness" label="The Whisperer in Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275161" start="14081" end="14099" title="Upload (TV series)" label="Upload (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14114" end="14125" title="Where am I?" label="Where am I?"/>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="14144" end="14158" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Daniel Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020727" start="14167" end="14183" title="William and Mary (short story)" label="William and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="14193" end="14203" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034268" start="14247" end="14254" title="Way Out (TV series)" label="Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q176027" start="14296" end="14319" title="Tales of the Unexpected (TV series)" label="Tales of the Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14342" end="14367" title="White Christmas (Black Mirror)#Part II" label="White Christmas - Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q558112" start="14395" end="14407" title="Black Mirror" label="Black Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q481467" start="14422" end="14437" title="World on a Wire" label="World on a Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q646419" start="14462" end="14477" title="Boltzmann brain" label="Boltzmann brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q220652" start="14480" end="14496" title="Borg (Star Trek)" label="Borg (Star Trek)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861080" start="14499" end="14513" title="Dream argument" label="Dream argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502279" start="14516" end="14526" title="Evil demon" label="Evil demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421060" start="14529" end="14547" title="Experience machine" label="Experience machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q20987798" start="14550" end="14562" title="Floating man" label="Floating man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143116" start="14595" end="14614" title="Human Brain Project" label="Human Brain Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185050" start="14617" end="14644" title="Internalism and externalism" label="Internalism and externalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823404" start="14647" end="14661" title="Isolated brain" label="Isolated brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632041" start="14664" end="14673" title="Metaverse" label="Metaverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267982" start="14676" end="14690" title="Mind uploading" label="Mind uploading"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002077" start="14693" end="14719" title="Neurally controlled animat" label="Neurally controlled animat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305365" start="14722" end="14730" title="Red pill" label="Red pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742884" start="14733" end="14754" title="Simulation hypothesis" label="Simulation hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="14757" end="14777" title="Skeptical hypothesis" label="Skeptical hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q237525" start="14780" end="14805" title="Technological singularity" label="Technological singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q194100" start="14808" end="14821" title="Transhumanism" label="Transhumanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026807" start="14824" end="14850" title="Wirehead (science fiction)" label="Wirehead (science fiction)"/>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="15047" end="15061" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Daniel Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="15112" end="15134" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="265955" wikidata="Q66491031" url="?curid=265955" title="Reign title">
<text>Reign title may refer to:

*Chinese era name
*Japanese era name
*Korean era name
*Vietnamese era name</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q845538" start="28" end="44" title="Chinese era name" label="Chinese era name"/>
<link wikidata="Q24706" start="46" end="63" title="Japanese era name" label="Japanese era name"/>
<link wikidata="Q698350" start="65" end="80" title="Korean era name" label="Korean era name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420465" start="82" end="101" title="Vietnamese era name" label="Vietnamese era name"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="265956" wikidata="Q478229" url="?curid=265956" title="Léognan">
<text>Léognan (; ) is a commune in the Gironde department, Nouvelle-Aquitaine, southwestern France.

==Population==

Its inhabitants are called &quot;Léognanais&quot;.
==Wine==
It is located in the Graves area of the Bordeaux county, known for its red wine (Pessac-Léognan appellation):
* Château Haut-Bailly
* Domaine de Chevalier
* Château de Fieuzal
* Château Olivier
* Château Carbonnieux
* Château Malartic Lagravière

The processing plant for Cacolac has been located here since 2000.

==See also==
*Communes of the Gironde department

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q478229" start="0" end="7" title="Léognan" label="Léognan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="18" end="25" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q12526" start="33" end="40" title="Gironde" label="Gironde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="41" end="51" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q18678082" start="53" end="71" title="Nouvelle-Aquitaine" label="Nouvelle-Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="86" end="92" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558201" start="192" end="198" title="Graves (wine region)" label="Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="211" end="219" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760220" start="252" end="266" title="Pessac-Léognan" label="Pessac-Léognan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967893" start="283" end="302" title="Château Haut-Bailly" label="Château Haut-Bailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034427" start="305" end="325" title="Domaine de Chevalier" label="Domaine de Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969228" start="328" end="346" title="Château de Fieuzal" label="Château de Fieuzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090603" start="349" end="364" title="Château Olivier" label="Château Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967865" start="367" end="386" title="Château Carbonnieux" label="Château Carbonnieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q734456" start="389" end="416" title="Château Malartic Lagravière" label="Château Malartic Lagravière"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932561" start="443" end="450" title="Cacolac" label="Cacolac"/>
<link wikidata="Q384414" start="500" end="534" title="Communes of the Gironde department" label="Communes of the Gironde department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="265957" wikidata="Q296367" url="?curid=265957" title="Hong Taiji">
<text>Hong Taiji (28 November 1592 – 21 September 1643), also rendered as Huang Taiji and sometimes referred to as Abahai in Western literature, also known by his temple name as the Emperor Taizong of Qing, was the second khan of the Later Jin dynasty and the founding emperor of the Qing dynasty. He was responsible for consolidating the empire that his father Nurhaci had founded and laid the groundwork for the conquest of the Ming dynasty, although he died before this was accomplished. He was also responsible for changing the name of the Jurchens to &quot;Manchu&quot; in 1635, and changing the name of his dynasty from &quot;Great Jin&quot; to &quot;Great Qing&quot; in 1636.

== Names and titles ==
It is unclear whether &quot;Hong Taiji&quot; was a title or a personal name. Written &quot;Hong taiji&quot; in Manchu, it was borrowed from the Mongolian title &quot;Khong Tayiji&quot;. That Mongolian term was itself derived from the Chinese &quot;huang taizi&quot; 皇太子 (&quot;crown prince&quot;, &quot;imperial prince&quot;), but in Mongolian it meant, among other things, something like &quot;respected son&quot;. Alternatively, historian Pamela Crossley argues that &quot;Hung Taiji&quot; was a title &quot;of Mongolian inspiration&quot; derived from &quot;hung&quot;, a word that appeared in other Mongolian titles at the time. Early seventeenth-century Chinese and Korean sources rendered his name as &quot;Hong Taiji&quot; (). The modern Chinese rendering &quot;Huang Taiji&quot; (), which uses the character &quot;huang&quot; (&quot;imperial&quot;), misleadingly implies that Hong Taiji once held the title of &quot;imperial prince&quot; or heir apparent, even though his father and predecessor Nurhaci never designated a successor.

&quot;Hong Taiji&quot; was very rarely used in Manchu sources, because they observed a taboo on the personal names of emperors. In redacted documents, Hong Taiji was simply called the &quot;Fourth &quot;Beile&quot;&quot; or &quot;fourth prince&quot; (&quot;duici beile&quot;), indicating that he was the fourth ranked among the eight &quot;beile&quot; Nurhaci had designated from among his sons. However, an archival document rediscovered in 1996 and recounting events from 1621 calls him &quot;Hong Taiji&quot; in a discussion concerning the possible naming of Nurhaci&#x27;s heir apparent, a title that the document refers to as &quot;taise&quot;. Tatiana Pang and Giovanni Stary, two specialists of early Manchu history, consider this document as &quot;further evidence&quot; that Hong Taiji was his real name, &quot;not being at all connected with the Chinese title &quot;huang taizi&quot;&quot;. Historian Mark Elliott views this as persuasive evidence that Hong Taiji was not a title, but a personal name.

Western scholars used to refer to Hong Taiji as &quot;Abahai&quot;, but this appellation is now considered mistaken. Hong Taiji was never mentioned under this name in Manchu and Chinese sources; it was a mistake first made by Russian clergyman and later repeated by sinologists starting in the early twentieth century. Giovanni Stary states that this name may have originated by confusing &quot;Abkai&quot; with &quot;Abkai sure&quot;, which was Hong Taiji&#x27;s era name in the Manchu language. Though &quot;Abahai&quot; is indeed &quot;unattested in Manchu sources&quot;, it might also have derived from the Mongol word &quot;Abaġai&quot;, an honorary name given to the younger sons of hereditary monarchs. According to another view, Hong Taiji was mistakenly referred to as Abahai as a result of a confusion with the name of Nurhaci&#x27;s main consort Lady Abahai.

Hong Taiji was the second Khan of the Later Jin and then Emperor of the Qing dynasty, after he changed its name. His title as Great Khan was &quot;Bogd Sécén Khaan&quot; (Manchu: Gosin Onco Hūwaliyasun Enduringge Han), and he was referred to as Bogda Khan by his Mongol subjects. His reign names, which were used in his lifetime to record dates, were Tiancong (&quot;heavenly wisdom&quot;; Manchu: &quot;Abka-i sure&quot;) from 1627 to 1636, and Chongde (&quot;lofty virtue&quot;; Manchu: &quot;Wesihun erdemungge&quot;, Mongolian: &quot;Degedü Erdemtü&quot;) from 1636 to 1643.

Hong Taiji&#x27;s temple name, by which he was worshipped at the Imperial Ancestral Temple, was Taizong 太宗, the name that was conventionally given to the second emperor of a dynasty. His posthumous name, which was chosen to reflect his style of rule, was &quot;Wen Huangdi&quot; (Manchu: &quot;šu hūwangdi&quot;), which means &quot;the culturing emperor&quot; or &quot;the emperor of letters&quot;.

==Consolidation of power==
Hong Taiji was the eighth son of Nurhaci, whom he succeeded as the second ruler of the Later Jin dynasty in 1626. He might have had Mongolian ancestry as the son of Yehe-Nara Monggo Jerjer, and he might have been genetically related to the Mongolic Daur people as a member of the Aisin-Gioro clan.

Although it has always been regarded as gossip, he was said to have been involved in the suicide of Dorgon&#x27;s mother, Lady Abahai, in order to block the succession of his younger brother. This is speculated because at the time of Nurhaci&#x27;s death, there were four Lords/Beile with Hong Taiji holding the lowest rank, but also being the most fit one.

Originally, at the end of Nurhaci&#x27;s reign, Hong Taiji controlled the two White Banners, but after Lady Abahai&#x27;s death, he switched his two banners with Dorgon and Dodo&#x27;s two Yellow banners. In the end, Hong Taiji had control over the highest class banners — the Plain and Bordered Yellow Banners — and the most influence. From there, he slowly got rid of his competitors&#x27; powers. Later, he would also receive the Plain Blue Banner from his fifth brother Manggūltai, which was the third strongest banner. Those three banners would officially become the Upper Three Banners during the early years of the Qing dynasty.

==Ethnic policies==
During his reign, Hong Taiji started recruitment of Han Chinese officials. After a 1623 revolt, Nurhaci came to mistrust his &quot;Nikan&quot; (, &quot;Han people&quot;) followers so Hong Taiji began their assimilation into the country and government.

A mass marriage of Han Chinese officers and officials to Manchu women numbering 1,000 couples was arranged by Prince Yoto and Hong Taiji in 1632 to promote harmony between the two ethnic groups.

It is the predecessor of Mongol Yamen ( 蒙古衙門, &quot;monggo jurgan&quot;) which was established for indirect government of Inner Mongolia after the Mongols were conquered by Hong Taiji. In 1638 it was renamed to Lifanyuan. Initially, the ministerial affairs were settled, while vice-ministers were set up as vice-ministers.

==Expansion==
He continued the expansion of the Later Jin dynasty in Manchuria, pushing deeper into the Mongolian Plateau and raiding the Joseon dynasty and the Ming dynasty. His personal military abilities were widely praised and he effectively developed the military-civil administration known as the &quot;Eight Banners&quot; or Banner system. This system was well-suited to accept the different peoples, primarily Han and Mongols, who joined the Later Jin state either following negotiated agreements or military defeat.

Although Hong Taiji patronized Tibetan Buddhism in public, in private he disdained the Buddhist belief of the Mongols and thought it was destructive of Mongol identity. He is quoted to have said that, &quot;The Mongolian princes are abandoning the Mongolian language; their names are all in imitation of the lamas.&quot; The Manchus themselves such as Hong Taiji did not personally believe in Tibetan Buddhism and few wanted to convert. Hong Taiji described some Tibetan Buddhist lamas as &quot;incorrigibles&quot; and &quot;liars&quot;, but still patronized Buddhism in order to harness the Tibetans&#x27; and Mongols&#x27; belief in the religion.

Hong Taiji started his conquest by subduing the potent Ming ally in Korea. February 1627 his forces crossed the Yalu River which had frozen. In 1628, he attempted to invade the Ming dynasty, but was defeated by Yuan Chonghuan and his use of artillery. During the next five years, Hong Taiji spent resources in training his artillery to offset the strength of the Ming artillery. 
Hong Taiji upgraded the weapons of the Empire. He realized the advantage of the Red Cannons and later also bought the Red Cannons into the army. Though the Ming dynasty still had more cannons, Hong Taiji now possessed the cannons of equal might and Asia&#x27;s strongest cavalry. Also during this time, he sent several probing raids into northern China which were defeated. First attack went through the Jehol Pass, then in 1632 and 1634 he sent raids into Shanxi.

In 1636, Hong Taiji invaded Joseon Korea, as the latter did not accept that Hong Taiji had become emperor and refused to assist in operations against the Ming. With the Joseon dynasty surrendered in 1637, Hong Taiji succeeded in making them cut off relations with the Ming dynasty and force them to submit as tributary state of the Qing dynasty. Also during this period, Hong Taiji took over Inner Mongolia, which protected northern border of China, in three major wars, each of them victorious. From 1636 until 1644, he sent 4 major expeditions into the Amur region. In 1640 he completed the conquest of the Evenks, when he defeated and captured their leader Bombogor. By 1644, the entire region was under his control.

Huang Taji&#x27;s plan at first was to make a deal with the Ming dynasty. If the Ming was willing to give support and money that would be beneficial to the Qing&#x27;s economy, the Qing in exchange would not only be willing to not attack the borders, but also admit itself as a country one level lower than the Ming dynasty; however, since Ming court officials were reminded of the deal that preceded the Song dynasty&#x27;s wars with the Jin Empire, the Ming refused the exchange. Huang Taiji rejected the comparison, saying that, &quot;Neither is your Ming ruler a descendant of the Song nor are we heir to the Jin. That was another time.&quot; Hong Taiji had not wanted to conquer the Ming. The Ming&#x27;s refusal ultimately led him to take the offensive. The people who first encouraged him to invade the Ming dynasty were his ethnic Han advisors Fan Wencheng, Ma Guozhu, and Ning Wanwo. Hong Taiji recognized that the Manchus needed Han defectors in order to assist in the conquest of the Ming, and thus explained to other Manchus why he also needed to be lenient to recent defectors like Ming general Hong Chengchou, who surrendered to the Qing in 1642.

==Government==
When Hong Taiji came into power, the military was composed of entirely Mongol and Manchu companies. By 1636, Hong Taiji created the first of many Chinese companies. Before the conquest of the Ming dynasty, the number of companies organized by him and his successor was 278 Manchus, 120 Mongols, and 165 Han. By the time of Hong Taiji&#x27;s death there were more ethnic Han than Manchus and he had realized the need for there to be control exerted whilst getting approval from the Han majority. Not only did he incorporate the Han into the military, but also into the government. The Council of Deliberative Officials was formed as the highest level of policy-making and was composed entirely of Manchu. However, Hong Taiji adopted from the Ming such institutions as the Six Ministries, the Censorate and others. Each of these lower ministries was headed by a Manchu prince, but had four presidents: two were Manchu, one was Mongol, and one was Han. This basic framework remained, even though the details fluctuated over time, for some time.

==Renaming the dynasty==

In 1635, Hong Taiji changed the name of his people from Jurchen (Manchu: &quot;jušen&quot;) to Manchu, or &quot;manju&quot; in the Manchu language. The original meaning of &quot;Manju&quot; is not known and so the reasons for its adoption remain opaque. There are many theories as to the reason for the choice of name but two of the most commonly cited are its sounding similar to the Manchu word for &quot;brave&quot; and a possible connection with the Bodhisattva Manjusri, the Bodhisattva of Wisdom, of whom Nurhaci claimed to be an incarnation.

The dynastic name Later Jin was a direct reference to the Jin dynasty founded by the Jurchen people, who ruled northern China from 1115 to 1234. As such, the name was likely to be viewed as closely tied to the Jurchens and would perhaps evoke hostility from ethnic Han who viewed the Song dynasty, rival state to the Jin, as the legitimate rulers of China at that time. Hong Taiji&#x27;s ambition was to conquer China proper and overthrow the Ming dynasty, and to do that required not only a powerful military force but also an effective bureaucratic administration. For this, he used the obvious model, that of the Ming government, and recruited Ming officials to his cause. If the name of Later Jin would prove an impediment to his goal among the Han people, then it was not too much to change it. At the same time, Hong Taiji conquered territory north of Shanhai pass and defeated Ligdan Khan in Inner Mongolia. He captured one of the Yuan dynasty&#x27;s imperial jade seals (Chinese: ) and a golden Buddha called &quot;Mahakala&quot;. In April 1636, the Mongolian nobility of Inner Mongolia, Manchu nobility and Han bureaucrats held a Kurultai in Shenyang where they voted to support Hong Taiji to be the emperor of what would later become the Qing empire. Russian archive contains translations of the 1636 year Hong Taiji decree with the provision that after the fall of the Qing dynasty Mongols will return to their previous laws, i.e. independence. Whatever his precise motivation behind doing so might&#x27;ve been, Hong Taiji proclaimed the establishment of the Qing dynasty and also changed his era name to Chóngdé in 1636. The reasons for the choice of &quot;Qing&quot; as the name of this new dynasty are likewise unclear, although it has been speculated that &quot;Jin&quot; and &quot;Qing&quot; are pronounced similarly in Manchu. However, according to the &quot;wuxing&quot; theory, traditional ideas held that fire, which was associated with the character for &quot;Ming&quot;, would be overcome by water, which is the element associated with the character for &quot;Qing&quot;, and that this might have influenced the choice. Another possible reason may be that Hong Taiji changed the name of the dynasty from (Later) Jin to Qing in order to avoid destructive fraternal struggles and skirmishes between brothers and half brothers for the throne, as according to Taoist philosophy, the dynastic name Jin carries the meaning of metal and fire in its constituents, thereby supposedly &quot;igniting the tempers&quot; of the brothers of the Manchurian dynasty into open conflict and war. Hong Taiji therefore adopted the new name of Qing (清), which includes the Chinese character for water on its left hand side. The name, which means &quot;clear and transparent&quot;, with its water symbol, was hoped to put out the feud between the brothers.

Hong Taiji claimed that the progenitor of his clan, the Aisin Gioro, was the legendary figure Bukūri Yongšon (布庫里雍順), who was supposedly conceived from a virgin birth. According to legend, three heavenly maidens, namely Enggulen (恩古倫), Jenggulen (正古倫) and Fekulen (佛庫倫), were bathing at a lake called Bulhūri Omo near the Changbai Mountains. A magpie dropped a piece of red fruit near Fekulen, who ate it. She then became pregnant with Bukūri Yongšon. However, another older version of the story by the Hurha (Hurka) tribe member Muksike recorded in 1635 contradicts Hong Taiji&#x27;s version, claiming that it was in Heilongjiang province close to the Amur river where Bulhuri lake was supposedly located and that it was there that the &quot;heavenly maidens&quot; took their bath. This was recorded in the Jiu Manzhou Dang and his much shorter and simpler in addition to being older. This is thus believed to be the original version and Hong Taiji changed it to Changbai. It shows that the Aisin Gioro clan originated in the Amur area and the Heje (Hezhen) and other Amur valley Jurchen tribes had an oral version of the same tale. It also fits with Jurchen history as some ancestors of the Manchus came down from the north into the Amur valley before the 14th-15th centuries and only later moved further south.

==The banners status==
Before Hong Taiji was emperor, he controlled the two White banners. Upon Nurhaci&#x27;s death, Hong Taiji immediately switched his two White Banners with Nurhaci&#x27;s two Yellow Banners, which should have been passed on to Dorgon and his brothers. As emperor, he was the holder of three banners out of eight. He controlled the Upper Three Banners or the Elite banners which at the time were the Plain/Bordered Yellow Banners and Plain Blue Banner. Later the Plain Blue Banner was switched by Dorgon to the Plain White Banner as the third Elite Banner. At the end of his reign, Hong Taiji gave the two Yellow Banners to his eldest son Hooge. Daisan, who was the second son of Nurhaci, and his son controlled the two Red Banners. Dorgon and his two brothers controlled the two White Banners and Šurhaci&#x27;s son Jirgalang controlled the remaining Bordered Blue Banner.

== Death and succession ==
Hong Taiji died on 21 September 1643 just as the Qing was preparing to attack Shanhai Pass, the last Ming fortification guarding access to the north China plains. Because he died without having named an heir, the Qing state now faced a succession crisis. The Deliberative Council of Princes and Ministers debated on whether to grant the throne to Hong Taiji&#x27;s half-brother Dorgon a proven military leader or to Hong Taiji&#x27;s eldest son Hooge. As a compromise, Hong Taiji&#x27;s five-year-old ninth son Fulin was chosen, while Dorgon alongside Nurhaci&#x27;s nephew Jirgalang was given the title of &quot;prince regent&quot;. Fulin was officially crowned emperor of the Qing dynasty on 8 October 1643 and it was decided that he would reign under the era name &quot;Shunzhi.&quot; A few months later, Qing armies led by Dorgon seized Beijing, and the young Shunzhi Emperor became the first Qing emperor to rule from that new capital. That the Qing state succeeded not only in conquering China but also in establishing a capable administration was due in large measure to the foresight and policies of Hong Taiji. His body was buried in Zhaoling, located in northern Shenyang.

==Legacy==
As the emperor, he is commonly recognized as having abilities similar to the best emperors such as Yongle, Emperor Taizong of Tang due to his effective rule, use of talent, and warring skills. According to historian Jin Yong, Hong Taiji had the broad and wise views of Qin Shi Huang, Emperor Gaozu of Han, Emperor Guangwu of Han, Emperor Wen of Sui, Emperor Taizong of Tang, Emperor Taizu of Song, Kublai Khan, the Hongwu Emperor, and the Yongle Emperor. His political abilities were paralleled only by Genghis Khan, Emperor Taizong of Tang, and Emperor Guangwu of Han. In this sense, Hong Taiji is considered by some historians as the true first emperor for the Qing dynasty. Some historians suspect Hong Taiji was overall underrated and overlooked as a great emperor because he was a Manchu.

== Family ==

Empress

*Empress Xiaoduanwen (孝端文皇后) of the Khorchin Borjigin clan (博爾濟吉特氏; 31 May 1599 – 28 May 1649), personal name Jerjer (哲哲)
** Makata (馬喀塔), Princess Wenzhuang of the First Rank (固倫溫莊公主; 10 September 1625 – April/May 1663), second daughter
*** Married Ejei (額哲; ? – 1641) of the Chahar Borjigin clan on 16 February 1636
*** Married Abunai (阿布奈; 1635–1675) of the Chahar Borjigin clan in 1645 and had issue (two sons)
** Princess Jingduan of the First Rank (固倫靖端公主; 2 August 1628 – June/July 1686), third daughter
*** Married Kitad (奇塔特; ? – 1653) of the Khorchin Borjigin clan in 1639
** Princess Yong&#x27;an Duanzhen of the First Rank (固倫永安端貞公主; 7 October 1634 – February/March 1692), eighth daughter
*** Married Bayasihulang (巴雅斯護朗) of the Khorchin Borjigin clan in 1645
* Empress Xiaozhuangwen (孝莊文皇后) of the Khorchin Borjigin clan (博爾濟吉特氏; 28 March 1613 – 27 January 1688), personal name Bumbutai (布木布泰)
** Yatu (雅圖), Princess Yongmu of the First Rank (固倫雍穆公主; 31 January 1629 – February/March 1678), fourth daughter
*** Married Birtakhar (弼爾塔哈爾; ? – 1667) of the Khorchin Borjigin clan in 1641
** Atu (阿圖), Princess Shuhui of the First Rank (固倫淑慧公主; 2 March 1632 – 28 February 1700), fifth daughter
*** Married Suo&#x27;erha (索爾哈) of the Khalkha Borjigin clan in 1643
*** Married Sabdan (色布騰; ? – 1667) of the Barin Borjigin clan in 1648
** Princess Shuzhe Duanxian of the First Rank (固倫淑哲端獻公主; 16 December 1633 – February/March 1648), seventh daughter
*** Married Lamasi (喇瑪思) of the Jarud Borjigin clan in 1645
** Fulin (福臨), the Shunzhi Emperor (順治帝; 15 March 1638 – 5 February 1661), ninth son

 Primary Consort

* Primary Consort Minhui (敏惠元妃) of the Khorchin Borjigin clan (博爾濟吉特氏; 1609 – 22 October 1641), personal name Harjol (海蘭珠)
** &quot;Eighth son&quot; (27 August 1637 – 13 March 1638)
* Consort Yuan (元妃) of the Niohuru clan (鈕祜祿氏; 1593–1612)
** Lobohoi (洛博會; 1611–1617), third son
* Consort Ji (繼妃) of the Ula-Nara clan (烏拉那拉氏) 
** Hooge (豪格), Prince Suwu of the First Rank (肅武親王; 16 April 1609 – 4 May 1648), first son
** Loge (洛格; 1611 – November/December 1621), second son
** Princess Aohan of the First Rank (敖漢固倫公主; 3 April 1621 – February/March 1654), first daughter
*** Married Bandi (班第; ? – 1647) of the Mongol Aohan Borjigin clan on 25 May 1633

Secondary Consort

* Noble Consort Yijing (懿靖貴妃) of the Abaga Borjigin clan (博爾濟吉特氏; ? – 1674), personal name Namjung (娜木鐘) 
** Princess Duanshun of the First Rank (固倫端順公主; 30 April 1636 – July/August 1650), 11th daughter
*** Married Garma Sodnam (噶爾瑪索諾木; ? – 1663) of the Mongol Abaga Borjigin clan in December 1647/January 1648
** Bomubogor (博穆博果爾), Prince Xiangzhao of the First Rank (襄昭親王; 20 January 1642 – 22 August 1656), 11th son
* Consort Kanghuishu (康惠淑妃) of the Abaga Borjigin clan (博爾濟吉特氏; 1606 – June/July 1667), personal name Batmadzoo (巴特瑪璪)
* Secondary consort (側福晉) of the Yehe-Nara clan (葉赫那拉氏), personal name Wuyunzhu (烏雲珠)
** Šose, Prince Chengzeyu of the First Rank (承澤裕親王 碩塞; 17 January 1629 – 12 January 1655), fifth son
* Secondary consort (側福晉) of the Jarud Borjigin clan (博爾濟吉特氏)
** Princess of the First Rank (固倫公主; 15 December 1633 – April/May 1649), sixth daughter
*** Married Kuazha (誇札; ? – 1649) of the Manchu Irgen-Gioro clan in December 1644 or January 1645
** &quot;Ninth daughter&quot; (5 November 1635 – April/May 1652)
*** Married Hashang (哈尚; ? – 1651) of the Mongol Borjigin clan in October/November 1648

Concubine

* Mistress (格格) of the Yanzha clan (顏扎氏)
** Yebušu (葉布舒), Duke of the Second Rank (輔國公; 25 November 1627 – 23 October 1690), fourth son
* Mistress (格格) of the Nara clan (那拉氏)
** Lady of the Second Rank (縣君; 30 November 1635 – August/September 1661), 10th daughter
*** Married Huisai (輝塞; ? – 1651) of the Manchu Gūwalgiya clan in September/October 1651
** Gose (高塞), Duke Quehou of the First Rank (愨厚鎮國公; 12 March 1637 – 5 September 1670), sixth son
** &quot;13th daughter&quot; (16 August 1638 – May/June 1657)
*** Married Laha (拉哈) of the Manchu Gūwalgiya clan in March/April 1652
* Mistress (格格) of the Sayin Noyan clan (賽音諾顏氏)
** Lady of the Third Rank (鄉君; 9 April 1637 – November/December 1678), 12th daughter
*** Married Bandi (班迪; ? – 1700) of the Mongol Borjigin clan in September/October 1651
* Mistress (格格) of the Irgen-Gioro clan (伊爾根覺羅氏)
** Cangšu (常舒), Duke of the Second Rank (輔國公; 13 May 1637 – 13 February 1700), seventh son
* Mistress (格格) of the Keyikelei clan (克伊克勒氏)
** Toose (韜塞), Duke of the Second Rank (輔國公; 12 March 1639 – 23 March 1695), tenth son
* Mistress (格格) of the Cilei clan (奇壘氏; ? – 1645)
** Princess Kechun of the Second Rank (和碩恪純公主; 7 January 1642 – December 1704 or January 1705), 14th daughter
*** Married Wu Yingxiong (吳應熊; 1634 – 18 May 1674) on 9 October 1653 and had issue (three sons, one daughter)

==Ancestry==
==Popular culture==
*Portrayed by Kim Yoon-hyung in the 1981 KBS1 TV Series &quot;Daemyeong&quot;.
* Portrayed by Tang Guoqiang in the 2003 TV series &quot;The Affaire in the Swing Age.&quot;
* Portrayed by Liu Dekai in the 2003 TV series &quot;Xiaozhuang Mishi&quot;.
* Portrayed by Nie Yuan in the 2015 TV series &quot;The Legend of Xiaozhuang&quot;. 
* Portrayed by Jiang Wen in the 2006 TV series &quot;Da Qing Fengyun&quot;.
* Portrayed by Hawick Lau in the 2012 TV series &quot;In Love With Power&quot;.
* Portrayed by Nam Kyung-eub in the 2013 JTBC TV series &quot;Blooded Palace: The War of Flowers&quot;.
* Portrayed by Byun Joo-hyun in the 2014 tvN TV series &quot;The Three Musketeers&quot;.
* Portrayed by Jung Sung-woon in the 2015 MBC TV series &quot;Hwajung&quot;. 
* Portrayed by Raymond Lam in the 2017 TV series &quot;Rule the World.&quot;
* Portrayed by Kim Beob-rae in the 2017 film &quot;The Fortress&quot;.
* Portrayed by Kim Jun-won in the 2023 MBC TV series &quot;My Dearest&quot;.

==See also==
* Chinese emperors family tree (late)
* Qing conquest of the Ming
* Daily life in the Forbidden City, Wan Yi, Wang Shuqing, Lu Yanzhen. .
* Qing imperial genealogy(清皇室四譜).
* Qing dynasty Taizong&#x27;s veritable records《清太宗實錄》
* Royal archives of the Qing dynasty (清宮档案).
* Samjeondo Monument

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q296367" start="0" end="10" title="Hong Taiji" label="Hong Taiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q296367" start="68" end="79" title="Hong Taiji" label="Huang Taiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q296367" start="109" end="115" title="Hong Taiji" label="Abahai"/>
<link wikidata="Q706208" start="157" end="168" title="temple name" label="temple name"/>
<link wikidata="Q296367" start="176" end="199" title="Hong Taiji" label="Emperor Taizong of Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062546" start="228" end="245" title="Later Jin (1616–1636)" label="Later Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="263" end="270" title="Emperor of China" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="278" end="290" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q311189" start="356" end="363" title="Nurhaci" label="Nurhaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="424" end="436" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="538" end="546" title="Jurchen people" label="Jurchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="556" end="562" title="Manchu" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="812" end="818" title="Manchu language" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069767" start="867" end="879" title="Khong Tayiji" label="Khong Tayiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q11522" start="1142" end="1157" title="Pamela Kyle Crossley" label="Pamela Crossley"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="1371" end="1377" title="Joseon" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q311189" start="1703" end="1710" title="Nurhaci" label="Nurhaci"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1945" end="1950" title="Royal and noble ranks of the Qing dynasty#Pre-standard non-imperial titles" label="Beile"/>
<link wikidata="Q15434178" start="2653" end="2665" title="Mark Elliott (historian)" label="Mark Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q845538" start="3219" end="3227" title="Chinese era name" label="era name"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="3235" end="3250" title="Manchu language" label="Manchu language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043063" start="3612" end="3623" title="Lady Abahai" label="Lady Abahai"/>
<link wikidata="Q181888" start="3652" end="3656" title="Khan (title)" label="Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062546" start="3664" end="3673" title="Later Jin (1616–1636)" label="Later Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="3698" end="3710" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089467" start="3871" end="3881" title="Bogda Khan" label="Bogda Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200976" start="3910" end="3920" title="reign name" label="reign name"/>
<link wikidata="Q706208" start="4224" end="4235" title="temple name" label="temple name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347866" start="4271" end="4296" title="Imperial Ancestral Temple" label="Imperial Ancestral Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q696100" start="4393" end="4408" title="posthumous name" label="posthumous name"/>
<link wikidata="Q311189" start="4666" end="4673" title="Nurhaci" label="Nurhaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="4720" end="4729" title="Qing dynasty" label="Later Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="4765" end="4774" title="Mongols" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043073" start="4798" end="4821" title="Empress Xiaocigao (Qing dynasty)" label="Yehe-Nara Monggo Jerjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q217464" start="4882" end="4893" title="Daur people" label="Daur people"/>
<link wikidata="Q934262" start="4913" end="4929" title="House of Aisin-Gioro" label="Aisin-Gioro clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q380573" start="5032" end="5038" title="Dorgon" label="Dorgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043063" start="5054" end="5065" title="Lady Abahai" label="Lady Abahai"/>
<link wikidata="Q340803" start="5375" end="5382" title="Eight Banners" label="Banners"/>
<link wikidata="Q842501" start="5464" end="5468" title="Dodo, Prince Yu" label="Dodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10886695" start="5568" end="5573" title="Plain Yellow Banner" label="Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12075190" start="5578" end="5601" title="Bordered Yellow Banner" label="Bordered Yellow Banners"/>
<link wikidata="Q12108045" start="5724" end="5741" title="Plain Blue Banner" label="Plain Blue Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271531" start="5765" end="5775" title="Manggūltai" label="Manggūltai"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="6000" end="6011" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q660643" start="6608" end="6617" title="Lifanyuan" label="Lifanyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="6790" end="6799" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q560198" start="6825" end="6842" title="Mongolian Plateau" label="Mongolian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="6859" end="6873" title="Joseon" label="Joseon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="6882" end="6894" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q340803" start="7053" end="7066" title="Banner system" label="Banner system"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="7139" end="7142" title="Han Chinese" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="7147" end="7153" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="7278" end="7294" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191421" start="7555" end="7559" title="lama" label="lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q55498" start="8009" end="8019" title="Yalu River" label="Yalu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q715553" start="8108" end="8122" title="Yuan Chonghuan" label="Yuan Chonghuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367229" start="8357" end="8368" title="Hongyipao" label="Red Cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="8734" end="8740" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q487757" start="8763" end="8770" title="Qing invasion of Joseon" label="invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241965" start="9052" end="9067" title="tributary state" label="tributary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="9075" end="9087" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="9298" end="9302" title="Amur River" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q191730" start="9352" end="9358" title="Evenks" label="Evenks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940762" start="9403" end="9411" title="Bombogor (Evenk chief)" label="Bombogor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="9869" end="9881" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446152" start="9889" end="9913" title="Jin–Song Wars" label="wars with the Jin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687313" start="11225" end="11258" title="Deliberative Council of Princes and Ministers" label="Council of Deliberative Officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q706894" start="11412" end="11426" title="Six Ministries" label="Six Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944274" start="11432" end="11441" title="Censorate" label="Censorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="11775" end="11781" title="Manchu language" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="11841" end="11856" title="Manchu language" label="Manchu language"/>
<link wikidata="Q471696" start="12176" end="12184" title="Manjusri" label="Manjusri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="12318" end="12329" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="12544" end="12556" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="12672" end="12684" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="12703" end="12715" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9341" start="13144" end="13155" title="Ligdan Khan" label="Ligdan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874663" start="13218" end="13237" title="Imperial Seal of the Mongols" label="imperial jade seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899712" start="13318" end="13336" title="Mongolian nobility" label="Mongolian nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126165" start="13376" end="13391" title="Mandarin (bureaucrat)" label="Han bureaucrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q136649" start="13399" end="13407" title="Kurultai" label="Kurultai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="14097" end="14103" title="Manchu language" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q218652" start="14137" end="14143" title="Five elements (Chinese philosophy)" label="wuxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q934262" start="15175" end="15186" title="Aisin Gioro" label="Aisin Gioro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809807" start="15213" end="15227" title="Bukūri Yongšon" label="Bukūri Yongšon"/>
<link wikidata="Q512139" start="15441" end="15459" title="Changbai Mountains" label="Changbai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="15737" end="15749" title="Heilongjiang" label="Heilongjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="15772" end="15782" title="Amur river" label="Amur river"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203361" start="15927" end="15943" title="Jiu Manzhou Dang" label="Jiu Manzhou Dang"/>
<link wikidata="Q504574" start="16170" end="16176" title="Hezhen" label="Hezhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505438" start="17271" end="17280" title="Jirgalang" label="Jirgalang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048381" start="17434" end="17446" title="Shanhai Pass" label="Shanhai Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687313" start="17615" end="17660" title="Deliberative Council of Princes and Ministers" label="Deliberative Council of Princes and Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q380573" start="17734" end="17740" title="Dorgon" label="Dorgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039354" start="17801" end="17806" title="Hooge, Prince Su" label="Hooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505438" start="17930" end="17939" title="Jirgalang" label="Jirgalang"/>
<link wikidata="Q886953" start="18019" end="18046" title="emperor of the Qing dynasty" label="emperor of the Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q310453" start="18129" end="18136" title="Shunzhi" label="Shunzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="18197" end="18204" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q310453" start="18220" end="18235" title="Shunzhi Emperor" label="Shunzhi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189796" start="18499" end="18507" title="Zhao Mausoleum (Qing dynasty)" label="Zhaoling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="18529" end="18537" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9965" start="18650" end="18656" title="Yongle Emperor" label="Yongle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9701" start="18658" end="18681" title="Emperor Taizong of Tang" label="Emperor Taizong of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q180626" start="18767" end="18775" title="Jin Yong" label="Jin Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="18820" end="18833" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210" start="18835" end="18855" title="Emperor Gaozu of Han" label="Emperor Gaozu of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268" start="18857" end="18879" title="Emperor Guangwu of Han" label="Emperor Guangwu of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418" start="18881" end="18899" title="Emperor Wen of Sui" label="Emperor Wen of Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q9701" start="18901" end="18924" title="Emperor Taizong of Tang" label="Emperor Taizong of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7471" start="18926" end="18947" title="Emperor Taizu of Song" label="Emperor Taizu of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="18949" end="18960" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="18966" end="18980" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9965" start="18990" end="19004" title="Yongle Emperor" label="Yongle Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="19054" end="19066" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9701" start="19068" end="19091" title="Emperor Taizong of Tang" label="Emperor Taizong of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268" start="19097" end="19119" title="Emperor Guangwu of Han" label="Emperor Guangwu of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q835772" start="19370" end="19389" title="Empress Xiaoduanwen" label="Empress Xiaoduanwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115469" start="19405" end="19413" title="Khorchin Mongols" label="Khorchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="19414" end="19427" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265973" start="19508" end="19544" title="Princess Wenzhuang" label="Princess Wenzhuang of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q9345" start="19619" end="19623" title="Ejei Khan" label="Ejei"/>
<link wikidata="Q26235" start="19646" end="19652" title="Chahars" label="Chahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="19653" end="19666" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26235" start="19730" end="19736" title="Chahars" label="Chahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="19737" end="19750" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115469" start="19921" end="19929" title="Khorchin Mongols" label="Khorchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="19930" end="19943" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115469" start="20110" end="20118" title="Khorchin Mongols" label="Khorchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="20119" end="20132" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373915" start="20143" end="20164" title="Empress Xiaozhuangwen" label="Empress Xiaozhuangwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115469" start="20180" end="20188" title="Khorchin Mongols" label="Khorchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="20189" end="20202" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115469" start="20436" end="20444" title="Khorchin Mongols" label="Khorchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="20445" end="20458" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="20611" end="20618" title="Khalkha Mongols" label="Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="20619" end="20632" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="20689" end="20702" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="20864" end="20877" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310453" start="20905" end="20920" title="Shunzhi Emperor" label="Shunzhi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049451" start="20992" end="21014" title="Harjol" label="Primary Consort Minhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115469" start="21029" end="21037" title="Khorchin Mongols" label="Khorchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="21038" end="21051" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16076901" start="21174" end="21186" title="Consort Yuan (Hong Taiji)" label="Consort Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q994197" start="21199" end="21211" title="Niohuru" label="Niohuru clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16603279" start="21271" end="21281" title="Consort Ji (Hong Taiji)" label="Consort Ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21294" end="21307" title="Nara clan#Ula Nara" label="Ula-Nara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039354" start="21320" end="21325" title="Hooge, Prince Su" label="Hooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11604543" start="21332" end="21361" title="Prince Su" label="Prince Suwu of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829123" start="21608" end="21613" title="Aohans" label="Aohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="21614" end="21627" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256199" start="21665" end="21685" title="Noble Consort Yijing" label="Noble Consort Yijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057909" start="21700" end="21705" title="Abaga Mongols" label="Abaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="21706" end="21719" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057909" start="21924" end="21929" title="Abaga Mongols" label="Abaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="21930" end="21943" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267221" start="21977" end="21986" title="Bomubogor" label="Bomubogor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256308" start="22084" end="22102" title="Consort Kanghuishu" label="Consort Kanghuishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057909" start="22117" end="22122" title="Abaga Mongols" label="Abaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="22123" end="22136" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q985700" start="22234" end="22248" title="Yehe Nara clan" label="Yehe-Nara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65050587" start="22272" end="22280" title="Wuyunzhu" label="Wuyunzhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277954" start="22290" end="22294" title="Šose" label="Šose"/>
<link wikidata="Q15915694" start="22296" end="22330" title="Prince Zhuang" label="Prince Chengzeyu of the First Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="22427" end="22440" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54593665" start="22586" end="22602" title="Irgen Gioro" label="Irgen-Gioro clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="22750" end="22763" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105063341" start="22824" end="22835" title="Yanzha" label="Yanzha clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277920" start="22845" end="22851" title="Yebušu" label="Yebušu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10801964" start="22960" end="22969" title="Nara clan" label="Nara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627766" start="23113" end="23127" title="Gūwalgiya" label="Gūwalgiya clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627766" start="23349" end="23363" title="Gūwalgiya" label="Gūwalgiya clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="23564" end="23577" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54593665" start="23627" end="23643" title="Irgen Gioro" label="Irgen-Gioro clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953267" start="24049" end="24061" title="Wu Yingxiong" label="Wu Yingxiong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24222" end="24226" title="Korean Broadcasting System#Terrestrial television" label="KBS1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832634" start="24243" end="24252" title="Daemyeong" label="Daemyeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152156" start="24275" end="24288" title="Tang Guoqiang" label="Tang Guoqiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191697" start="24317" end="24345" title="The Affaire in the Swing Age" label="The Affaire in the Swing Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q10945001" start="24406" end="24422" title="Xiaozhuang Mishi" label="Xiaozhuang Mishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q835003" start="24445" end="24453" title="Nie Yuan" label="Nie Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q716069" start="24530" end="24539" title="Jiang Wen" label="Jiang Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207301" start="24568" end="24583" title="Da Qing Fengyun" label="Da Qing Fengyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4255089" start="24606" end="24616" title="Hawick Lau" label="Hawick Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q213097" start="24712" end="24716" title="JTBC" label="JTBC"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24733" end="24767" title="Blooded Palace: The War of Flowers" label="Blooded Palace: The War of Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q333424" start="24816" end="24819" title="TvN (South Korean TV channel)" label="tvN"/>
<link wikidata="Q17254818" start="24836" end="24856" title="The Three Musketeers (South Korean TV series)" label="The Three Musketeers"/>
<link wikidata="Q482607" start="24906" end="24909" title="Munhwa Broadcasting Corporation" label="MBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q19795129" start="24926" end="24933" title="Splendid Politics" label="Hwajung"/>
<link wikidata="Q519834" start="24957" end="24968" title="Raymond Lam" label="Raymond Lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q28415637" start="24997" end="25011" title="Rule the World (TV series)" label="Rule the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641342" start="25070" end="25082" title="The Fortress (2017 film)" label="The Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q116678095" start="25149" end="25159" title="My Dearest" label="My Dearest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100764" start="25183" end="25218" title="Chinese emperors family tree (late)" label="Chinese emperors family tree (late)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427966" start="25221" end="25246" title="Qing conquest of the Ming" label="Qing conquest of the Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q497146" start="25455" end="25473" title="Samjeondo Monument" label="Samjeondo Monument"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="265965" wikidata="Q1164462" url="?curid=265965" title="Chariot racing">
<text>Chariot racing (, &quot;harmatodromía&quot;; ) was one of the most popular ancient Greek, Roman, and Byzantine sports. In Greece, chariot racing played an essential role in aristocratic funeral games from a very early time. With the institution of formal races and permanent racetracks, chariot racing was adopted by many Greek states and their religious festivals. Horses and chariots were very costly. Their ownership was a preserve of the wealthiest aristocrats, whose reputations and status benefitted from offering such extravagant, exciting displays. Their successes could be further broadcast and celebrated through commissioned odes and other poetry.

In standard Greek racing practise, each chariot held a single driver and was pulled by four horses, or sometimes two. Drivers and horses risked serious injury or death through collisions and crashes; this added to the excitement and interest for spectators. Most charioteers were slaves or contracted professionals. While records almost invariably credit victorious owners and their horses for winning, their drivers are often not mentioned at all. In the ancient Olympic Games, and other Panhellenic Games, chariot racing was one of the most important equestrian events, and could be watched by unmarried women. Married women were banned from watching any Olympic events but a Spartan noblewoman is known to have trained horse-teams for the Olympics and won two races, one of them as driver.

In ancient Rome, chariot racing was the most popular of many subsidised public entertainments, and was an essential component in several religious festivals. Roman chariot drivers had very low social status, but were paid a fee simply for taking part. Winners were celebrated and well paid for their victories, regardless of status, and the best could earn more than the wealthiest lawyers and senators. Racing team managers may have competed for the services of particularly skilled drivers and their horses. The drivers could race as individuals, or under team colours: Blue, Green, Red or White. Spectators generally chose to support a single team, and identify themselves with its fortunes. Private betting on the races raised large sums for the teams, drivers and wealthy backers. Generous imperial subsidies of &quot;bread and circuses&quot; kept the Roman masses fed, entertained and distracted. Organised violence between rival racing factions was not uncommon, but it was generally contained. Roman and later Byzantine emperors, mistrustful of private organisations as potentially subversive, took control of the teams, especially the Blues and Greens, and appointed officials to manage them.

Chariot racing faded in importance in the Western Roman Empire after the fall of Rome; the last known race there was staged in the Circus Maximus in 549, by the Ostrogothic king, Totila. In the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire, the traditional Roman chariot-racing factions continued to play a prominent role in mass entertainment, religion and politics for several centuries. Supporters of the Blue teams vied with supporters of the Greens for control of foreign, domestic and religious policies, and imperial subsidies for themselves. Their displays of civil discontent and disobedience culminated in an indiscriminate slaughter of Byzantine citizenry by the military in the Nika riots. Thereafter, rising costs and a failing economy saw the gradual decline of Byzantine chariot racing.

==Early Greece==
Images on pottery show that chariot racing existed in thirteenth century BC Mycenaean Greece. The first literary reference to a chariot race is in Homer&#x27;s poetic account of the funeral games for Patroclus, in the &quot;Iliad&quot;, combining practices from the author&#x27;s own time (c. 8th century) with accounts based on a legendary past. The participants in this race were drawn from leading figures among the Greeks; Diomedes of Argos, the poet Eumelus, the Achaean prince Antilochus, King Menelaus of Sparta, and the hero Meriones. The race, which was one lap around the stump of a tree, was won by Diomedes, who received a slave woman and a cauldron as his prize. A chariot race also was said to be the event that founded the Olympic Games; according to one legend, mentioned by Pindar, King Oenomaus challenged suitors for his daughter Hippodamia to a race, but was defeated by Pelops, who founded the Games in honour of his victory.

==Olympic Games==
The Olympic Games were traditionally founded in 776 BC, by the Eleans, a wealthy, prestigious horse-owning aristocracy. Pindar, the earliest source for the Olympics, includes chariot racing among their five foundation events. Much later, Pausanias claims that chariot races were added only from 680 BC, and that the games were extended from one day to two days to accommodate them. In this tradition, the foot race of a stadion (approximately 600 feet) offered the greater prestige. Votive offerings associated with Olympic victories include horses and chariots. The single horse race (the ) was a late arrival at the games, dropped early in their history. The major chariot-races of the Olympic and other Panhellenic Games, were four-horse (, ) and two-horse (, ) events.

Pausanias describes the Olympic hippodrome of the second century AD, when Greece was part of the Roman Empire. The perimeter groundplan, southeast of the sanctuary itself, was approximately 780 meters long and 320 meters wide. Competitors raced from the starting-place counter-clockwise around the nearest (western) turning post, then turned at the eastern turning post and headed back west. The number of circuits varied according to the event. Spectators could watch from natural embankments to the north, and artificial embankments to the south and east. A place on the western side of the north bank was reserved for the judges. Pausanias does not describe a central dividing barrier at Olympia, but archaeologist Vikatou presumes one.

Pausanias offers several theories regarding the origins of an object named Taraxippus (&quot;Horse-disturber&quot;), an ancient round altar, tomb or &quot;Heroon&quot; embedded within one of the entrance-ways to the track. It was thought to be malevolent, as it terrified horses for no apparent reason when they raced past it, and was a major cause of crashes. Pausanias reports that consequently &quot;the charioteers offer sacrifice, and pray that Taraxippus may show himself propitious&quot;. It might simply have marked the most dangerous and difficult section of track, at the semi-circular end. Pausanias describes very similar, identically named places in other Greek hippodromes. Their name may have been an epithet of Poseidon, patron deity of horses and horse-racing. 
Races began with a procession into the hippodrome, while a herald announced the names of the drivers and owners. The tethrippon consisted of twelve laps. The most immediate and challenging aspect of the races for drivers, judges and stewards was ensuring a fair start, and keeping false starts and crushes to a minimum. Then as now, the marshalling of over-excited racehorses could prove a major difficulty. Various mechanical devices were used to reduce the likelihood of human error. Portable starting gates (&quot;hyspleges&quot;, singular: hysplex), employed a tight cord in a wooden frame, loosened to drop forwards and start the race. According to Pausanias, the chariot furthest from the start-line began to move, followed by the rest in sequence, so that when the final gate was opened, all the chariots would be in motion at the starting line. A bronze eagle (a sign of Zeus, who was patron of the Olympic games) was raised to start the race, and at each lap, a bronze dolphin (a sign of Poseidon) was lowered. The central pair of horses did most of the heavy pulling, via the yoke. The flanking pair pulled and guided, using their traces. Horse teams were highly trained, and tractable. Greek aficionadoes thought mares the best horses for chariot racing.

===Owners and charioteers===

In most cases, the owner and the driver of the Greek racing chariot were different persons. In 416 BC, the Athenian general Alcibiades had seven chariots in the race, and came in first, second, and fourth; evidently, he could not have been racing all seven chariots himself. Chariot teams were costly to own and train, and the case of Alcibiades shows that for the wealthy, this was an effective and honourable form of self-publicity; they were not expected to risk their own lives. On the other hand, they were not necessarily dishonoured when they did. The poet Pindar praised Herodotes for driving his own chariot, &quot;using his own hands rather than another&#x27;s&quot;.

Entries were exclusively Greek, or claimed to be so. Philip II of Macedon, pre-eminent through his conquest of most Greek states and self-promotion as a divinity, entered his horse and chariot teams in several major pan-Hellenic events, and won several. He celebrated the fact on his coinage, claiming it as divine confirmation of his legitimacy as Greek overlord.

Women could win races through ownership, though there was a ban on the participation of married women as competitors or even spectators at the Olympics, supposedly on pain of death; this was not typical of Greek festivals in general, and there is no consistent record of this ban, or the penalty&#x27;s enforcement. The Spartan Cynisca, daughter of Archidamus II, entered and won the Olympic chariot race, twice as owner and trainer, and at least once as driver. 

Most charioteers were slaves or hired professionals. Drivers and their horses needed strength, skill, courage, endurance and prolonged, intensive training. Like jockeys, charioteers were ideally slight of build, and therefore often young, but unlike jockeys, they were also tall. The names of very few charioteers are known from the Greek racing circuits, Victory songs, epigrams and other monuments routinely omit the names of winning drivers.

The chariots themselves resembled war chariots, essentially wooden two-wheeled carts with an open back, though by this time chariots were no longer used in battle. Charioteers stood throughout the race. They traditionally wore only a sleeved garment called a &quot;xystis&quot;, which would have offered at least some protection from crashes and dust. It fell to the ankles and was fastened high at the waist with a plain belt. Two straps that crossed high at the upper back prevented the &quot;xystis&quot; from &quot;ballooning&quot; during the race The body of the chariot rested on the axle, so the ride was bumpy. The most exciting parts of the chariot race, at least for the spectators, were the turns at the ends of the hippodrome. These turns were dangerous and sometimes deadly. In a full-sized racing stadium, the chariots could reach high speeds along the straights, then overturn or be crushed along with their horses and driver by the following chariots as they wheeled around the post. Driving into an opponent to make him crash was technically illegal, but most crashes were accidental and often unavoidable. In Homer&#x27;s account of Patroclus&#x27; funeral games, Antilochus inflicts such a crash on Menelaus.

===Pan-Hellenic festivals===

Race winners were celebrated throughout the Greek festival circuit, both on their own account and on behalf of their cities. In the classical era, other great festivals emerged in Asia Minor, Magna Graecia, and the mainland, providing the opportunity for cities to compete for honour and renown, and for their athletes to gain fame and riches. Apart from the Olympics, the most notable were the Isthmian Games in Corinth, the Nemean Games, the Pythian Games in Delphi, and the Panathenaic Games in Athens, where the winner of the four-horse chariot race was awarded 140 amphorae of olive oil, a highly valued commodity. Prizes elsewhere included corn in Eleusis, bronze shields in Argos, and silver vessels in Marathon. Winning Greek athletes, no matter their social status, were greatly honoured by their own communities. Chariot racing at the Panathenaic Games included a two-man event, the &quot;apobatai&quot;, in which one of the team was armoured, and periodically leapt off the moving chariot, ran alongside it, then leapt back on again. The second charioteer took the reins when the &quot;apobates&quot; jumped out; in the catalogues of winners, the names of both these athletes are given. Images of this contest show warriors, armed with helmets and shields, perched on the back of their racing chariots. Some scholars believe that the event preserved traditions of Homeric warfare.

==Roman chariot racing==

The Romans probably borrowed chariot technology and racing track design from the Etruscans, who in turn had borrowed them from the Greeks. Rome&#x27;s public entertainments were also influenced directly by Greek examples. Chariot racing as a feature of Roman is attested in Rome&#x27;s foundation myths, and on 66 of the 177 days of religious festival games scheduled in a late Roman Calendar of 354. Races were held as part of triumphal processions, foundation anniversary rites and funeral games subsidised by magnates during the Regal and Republican eras, and by the emperors during the imperial era. According to Roman legend, Rome in its earliest days was faced with a lack of marriagable women. Romulus, the city&#x27;s founder, invited the Sabine people to celebrate the Consualia, honouring the grain-god Consus with horse races and chariot races at the Circus Maximus. While the Sabines were enjoying the spectacle, Romulus and his men seized the Sabine women. The women eventually married their captors, and were instrumental in persuading Sabines and Romans to unite as one people. Chariot racing thus played a part in Rome&#x27;s foundation myth and local politics.

Consuls were obliged to subsidise races at the beginning and end of their annual terms, as a sort of tax on their office and a gift to the people of Rome. Races on January 1 accompanied the renewal of loyalty vows; emperors gave annual games on the anniversary of their succession, and on their own and other imperial birthdays.

Chariot races were preceded by a parade () that featured the charioteers, music, costumed dancers, and gilded images of the gods, headed by Victoria, goddess of victory. These images were placed on dining couches, which were arranged on a viewing platform () to observe the races, which were nominally held in their honour. The sponsor or of the races shared the with these divine images. In the imperial era, the in the Circus Maximus was directly connected to the imperial palace, on the Palatine Hill.

Several deities had permanent temples, shrines or images on the dividing barrier ( or ) of the circus. While the entertainment value of chariot races tended to overshadow any sacred purpose, in late antiquity the Church Fathers still saw them as a traditional &quot;pagan&quot; practice and advised Christians not to participate. Soon after the end of the Roman Empire in the West, the influential Christian scholar, administrator and historian Cassiodorus describes chariot racing as an instrument of the Devil.

===Roman circuses===

Most cities had at least one dedicated chariot racing circuit. The city of Rome had several; its main centre was the Circus Maximus which developed on the natural slopes and valley (the &quot;Vallis Murcia&quot;) between the Palatine Hill and Aventine Hill. It had a vast seating capacity; Boatwright estimates this as 150,000 before its rebuilding under Julius Caesar, and 250,000 under Trajan. According to Humphrey, the higher seating estimate is traditional but excessive, and even at its greatest capacity, the circus probably accommodated no more than about 150,000. It was Rome&#x27;s earliest and greatest circus. Its basic form and footprint were thought more or less coeval with the city&#x27;s foundation, or with Rome&#x27;s earliest Etruscan kings. Julius Caesar rebuilt it around 50 BC to a length of about and width of . It had a semi-circular end, and a semi-open, slightly angled end where the chariots lined up across the track to begin the race, each enclosed within a cell known as a &quot;carcere&quot; (&quot;prison&quot;) behind a spring-loaded gate. These were functionally equivalent to the Greek &quot;hysplex&quot; but were further staggered to accommodate a median barrier, known originally as a &quot;euripus&quot; (canal) but much later as the &quot;spina&quot; (spine). When the chariots were ready the &quot;editor&quot;, usually a high-status magistrate, dropped a white cloth; all the gates sprang open at the same time, allowing a fair start for all participants. Races were run counter-clockwise; starting positions were allocated by lottery.

The &quot;spina&quot; carried lap-counters, in the form of eggs or dolphins; the eggs were suggestive of Castor and Pollux, the mythic dioscuri, one human and one divine. They were born from an egg, divine patrons of horsemen and the Equestrian order. Dolphins were thought to be the swiftest of all creatures; they symbolised Neptune, god of the sea, earthquakes and horses.

The &quot;spina&quot; bore water-feature elements, blended with decorative and architectural features. It eventually became very elaborate, with temples, statues and obelisks and other forms of art, though the addition of these multiple adornments obstructed the view of spectators on the trackside&#x27;s lower seats, which were close to the action. At each end of the spina was a &quot;meta&quot;, or turning point, consisting of three large gilded columns. 

===Spectators===


Seats in the Circus were free for the poor, and either free or subsidised for the mass of citizens (plebs), whose lack of involvement in late Republican and Imperial politics was compensated, as far as Juvenal was concerned, by an endless supply of handouts and entertainments, or &quot;panem et circenses&quot; (&quot;bread and circuses&quot;). The seating nearest the track was reserved for senators, the rows behind them for equites and the remainder for everyone else. The better-off could pay for shaded seats with a better view. The Vestal virgins occupied their own privileged seating, close to the track. Men and women were supposed to occupy segregated seating but the &quot;law of the place&quot; allowed most to sit together, which for the Augustan poet Ovid presented opportunities for seduction. The circus was one of few places where the populace could assemble in vast numbers, and exercise the freedom of speech associated with theatre factions and , voicing support or criticism of their rulers and each other.

===The races===
The charioteers had to keep to their own lanes for the first two laps. Then they were free to jockey for position, cutting across the paths of their competitors, moving as close to the &quot;spina&quot; as they could, and whenever possible forcing their opponents to find another, much longer route forwards. Every team included a &quot;hortator&quot;, who rode horseback and signalled their faction&#x27;s charioteers to help them navigate the dangers of the track. Roman drivers wrapped the reins round their waist, and steered using their body weight; with the reins looped around their torsos, they could lean from one side to the other to direct the horses&#x27; movement while keeping the hands free &quot;for the whip and such&quot;. A driver who became entangled in a crash risked being trampled or dragged along the track by his own horses; charioteers carried a curved knife (&quot;falx&quot;) to cut their reins, and wore helmets and other protective gear. Spectacular crashes in which the chariot was destroyed and the charioteer and horses were incapacitated were called &quot;naufragia,&quot; (a &quot;shipwreck&quot;).
The best charioteers could earn a great deal of prize money, in addition to their contracted subsistence pay. The prize money for up to fourth place was advertised beforehand, with first place winning up to 60,000 sesterces. Detailed records were kept of drivers&#x27; performances, and the names, breeds and pedigrees of famous horses. Betting on results was widespread, among all classes. Most races involved four-horse chariots (&quot;quadrigae&quot;), or less often, two-horse chariots (&quot;bigae&quot;). Just to display the skill of the driver and his horses, up to ten horses could be yoked to a single chariot. The &quot;quadriga&quot; races were the most important and frequent.

===Frequency and laps===
Magnates and emperors courted popularity by staging and subsidising as many races as they could, as often as possible. In Rome, races usually lasted 7 laps, or even 5, rather than the typical 12 laps of the Greek race. Some emperors were spendthrift enthusiasts; Caligula sponsored 10–12 races a day, Nero sponsored 20–24 a day. Commodus once held and subsidised 30 races in just 2 hours of a single afternoon; Dio Cassius predicted that such extravagance could only lead to government bankruptcy. In a previous century, the emperor Domitian had managed to squeeze an extraordinary 100 races into a single afternoon, presumably by drastically lowering the number of laps from the standard 7. Twenty four races in a single day became the norm, until the slow collapse of Rome&#x27;s economy in the West, when costs rose, sponsors were lost and racetracks were abandoned. In the 4th century AD, 24 races were held every day on 66 days each year. By the end of that century, public entertainments in Italy had come to an end in all but a few towns. The Circus Maximus was still adequately maintained for use, though for what purposes is uncertain. The last known beast-hunt there was in 523. The last recorded race there was in 549 AD, staged by the Ostrogothic king, Totila; whether this was a display of horsemanship or a chariot-race is not known 

===Factions===

Most Roman chariot drivers, and many of their supporters, belonged to one of four factions; social and business organisations that raised money to sponsor the races. The factions offered security to their members in return for their loyalty and contributions, and were headed by a patron or patrons. Each faction employed a large staff to serve and support their charioteers. Every circus seems to have independently followed the same model of organisation, including the four-colour naming system: Red, White, Blue, and Green. Senior managers () were usually of equestrian class. Investors were often wealthy, but of lower social status; driving a racing chariot was thought a very low class occupation, beneath the dignity of any citizen, but making money from it was truly disgraceful, so investors of high social status usually resorted to negotiations discreetly through agents, rather than risk losing reputation, status and privilege through &quot;infamia&quot;. No contemporary source describes these factions as official, but unlike many unofficial organisations in Rome, they were evidently tolerated as useful and effective rather than feared as secretive and potentially subversive.
Tertullian claims that there were originally just two factions, White and Red, sacred to winter and summer respectively. By his time, there were four factions; the Reds were dedicated to Mars, the Whites to the Zephyrus, the Greens to Mother Earth or spring, and the Blues to the sky and sea or autumn. Each faction could enter up to three chariots in a race. Members of the same faction often collaborated against the other entrants, for example to force them to crash into the &quot;spina&quot; (a legal and encouraged tactic). The driver&#x27;s clothing was color-coded in accordance with his faction, which would help distant spectators to keep track of the race&#x27;s progress.

The emperor Domitian created two new factions, the Purples and Golds, but they vanished from the record very soon after his death. The Blues and the Greens gradually became the most prestigious factions, supported by emperors and the populace alike. Blue versus Green clashes sometimes broke out during the races. The Reds and Whites are seldom mentioned in the literature, but their continued activity is documented in inscriptions and in curse tablets.

===Roman charioteers===
Charioteers occupied a peculiar position in Roman society. If originally citizens, their chosen career made &quot;infames&quot; of them, denying them many of the privileges, protections and dignities of full citizenship. Undertakers, prostitutes and pimps, butchers, executioners, and heralds were considered infamous, for various reasons; but although gladiators, actors, charioteers and any others who earned a living on stage, arena or racetrack were &quot;infames&quot;, the best of them could earn popular and elite support that verged on adoration, and near-fabulous wealth if not respectability. Juvenal bewailed that the earnings of the charioteer Lacerta were a hundred times more than a lawyer&#x27;s fee. Emperors who took the reins as charioteer, or promoted drivers to elite status or freely mixed with &quot;arenarii&quot;—as did Caligula, Nero and Elagabalus, for example—were also notoriously &quot;bad&quot; rulers. Two jurists of the later imperial era, and some modern scholars, argue against the legal status of charioteers as &quot;infames&quot;, on the grounds that athletic competitions were not mere entertainment but &quot;seemed useful&quot; as honourable displays of Roman strength and &quot;virtus&quot;.

Most Roman charioteers started their careers as slaves, who had neither reputation nor honour to lose. Of more than 200 dedications to named charioteers catalogued by , more than half are of unknown social status. Of the remainder, 66 are slaves, 14 are freedmen, 13 either slaves or freedmen and only one a freeborn citizen.

All race competitors, regardless of their social status or whether they completed the race, were paid a driver&#x27;s fee. Slave-charioteers could not lawfully own property, including money, but their masters could pay them regardless, or retain all or some accumulated driving fees and winnings on their behalf, as the price of their eventual manumission. While most freed slave-charioteers would have become clients of their former master, some would have earned more than enough to buy their freedom outright, assuming they survived that long. Scorpus won over 2,000 races before being killed in a collision at the &quot;meta&quot; when he was about 27 years old. The charioteer Florus&#x27; tomb inscription describes him as &quot;infans&quot; (not adult). Gaius Appuleius Diocles won 1,462 out of 4,257 races for various teams during his exceptionally long and lucky career. When he retired at the age of 42, his lifetime winnings reportedly totalled 35,863,120 sesterces (HS), not counting driver&#x27;s fees. His personal share of this is unknown but Vamplew calculates that even if Diocles&#x27; personal winnings were only a tenth part of the declared prize money, this would have yielded him an average annual income of 150,000 HS. 

Most races and wins were team efforts, results of co-operation between charioteers of the same faction, but victories won in single races were the most highly esteemed by drivers and their public. Charioteers followed a ferociously competitive, charismatic profession, routinely risked violent death, and aroused a compulsive, even morbid reverence among their followers. A supporter of the Red faction is said to have thrown himself on the funeral pyre of his favourite charioteer. More usually, some charioteers and supporters tried to enlist supernatural help by covertly burying curse tablets at or near the track, appealing to spirits and deities of the underworld for the success of their favourites or disaster for their opponents; a common practise among Romans of all classes though like all magic, strictly illegal, and punishable by death.

Some of the most talented and successful charioteers were suspected of winning through the illicit agency of dark forces. Ammianus Marcellinus, writing during Valentinian&#x27;s reign (AD 364–375), describes various cases of chariot drivers prosecuted for witchcraft or the procurement of spells. One charioteer was beheaded for having his young son trained in witchcraft to help him win his races; and another burnt at the stake for practising witchcraft.

===Horses===
The horses, too, could become celebrities; they were purpose-bred and were trained relatively late, from 5 years old. The Romans favoured particular native breeds from Hispania and north Africa. One of Diocles&#x27; horses, named Cotynus, raced with him in various teams 445 times, alongside Abigeius, a treasured &quot;trace&quot; horse. A chariot&#x27;s &quot;trace&quot; horses partly pulled the chariot and partly guided it, as flankers to the central pair, who were yoked to the chariot and provided both speed and power. A left-side trace horse&#x27;s steady performance could mean the difference between victory and disaster; mares were thought the steadiest. Left-side trace horses were the closest to the &quot;spina&quot;, and are most likely to be named in the race record. Another key performer in a standard &quot;quadriga&quot; race was the right-hand yoke-horse. Celebrity horses named in Diocles&#x27; extraordinary record of 445 races and more than 100 wins in a year include Pompeianus, Lucidus and Galata. 

== Byzantine context ==
Constantine I (r. 306–337) refounded the eastern Greek city of Byzantium as a &quot;New Rome&quot;, to serve as the administrative center of the eastern half of the Empire, and renamed it Constantinople. He replaced or restored the city&#x27;s chariot-racing circuit (&quot;hippodrome&quot;), which had been provided by Septimius Severus. As a Christian emperor, or at least one with Christian leanings, Constantine supported and financed Constantinople&#x27;s chariot racing infrastructure and overheads in preference to gladiatorial combat, which he considered a vestige of paganism. A possibility of spiritual damage through the witnessing of traditional public spectacles had concerned Christian apologists since at least Tertullian&#x27;s time. The Olympic Games were eventually ended by Emperor Theodosius I (r. 379–395) in 393, perhaps in a move to suppress paganism and promote Christianity. Gladiator contests were eventually abandoned, but chariot racing and theatrical entertainments remained popular. The Church did not, or perhaps could not, prevent them, although prominent Christian writers attacked them.

Justinian I&#x27;s reformed legal code specifically prohibits drivers from placing curses on their opponents, and invites their co-operation in bringing offenders before the authorities, rather than acting like assassins or vigilantes. This not only reiterates a very longstanding prohibition of witchcraft throughout the Empire but confirms a reputation that charioteers had for living at the very edge of the law, for violent thefts, blackmail and bullying as debt collectors on their masters&#x27; behalf, and an easy-going criminality that could extend to the murder of opponents and enemies, disguised as rough but rightful justice.

A sixth-seventh century Byzantine graffito in the Hagia Sophia shows a charioteer named Samonas, performing a victory lap. The graffito, no earlier than 537, includes an engraved cross to seek God&#x27;s help for the charioteer. Samonas is otherwise unknown.
Several earlier Byzantine charioteers are known by name or race records, six of them through short, laudatory verse epigrams; namely, Anastasius; Julianus of Tyre; Faustinus and his son Constantinus; Uranius; and Porphyrius. Among these, the single epigram to Anastasius offers very little personal information, but Porphyrius is the subject of thirty-four. He is described as the best charioteer of his time; and as the only charioteer known to have won the &quot;diversium&quot; twice in one day.

The &quot;diversium&quot; was unique to Byzantine chariot racing, a formal rematch between the winner and a loser, in which the competing charioteers drove each other&#x27;s team and chariot. A winning charioteer could thus win twice over, driving the same horse team that he had defeated earlier, virtually eliminating mere chance or better horses as the deciding factors in both victories. In Byzantine chariot racing, the expected standards of professional athleticsm were very high. Competitors were sometimes assigned to age categories, though very loosely; youths under approximately 17 (described as &quot;beardless&quot;), young men (17–20), and adult men over 20; but skill counted more than age, or stamina. In some circumstances, the charioteers themselves performed formal, ritualised mimes, or dances, which won them fame and adulation Preparation for races could involve ritualised public dialogues between charioteers, imperial officials and emperors, a prescribed liturgy of questions, answers, and processional orders of precedence. Each race required the emperor&#x27;s consent.

=== Byzantine racing factions ===
In the eastern provinces, and Constantinople itself, the earliest evidence for colour factions is from AD 315, coincident with the extension of imperial authority into local government and public life. The cost of financing the races was split between the factions, the state, the Emperors, and senior officials. The annually appointed consuls were obliged to personally fund their own inaugural games.

Members of racing factions (known as demes), were a minority among chariot racing enthusiasts as a whole. In Byzantium as elsewhere, racing fans cheered on their favorite charioteers, and sought out the company of like-minded supporters. Charioteers could change their factional allegiance but their fans did not necessarily follow them. Semi-permanent alliances of Blues (, &quot;Vénetoi&quot;) and Greens (, &quot;Prásinoi&quot;) overshadowed the Whites (, &quot;Leukoí&quot;) and Reds (, &quot;Rhoúsioi&quot;). In the 5th century, the outstanding Byzantine charioteer Porphyrius raced as a &quot;Blue&quot; or a &quot;Green&quot; at various times; he was celebrated by each faction, and by the reigning Emperor, and was honoured with several imperially subsidised monuments on a grand scale in the Hippodrome. While the racing factions, their supporters and the populace at large were overwhelmingly composed of commoners, as in Rome, Cameron (1976) sees no justification for the description of any Byzantine racing faction, racing sponsor or factional ideology as &quot;populist&quot;, nor the conflicts between factions and authorities as expressions of &quot;class conflict&quot; or religious squabling on a grand scale. The urban mass disturbances that characterise much of Byzantium&#x27;s early history were not associated with racing factions until the 5th century, when the imperial government appointed managers of both the Circus races and the Theatres, responsible for the production and performance of the chants, theatrical displays and lavish religious ceremonies that accompanied imperial court rituals and chariot races. The acclamations of emperors and of winning charioteers employed much the same triumphalist language, symbolism, honours and pledges of allegiance. From around the mid-fifth century, the support and approval of the factions in confirming the legitimacy of emperors became a formal requirement. The factions were represented as loyal commoners, or &quot;the people&quot;.

Social discontent and disturbances in Constantinople tended to focus on the Hippodrome, which was not only ideal for racing but by far the largest and most conveniently designed space for mass meetings and their containment. The structure of the Hippodrome in Constantinople allowed the people to voice their religious and political opinion in the presence of the emperor, thus empowering the charioteers who were presented as political mediators between the people and the emperor. In 498, the crowd showed its dissatisfaction with the emperor Anastasius by launching a hail of stones at the &quot;kathisma&quot;; during a near-revolutionary riot of 512 at the Hippodrome, the same emperor feared for his life, and offered to abdicate; the crowd, apparently seeing this offer as both humble and magnanimous, found something like a &quot;popular voice&quot; and shifted their collective posture from opposition to support. Byzantium&#x27;s theatre claques, which already had a reputation for well-organised violence, were now identified with the racing factions, and were thought to represent the rowdiest, most uncontrollable elements among the Blues and Greens. Blue–Green rivalry increasingly erupted into armed and lethal gang warfare. Justin I (r. 518–527) took severe, but apparently indiscriminate, misdirected and ultimately ineffective measures against urban violence after a citizen was murdered in the church of Hagia Sophia. Long-running factional disorder culminated in the Nika riots of 532 AD, against the backdrop of scheduled chariot races on the Ides of January, and factional &quot;discontent&quot; at political corruption and mismanagement. The Blues and Greens united and attempted but failed to overthrow the emperor; thousands were killed by the Byzantine military in retribution, including many ordinary citizens. The Byzantine historian Procopius saw the entire affair as a failure of the Emperor and his authorities to manage their imperial troops and govern their people, and the almost complete lack of a dedicated police force.

Civil law reforms enacted by Justinian I in 541 ensured that only emperors or their representatives could subsidise the races; soon after, the emperor Tiberius II Constantine curbed imperial spending on the factions, which further reduced their power and influence. Chariot racing declined further in the course of the seventh century, in line with the Empire&#x27;s dwindling economy and loss of territory. After the Nika riots, the factions had become less antagonistic to imperial authority as their importance and roles in imperial ceremony were increased. The iconoclast emperor Constantine V (r. 741–775) deployed both Green and Blue &quot;rowdies&quot; in his anti-monastic campaigns, staging theatrical shows in which monks and nuns were exposed to public ridicule, abuse and forced marriages. The number of races per race-day declined sharply to eight in the 10th century. The racing factions in Byzantium continued their activity, though much reduced, until the imperial court was moved to Blachernae during the 12th century.

==See also==
* Carriage driving
* Harness racing
* Oval track racing
* Spectacles in ancient Rome
==Footnotes==
==References==
==Sources==

===Primary sources===
* 
* Pausanias. &quot;Description of Greece&quot;, Book 6: Elis II. English translation Perseus program.
* Pindar. &quot;Isthmian Odes – Isthmian 1&quot;. See original text in Perseus program.
* Pindar. &quot;Olympian Odes – Olympian 1&quot;. See original text in Perseus program.
* Pindar. &quot;Pythian Odes – Pythian 5&quot;. See original text in Perseus program.
* 
* Tertullian. &quot;De Spectaculis&quot;. See original text in the Latin library.
===Secondary sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Chariot Races (United Nations of Roma Victrix (UNRV) History – Roman Empire)
* The Circus: Roman Chariot Racing (VRoma: A Virtual Community for Teaching and Learning Classics) 
* Pasko Varnica – Sports In Antiquity</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1164462" start="0" end="14" title="Chariot racing" label="Chariot racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="75" end="88" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="90" end="95" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="101" end="110" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="130" end="137" title="chariot" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509124" start="186" end="199" title="funeral games" label="funeral games"/>
<link wikidata="Q188468" start="1116" end="1137" title="ancient Olympic Games" label="ancient Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q508557" start="1149" end="1166" title="Panhellenic Games" label="Panhellenic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="1338" end="1344" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q845658" start="2277" end="2295" title="bread and circuses" label="bread and circuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="2456" end="2461" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="2472" end="2490" title="Byzantine emperors" label="Byzantine emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="2699" end="2719" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="2730" end="2742" title="Fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="2818" end="2827" title="Ostrogoth" label="Ostrogoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q159707" start="2836" end="2842" title="Totila" label="Totila"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2851" end="2883" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q162665" start="3334" end="3344" title="Nika riots" label="Nika riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="3474" end="3481" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="3540" end="3556" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3611" end="3616" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186271" start="3664" end="3673" title="Patroclus" label="Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="3688" end="3693" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q208256" start="3891" end="3899" title="Diomedes" label="Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="3903" end="3908" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q391254" start="3910" end="3926" title="Eumelus of Corinth" label="the poet Eumelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="3932" end="3939" title="Achaeans (Homer)" label="Achaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q577552" start="3947" end="3957" title="Antilochus" label="Antilochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="3964" end="3972" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="3976" end="3982" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="3992" end="3996" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q367819" start="3997" end="4005" title="Meriones (mythology)" label="Meriones"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="4099" end="4104" title="slavery" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317634" start="4117" end="4125" title="cauldron" label="cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q188468" start="4202" end="4215" title="Ancient Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="4255" end="4261" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q847890" start="4268" end="4276" title="Oenomaus" label="Oenomaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q328354" start="4313" end="4323" title="Hippodamia (daughter of Oenomaus)" label="Hippodamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192485" start="4355" end="4361" title="Pelops" label="Pelops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063649" start="4493" end="4499" title="Elis" label="Eleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="4550" end="4556" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="4668" end="4677" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="4850" end="4857" title="Stadion (unit)" label="stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="5228" end="5235" title="Olympia, Greece" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q770627" start="6020" end="6030" title="Taraxippus" label="Taraxippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356770" start="6100" end="6106" title="Heroon" label="Heroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="6661" end="6668" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="6672" end="6680" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641600" start="7268" end="7275" title="hysplex" label="hysplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="7603" end="7607" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064853" start="8128" end="8136" title="ancient Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q187982" start="8145" end="8155" title="Alcibiades" label="Alcibiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="8585" end="8591" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="8753" end="8773" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="9386" end="9392" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q267195" start="9394" end="9401" title="Cynisca" label="Cynisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q313731" start="9415" end="9428" title="Archidamus II" label="Archidamus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q577552" start="11159" end="11169" title="Antilochus" label="Antilochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="11195" end="11203" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="11416" end="11426" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="11428" end="11441" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q675181" start="11631" end="11645" title="Isthmian Games" label="Isthmian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="11649" end="11656" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q527006" start="11662" end="11674" title="Nemean Games" label="Nemean Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q649128" start="11680" end="11693" title="Pythian Games" label="Pythian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162701" start="11713" end="11730" title="Panathenaic Games" label="Panathenaic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="11734" end="11740" title="Classical Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277842" start="11806" end="11814" title="Panathenaic Amphorae" label="amphorae"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="11818" end="11827" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q204905" start="11890" end="11897" title="Eleusis" label="Eleusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="11917" end="11922" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q40244" start="11946" end="11954" title="Marathon" label="Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="12736" end="12745" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367629" start="12988" end="13006" title="Roman festival" label="religious festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q774892" start="13039" end="13054" title="Calendar of 354" label="Calendar of 354"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="13272" end="13284" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186" start="13356" end="13363" title="Romulus" label="Romulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q108356" start="13402" end="13408" title="Sabine" label="Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356572" start="13433" end="13442" title="Consualia" label="Consualia"/>
<link wikidata="Q868923" start="13468" end="13474" title="Consus" label="Consus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207808" start="13517" end="13531" title="Circus Maximus" label="Circus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048568" start="13600" end="13623" title="The Rape of the Sabine Women" label="seized the Sabine women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209773" start="14284" end="14292" title="List of Roman deities" label="the gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q308902" start="14304" end="14312" title="Victoria (mythology)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="14864" end="14878" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="14883" end="14897" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="14969" end="14979" title="early Christianity" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q192365" start="15115" end="15126" title="Cassiodorus" label="Cassiodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207808" start="15323" end="15337" title="Circus Maximus" label="Circus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554037" start="15398" end="15411" title="Vallis Murcia" label="Vallis Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="15431" end="15444" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q194103" start="15449" end="15462" title="Aventine Hill" label="Aventine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="15561" end="15574" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="15594" end="15600" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190103" start="16891" end="16908" title="Castor and Pollux" label="Castor and Pollux"/>
<link wikidata="Q190103" start="16921" end="16929" title="dioscuri" label="dioscuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="17020" end="17036" title="Equites" label="Equestrian order"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="17113" end="17120" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q477396" start="17551" end="17555" title="meta (architecture)" label="meta"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="17744" end="17749" title="plebs" label="plebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="17846" end="17853" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q845658" start="17963" end="17981" title="bread and circuses" label="bread and circuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="18072" end="18079" title="equites" label="equites"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="18183" end="18197" title="Vestal virgins" label="Vestal virgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="18409" end="18413" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q155987" start="20261" end="20269" title="quadriga" label="quadriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="20801" end="20809" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="20839" end="20843" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="20867" end="20875" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="20949" end="20960" title="Dio Cassius" label="Dio Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="21071" end="21079" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="21785" end="21794" title="Ostrogoth" label="Ostrogoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q159707" start="21803" end="21809" title="Totila" label="Totila"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028761" start="22858" end="22865" title="infamia" label="infamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="23098" end="23108" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="23285" end="23289" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q467515" start="23309" end="23317" title="Zephyrus" label="Zephyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402540" start="23333" end="23345" title="Mother Nature" label="Mother Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="23795" end="23803" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430557" start="24223" end="24236" title="curse tablets" label="curse tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028761" start="24377" end="24384" title="Infamia" label="infames"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="24866" end="24873" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="25107" end="25115" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="25117" end="25121" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="25126" end="25136" title="Elagabalus" label="Elagabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935246" start="25482" end="25488" title="virtus" label="virtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="26168" end="26179" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881933" start="26234" end="26264" title="Patronage in ancient Rome" label="clients of their former master"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435425" start="26371" end="26378" title="Scorpus" label="Scorpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q983525" start="26585" end="26608" title="Gaius Appuleius Diocles" label="Gaius Appuleius Diocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430557" start="27651" end="27664" title="curse tablets" label="curse tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q172198" start="28042" end="28062" title="Ammianus Marcellinus" label="Ammianus Marcellinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46720" start="28079" end="28090" title="Valentinian I" label="Valentinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="28559" end="28567" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="29442" end="29455" title="Constantine I" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="29762" end="29779" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="29964" end="29973" title="gladiator" label="gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="30018" end="30026" title="paganism" label="paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="30168" end="30178" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="30243" end="30255" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="30459" end="30465" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="30564" end="30575" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q193121" start="31578" end="31586" title="epigrams" label="epigrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210522" start="31675" end="31685" title="Porphyrius the Charioteer" label="Porphyrius"/>
<link wikidata="Q672490" start="33535" end="33539" title="deme" label="deme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210522" start="34069" end="34079" title="Porphyrius the Charioteer" label="Porphyrius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623113" start="34436" end="34443" title="Alan Cameron (classicist)" label="Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q173470" start="36055" end="36065" title="Anastasius I Dicorus" label="Anastasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q183445" start="36750" end="36758" title="Justin I" label="Justin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q162665" start="36997" end="37007" title="Nika riots" label="Nika riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="37074" end="37089" title="Ides (calendar)" label="Ides of January"/>
<link wikidata="Q186153" start="37372" end="37381" title="Procopius" label="Procopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="37597" end="37608" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q31491" start="37719" end="37742" title="Tiberius II Constantine" label="Tiberius II Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="38133" end="38143" title="iconoclast" label="iconoclast"/>
<link wikidata="Q41635" start="38152" end="38165" title="Constantine V" label="Constantine V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749015" start="38568" end="38578" title="Blachernae" label="Blachernae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046124" start="38620" end="38636" title="Carriage driving" label="Carriage driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194269" start="38639" end="38653" title="Harness racing" label="Harness racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935680" start="38656" end="38673" title="Oval track racing" label="Oval track racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966554" start="38676" end="38702" title="Spectacles in ancient Rome" label="Spectacles in ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="38772" end="38781" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="38874" end="38880" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="39139" end="39149" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244978" start="39157" end="39171" title="De Spectaculis" label="De Spectaculis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="265967" wikidata="Q965040" url="?curid=265967" title="Pierrot lunaire">
<text>Dreimal sieben Gedichte aus Albert Girauds &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot; (&quot;Three times Seven Poems from Albert Giraud&#x27;s &#x27;Pierrot lunaire), commonly known simply as Pierrot lunaire, Op. 21 (&quot;Moonstruck Pierrot&quot; or &quot;Pierrot in the Moonlight&quot;), is a melodrama by Arnold Schoenberg. It is a setting of 21 selected poems from Albert Giraud&#x27;s cycle of the same name as translated into German by Otto Erich Hartleben.
The work is written for reciter (voice-type unspecified in the score, but traditionally performed by a soprano) who delivers the poems in the &quot;Sprechstimme&quot; style accompanied by a small instrumental ensemble. Schoenberg had previously used a combination of spoken text with instrumental accompaniment, called &quot;melodrama&quot;, in the summer-wind narrative of the &quot;Gurre-Lieder&quot;, which was a fashionable musical style popular at the end of the nineteenth century. Though the music is atonal, it does not employ Schoenberg&#x27;s twelve-tone technique, which he did not use until 1921.

&quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot; is among Schoenberg&#x27;s most celebrated and frequently performed works. Its instrumentation – flute, clarinet, violin, cello, and piano with standard doublings and in this case with the addition of a vocalist – is an important ensemble in 20th- and 21st-century classical music and is referred to as a &quot;Pierrot ensemble&quot;.

The piece was premiered at the Berlin Choralion-Saal on October 16, 1912, with Albertine Zehme as the vocalist. A typical performance lasts about 35 to 40 minutes. The American premiere took place at the Klaw Theatre, on Broadway, New York, on 4 February 1923 as part of a series of concerts organised by the International Composers&#x27; Guild.

== History ==
The work originated in a commission by Albertine Zehme, a former actress, for a cycle for voice and piano, setting a series of poems by the Belgian writer Albert Giraud. The verses had been first published in 1884 and later translated into German by Otto Erich Hartleben. Zehme had previously performed a &#x27;melodrama&#x27; by composer Otto Vrieslander based on the translated poems. But, according to Eduard Steuermann, student of Schoenberg and pianist of the premiere, &quot;the music was not strong enough, and someone advised her to approach Schoenberg.&quot;

Schoenberg began work on March 12 and completed the piece on July 9, 1912, having expanded the forces to an ensemble consisting of flute (doubling on piccolo), clarinet in A (doubling on bass clarinet and clarinet in B), violin (doubling on viola), cello, and piano.

After forty rehearsals, Schoenberg and Zehme (in Columbine dress) gave the premiere at the Berlin Choralion-Saal on October 16, 1912. Reaction was mixed. According to Anton Webern, some in the audience were whistling and laughing, but in the end &quot;it was an unqualified success&quot;. According to eyewitness Salka Viertel, the sister of the premiere&#x27;s pianist Eduard Steuermann, 

There was some criticism of blasphemy in the texts, to which Schoenberg responded, &quot;If they were musical, not a single one would give a damn about the words. Instead, they would go away whistling the tunes.&quot;

==Structure==
&quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot; consists of three groups of seven poems. In the first group, Pierrot sings of love, sex and religion; in the second, of violence, crime, and blasphemy; and in the third of his return home to Bergamo, with his past haunting him.

Schoenberg, who was fascinated by numerology, also makes great use of seven-note motifs throughout the work, while the ensemble (with conductor) comprises seven people. The piece is his opus 21, contains 21 poems, and was begun on March 12, 1912. Other key numbers in the work are 3 and 13: each poem consists of 13 lines (two four-line verses followed by a five-line verse), while the first line of each poem occurs three times (being repeated as lines 7 and 13).

== Music and text ==
Though written in a freely atonal style, &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot; uses a variety of classical forms and techniques, including canon, fugue, rondo, passacaglia, and free counterpoint.

The instrumental combinations (including doublings) vary between most movements. The entire ensemble is used only in Nos. 6, 11, 14, 15 (end), 16, 18, 19 (end), 20, and 21. Musicologist Alan Lessem states about the work that &quot;on the whole instrumental textures tend to become fuller as the work progresses&quot; and that, in general, &quot;the piano is the leading [instrumental] protagonist of the melodramas.&quot;

The poetry is a German version of a rondeau of the old French type with a double refrain. Each poem consists of three stanzas of 4 + 4 + 5 lines, with the first two lines of the first stanza (1,2) repeated as the last two lines of the second stanza (7,8), and line 1 additionally repeated (13) to close the third stanza and the poem. The first poem is shown below.

=== &quot;Sprechstimme&quot; / &quot;Sprechgesang&quot; ===
The atonal, expressionistic settings of the text, with their echoes of German cabaret, bring the poems vividly to life. &quot;Sprechstimme&quot; is a style in which the vocalist uses the specified rhythms and pitches but does not sustain the pitches, allowing them to drop or rise, in the manner of speech. Schoenberg describes the technique in a foreword to the score:

In the score, &quot;Sprechstimme&quot; is indicated with small x&#x27;s through the stems of notes. Though &quot;Sprechstimme&quot; is used throughout the piece, Schoenberg also occasionally indicates that certain passages are to be sung (&quot;gesungen&quot;).

==Notable recordings==
Notable recordings of this composition include:

Arnold Schoenberg himself made test recordings of the music with a group of Los Angeles musicians, nearly all European immigrants, from September 24 to 26, 1940. These recordings were eventually released on LP by Columbia Records in 1949, and reissued in 1974 on the Odyssey label.

The jazz singer Cleo Laine recorded &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot; in 1974. Her version was nominated for a classical Grammy Award. Another jazz singer who has performed the piece is Sofia Jernberg, who sang it with Norrbotten NEO. 

The avant-pop star Björk, known for her interest in avant-garde music, performed &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot; at the 1996 Verbier Festival with Kent Nagano conducting. According to the singer in a 2004 interview, &quot;Kent Nagano wanted to make a recording of it, but I really felt that I would be invading the territory of people who sing this for a lifetime .&quot; Only small recorded excerpts (possibly bootlegs) of her performance have become available.

The American mezzo-soprano Mary Nessinger has performed &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot; extensively with organizations such as the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, Chamber Music Northwest, and Sequitur at venues including Alice Tully Hall and Weill Recital Hall at Carnegie Hall.

In March 2011, Bruce LaBruce directed a performance at the Hebbel am Ufer Theatre in Berlin. This interpretation of the work included gender diversity, castration scenes and dildos, as well as a female to male transgender Pierrot. LaBruce subsequently filmed this adaptation as the 2014 theatrical film &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot;.

==Legacy as a standard ensemble==

The quintet of instruments used in &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot; became the core ensemble for The Fires of London, who formed in 1965 as &quot;The Pierrot Players&quot; to perform &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot;, and continued to concertize with a varied classical and contemporary repertory. This group performed works arranged for these instruments and commissioned new works especially to take advantage of this ensemble&#x27;s instrumental colors, up until it disbanded in 1987.

Over the years, other groups have continued to use this instrumentation professionally (current groups include Da Capo Chamber Players, eighth blackbird and the Finnish contemporary group Uusinta Lunaire) and have built a large repertoire for the ensemble.

==Notes==
==References==
*Bryn-Julson, Phyllis, and Paul Mathews. 2009. &quot;Inside&quot; Pierrot lunaire: &quot;Performing the Sprechstimme in Schoenberg&#x27;s Masterpiece&quot;. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. (pbk); (ebook).
*Byron, Avior. &quot;The Test Pressings of Schoenberg Conducting Pierrot lunaire&quot;. accessed May 1, 2008.
*Byron, Avior. 2006–07. &quot;Pierrot lunaire in Studio and in Broadcast: Sprechstimme, Tempo and Character&quot;. &quot;Journal of the Society of Musicology in Ireland&quot; 2:69–91. (accessed October 29, 2008).
*Dunsby, Jonathan. 1992. &quot;Schoenberg: Pierrot lunaire&quot;. Cambridge University Press. .
*Hazlewood, Charles. 2006. &quot;Discovering Music&quot;. BBC Radio 3 (June 24).
*Neighbour, Oliver W. 2001. &quot;Schoenberg, Arnold (Franz Walter)&quot;. &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot;, second edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell. London: Macmillan.
*Puffett, Kathryn. 2006. &quot;Structural Imagery: &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot; Revisited&quot;. &quot;Tempo&quot; 60, no. 237 (July): 2–22.
*Rosen, Charles. 1996. &quot;Arnold Schoenberg&quot;, with a new preface. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. .
*Schoenberg, Arnold. 1994. &quot;Verklärte Nacht and Pierrot lunaire&quot;. Dover Publications. 
*Winiarz, John. Schoenberg – Pierrot lunaire: an Atonal Landmark April 1, 2000 accessed July 23, 2006.

==Further reading==
*Argentino, Joe. 2012. &quot;Serialism and Neo-Riemannian Theory: Transformations and Hexatonic Cycles in Schoenberg&#x27;s &quot;Modern Psalm&quot; Op. 50c&quot;. &quot;Intégral&quot; 26:123–58.
* Article by a singer who has often performed the work
*Gillespie, Jeffrey L. 1992. &quot;Motivic Transformations and Networks in Schoenberg&#x27;s &#x27;Nacht&#x27; from &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot;&quot;. &quot;Intégral&quot; 6:34–65.
*Gingerich, Katrina (2012). &quot;The Journey of the Song Cycle: From &#x27;The Iliad&#x27; to &#x27;American Idiot, &quot;Musical Offerings&quot;: Vol. 1: No. 2, Article 3.
*Lambert, Philip. 2000. &quot;On Contextual Transformations&quot;. &quot;Perspectives of New Music&quot; 38, no. 1 (Winter): 45–76.
*Lessem, Alan. 1979. &quot;Music and Text in the Works of Arnold Schoenberg: The Critical Years, 1908–22&quot;. .
*Metzer, David. 1994. &quot;The New York Reception of &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot;: The 1923 Premiere and Its Aftermath&quot;. &quot;The Musical Quarterly&quot; 78, no. 4 (Winter): 669–99.
*Roig-Francolí, Miguel A. 2001. &quot;A Theory of Pitch-Class-Set Extension in Atonal Music&quot;. &quot;College Music Symposium&quot; 41:57–90.
*Weytjens, Stephan. 2004. “Text as a Crutch in Schoenberg&#x27;s Pierrot Lunaire?”. &quot;Pierrot lunaire: Albert Giraud, Otto Erich Hartleben, Arnold Schoenberg: a collection of musicological and literary studies.&quot; Delaere, Mark, Jan Herman editors. Leuven, Belgium: Éditions Peeters: 109-24.

==External links==
* Manuscript of the score at the Arnold Schönberg center
* Luna Nova New Music Ensemble: Arnold Schoenberg&#x27;s &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot;, study guide featuring a complete performance
* Austrian ensemble for contemporary music
* &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot;, LiederNet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17309" start="219" end="226" title="Pierrot" label="Pierrot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="280" end="289" title="Melodrama#Opera" label="melodrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="293" end="310" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q972661" start="354" end="367" title="Albert Giraud" label="Albert Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192571" start="375" end="397" title="Pierrot lunaire (book)" label="cycle of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q76279" start="427" end="447" title="Otto Erich Hartleben" label="Otto Erich Hartleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q30903" start="552" end="559" title="soprano" label="soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500983" start="591" end="615" title="Sprechgesang" label="&amp;quot;Sprechstimme&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q504514" start="622" end="633" title="Accompaniment" label="accompanied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="658" end="666" title="Musical ensemble" label="ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555250" start="833" end="845" title="Gurre-Lieder" label="Gurre-Lieder"/>
<link wikidata="Q211745" start="957" end="963" title="Atonality" label="atonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="1002" end="1023" title="twelve-tone technique" label="twelve-tone technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="1184" end="1189" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="1191" end="1199" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="1201" end="1207" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="1209" end="1214" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="1220" end="1225" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192570" start="1398" end="1414" title="Pierrot ensemble" label="Pierrot ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032156" start="1627" end="1639" title="Klaw Theatre" label="Klaw Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1644" end="1652" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456251" start="1732" end="1767" title="International Composers&amp;#x27; Guild" label="International Composers&amp;#x27; Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q972661" start="1939" end="1952" title="Albert Giraud" label="Albert Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q76279" start="2034" end="2054" title="Otto Erich Hartleben" label="Otto Erich Hartleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q214108" start="2189" end="2206" title="Eduard Steuermann" label="Eduard Steuermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="2461" end="2469" title="Musical ensemble" label="ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="2484" end="2489" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q83509" start="2503" end="2510" title="piccolo" label="piccolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="2513" end="2521" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8345" start="2540" end="2553" title="bass clarinet" label="bass clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="2574" end="2580" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="2594" end="2599" title="viola" label="viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="2602" end="2607" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="2613" end="2618" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q17302" start="2670" end="2679" title="Columbina" label="Columbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190933" start="2788" end="2800" title="Anton Webern" label="Anton Webern"/>
<link wikidata="Q84576" start="2934" end="2947" title="Salka Viertel" label="Salka Viertel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214108" start="2991" end="3008" title="Eduard Steuermann" label="Eduard Steuermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q17309" start="3334" end="3341" title="Pierrot" label="Pierrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q316" start="3351" end="3355" title="love" label="love"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="3357" end="3360" title="sex" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="3365" end="3373" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="3393" end="3401" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="3403" end="3408" title="crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="3414" end="3423" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="3464" end="3471" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q140732" start="3536" end="3546" title="numerology" label="numerology"/>
<link wikidata="Q908349" start="3583" end="3589" title="Motif (music)" label="motifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="3636" end="3645" title="Conductor (music)" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q211745" start="4009" end="4022" title="Free atonality" label="freely atonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q862597" start="4086" end="4091" title="Musical form" label="forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q53831" start="4118" end="4123" title="canon (music)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q181014" start="4125" end="4130" title="fugue" label="fugue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13323" start="4132" end="4137" title="rondo" label="rondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q752329" start="4139" end="4150" title="passacaglia" label="passacaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="4161" end="4173" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q325944" start="4433" end="4441" title="Texture (music)" label="textures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417272" start="4635" end="4642" title="Rondeau (poetry)" label="rondeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q191609" start="4680" end="4687" title="refrain" label="refrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756348" start="4717" end="4723" title="stanza" label="stanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="5037" end="5050" title="expressionist" label="expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="5103" end="5110" title="cabaret" label="cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500983" start="5151" end="5163" title="Sprechstimme" label="Sprechstimme"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="5222" end="5228" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="5234" end="5241" title="Pitch (music)" label="pitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685487" start="5324" end="5330" title="Interpersonal communication" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q572837" start="5480" end="5485" title="Stem (music)" label="stems"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="5944" end="5960" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="6018" end="6022" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q291309" start="6030" end="6040" title="Cleo Laine" label="Cleo Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="6129" end="6141" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956646" start="6194" end="6208" title="Sofia Jernberg" label="Sofia Jernberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053238" start="6227" end="6241" title="Norrbotten NEO" label="Norrbotten NEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="6249" end="6258" title="Popular music" label="avant-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q42455" start="6264" end="6269" title="Björk" label="Björk"/>
<link wikidata="Q869977" start="6366" end="6382" title="Verbier Festival" label="Verbier Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q819447" start="6388" end="6399" title="Kent Nagano" label="Kent Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q558325" start="6652" end="6660" title="Bootleg recording" label="bootlegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722027" start="6832" end="6871" title="Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center" label="Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846032" start="6931" end="6947" title="Alice Tully Hall" label="Alice Tully Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="6974" end="6987" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q958916" start="7005" end="7018" title="Bruce LaBruce" label="Bruce LaBruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592694" start="7049" end="7063" title="Hebbel am Ufer" label="Hebbel am Ufer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4331122" start="7450" end="7469" title="Fires of London" label="The Fires of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207213" start="7947" end="7970" title="Da Capo Chamber Players" label="Da Capo Chamber Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049362" start="7972" end="7988" title="eighth blackbird" label="eighth blackbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="7997" end="8004" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q339243" start="8024" end="8039" title="Uusinta" label="Uusinta Lunaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104623067" start="8651" end="8667" title="Jonathan Dunsby" label="Dunsby, Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="8908" end="8955" title="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians" label="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335317" start="8989" end="9002" title="Stanley Sadie" label="Stanley Sadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217713" start="9007" end="9019" title="John Tyrrell (musicologist)" label="John Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698869" start="9142" end="9147" title="Tempo (journal)" label="Tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065956" start="9181" end="9195" title="Charles Rosen" label="Rosen, Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170760" start="10194" end="10219" title="Perspectives of New Music" label="Perspectives of New Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763768" start="10499" end="10520" title="The Musical Quarterly" label="The Musical Quarterly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="265975" wikidata="Q600950" url="?curid=265975" title="Sid and Nancy">
<text>Sid and Nancy (also known as Sid and Nancy: Love Kills) is a 1986 British biographical film directed by Alex Cox, co-written with Abbe Wool, and starring Gary Oldman and Chloe Webb. The film portrays the life of Sid Vicious, bassist of the punk rock band the Sex Pistols, and his destructive relationship with girlfriend Nancy Spungen. The film also features supporting performances from David Hayman, Xander Berkeley, and Courtney Love.

The film premiered at the Cannes Film Festival in May 1986, and was released theatrically in the United States in November of that same year. Although it failed to recoup its production budget at the box office, the film was received positively by most critics and developed a cult following.

==Plot==
On 12 October 1978, police are summoned to the Hotel Chelsea in New York City, where they find Nancy Spungen dead. Her boyfriend, former Sex Pistols bassist Sid Vicious, is taken into custody. Sid is driven to a police station and told to describe what happened.

A little more than a year earlier, in 1977, close friends and band members Sid and Johnny Rotten meet Nancy, a heroin-addicted American groupie who had come to London to bed the Sex Pistols. Sid dismisses her at first, as her intentions are obvious, but begins dating her after feeling sympathy for the rejection she faces from fellow punk performers. The two swiftly bond over heroin use, and it is implied that Nancy introduces Sid to the drug.

Sid and Nancy fall deeply in love, but their self-destructive, drug-fueled relationship frays Sid&#x27;s relationship with the rest of the band. Nancy is distraught when Sid departs on a month-long American tour without her. The tour is notably disastrous, with Sid strung out of his mind, often drunk or on methamphetamine, and physically violent. Phoebe, Sid&#x27;s friend and road manager, unsuccessfully attempts to help him stop drinking. Meanwhile, Nancy remains in London, staying with her friend Linda, a dominatrix. Although several of Sid&#x27;s friends and acquaintances warn him of Nancy&#x27;s devastating effect on his life, Sid stubbornly ignores these warnings. On 17 January 1978, in the midst of the group&#x27;s American tour, the band breaks up.

Sid reunites with Nancy in New York City, and he attempts to start a solo career with Nancy as his manager. The two visit Paris to begin recording sessions, but the trip is unfruitful. Sid is quickly dismissed in the music industry as a has-been, and he and Nancy descend deeper into heroin addiction; Nancy also begins suffering from severe depression, and the couple eventually make a suicide pact. Nancy brings Sid to Philadelphia to meet her family, who are horrified by the couple&#x27;s reckless behavior and physical state. Sid and Nancy return to New York and settle in the Hotel Chelsea, where they live in squalor and depend on opiates supplied by their drug dealer, Bowery Snax.

Their love affair ends tragically one night when, during an argument in which Sid announces his plans to stop using heroin and return to England to restart his life, a suicidal Nancy begs him to kill her. She attacks him and they fight in a drug-induced haze, leading to him stabbing her, although whether it was intentional is left to interpretation. They fall asleep and later Nancy awakes and stumbles into the bathroom, where she collapses and dies, calling Sid for help. Sid is bailed out temporarily by his mother, who is also a heroin addict. After Sid wanders to a restaurant, some street kids convince him to dance with them. A taxi appears and picks Sid up, and he believes he finds Nancy alive in the back seat. The two embrace as the cab drives off.

A postscript says that Vicious died of a heroin overdose, and lastly reads: &quot;R.I.P. Nancy and Sid.&quot;

==Cast==
==Production==
===Development===
The idea for the film began with a 1980 screenplay entitled &quot;Too Kool to Die&quot;; a fictional story inspired by Nancy Spungen and Sid Vicious, featuring references to current English politics which Cox realised would make it unlikely to be financed. Four years later, after his directorial debut with &quot;Repo Man&quot;, Cox heard rumour of the possibility of a Hollywood film documenting the relationship of Spungen and Vicious, with Madonna and Rupert Everett in the lead roles - &quot;For anyone who had been vaguely into the Punk movement, this was a troubling idea indeed&quot;, Cox wrote in his 2008 autobiography, and it motivated him to re-work his earlier script. “I felt an obligation to struggle against that project, fearing it would be even worse than mine.”

Cox&#x27;s film, originally titled &quot;Love Kills&quot;, is based on the mutually destructive, drug and sex filled relationship between Sid and Nancy. Nancy&#x27;s parents, Deborah and Frank Spungen, wanted no part in a film depicting their child&#x27;s death. Sid&#x27;s mother, Anne Beverley, initially tried to prevent the film from being made, but after meeting with Cox, decided to help the production, even lending Vicious&#x27; own heavy metal chain and padlock for Oldman to wear in the film. Some of the supporting characters are composites, invented to streamline the plot.

Work on the film was almost complete when the financers received a letter from a party claiming to own the title &quot;Love Kills&quot; and threatening legal action. Cox reluctantly changed it at lawyers&#x27; insistence, later describing the title &quot;Sid and Nancy&quot; as &quot;bland&quot;. He apparently did like the title given the Mexican video version; &quot;Two Lives Destroyed by Drugs&quot;.

===Casting===
According to director Cox, he had originally considered Daniel Day-Lewis for the part of Sid Vicious; however, Cox offered Oldman the part of Vicious after seeing him play the lead role of Scopey in a 1984 production of Edward Bond&#x27;s &quot;The Pope&#x27;s Wedding&quot;. Oldman twice turned down the role before accepting it, because, in his own words: &quot;I wasn&#x27;t really that interested in Sid Vicious and the punk movement. I&#x27;d never followed it. It wasn&#x27;t something that interested me. The script I felt was banal and &#x27;who cares&#x27; and &#x27;why bother&#x27; and all of that. And I was a little bit sort-of with my nose in the air and sort-of thinking &#x27;well the theatre – so much more superior&#x27; and all of that.&quot; He reconsidered based on the salary and the urging of his agent. - &quot;My agent at the time put a lot of pressure and bullied me into it&quot;, according to an Oldman interview, included in an early DVD version of the film. He lost weight to play the emaciated Vicious by eating nothing but &quot;steamed fish and lots of melon&quot;, and was briefly hospitalised when he lost too much. Oldman later dismissed his performance, saying: &quot;I don&#x27;t think I played Sid Vicious very well&quot;.

Courtney Love rang co-writer Abbe Wool and recorded a video audition for the role of Spungen. Cox was impressed by Love&#x27;s audition, but has said the film&#x27;s investors insisted on an experienced actress for the co-leading role. Therefore, instead, Cox wrote the minor role of Gretchen, one of Sid and Nancy&#x27;s New York junkie friends, specifically for her benefit. Cox would later cast Love as one of the leads in &quot;Straight to Hell&quot; (1987). Chloe Webb, who had appeared in several small television roles at the time, was instead cast in the role of Spungen.

In his 2007 autobiography, Guns N&#x27; Roses guitarist Slash revealed that the casting director hired all five members of Guns N&#x27; Roses as extras for a club scene, having coincidentally scouted them in different locations without their knowledge. He said &quot;all of us showed up to the first day of casting, like &#x27;Hey...what are you doing here?&#x27;&quot; However, Slash was the only one in the group to stay for the entire shoot.

Webb and Oldman improvised the dialogue heard in the scene leading up to Spungen&#x27;s death but based it on interviews and other materials available to them. The stabbing scene is fictionalized and based only on conjecture. Cox told the &quot;NME&quot;: &quot;We wanted to make the film not just about Sid Vicious and punk rock, but as an anti-drugs statement, the turbulent couple definitely falls into the depths of drug addiction.&quot;

The original music is by Pray for Rain, Joe Strummer, and The Pogues. A track by Tears for Fears (&quot;Swords and Knives&quot;) was also recorded for the film but was rejected by the filmmakers for not being &quot;punk&quot; enough. The track later appeared on the band&#x27;s &quot;Seeds of Love&quot; album in 1989.

Prominent musicians made appearances in the film including Circle Jerks, Love, Iggy Pop, Nico and Edward Tudor-Pole of Tenpole Tudor.

===Filming===
The film was primarily shot in London and New York City, though additional photography (particularly the sequences of the Sex Pistols&#x27; North American tour) was completed in Los Angeles and El Centro, California.

==Release==

===Critical reception===
From the 65 reviews collected by review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film received an overall approval rating of 88%, with the consensus: &quot;Visceral, energetic, and often very sad, &quot;Sid &amp; Nancy&quot; is also a surprisingly touching love story, and Gary Oldman is outstanding as the late punk rock icon Sid Vicious.&quot; Roger Ebert gave &quot;Sid and Nancy&quot; four-out-of-four in his review for &quot;The Chicago Sun-Times&quot;, writing that Cox and his crew &quot;pull off the neat trick of creating a movie full of noise and fury, and telling a meticulous story right in the middle of it.&quot; Appearing on &quot;The Late Show Starring Joan Rivers&quot;, Ebert said, to agreement from Rivers and applause from the audience, that Oldman &quot;definitely won&#x27;t be [Oscar] nominated – and should be&quot;, this being for the reason that &quot;Hollywood will not nominate an actor for portraying a creep, no matter how good the performance is&quot;. In a subsequent article on Oldman, Ebert referred to the movie&#x27;s titular couple as &quot;punk rock&#x27;s &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;.&quot; Richard Hell called the film &#x27;depressing&#x27; and noted &#x27;I&#x27;m glad to have outgrown those days&#x27;.

In his book &quot;Sid Vicious: Rock N&#x27; Roll Star&quot;, Malcolm Butt describes Webb&#x27;s performance as Spungen as &quot;intense, powerful, and most important of all, believable.&quot; Oldman&#x27;s portrayal of Vicious was ranked #62 in &quot;Premiere&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;100 Greatest Performances of All Time&quot;. &quot;Uncut&quot; magazine ranked Gary Oldman as #8 in its &quot;10 Best actors in rockin&#x27; roles&quot; list, describing his portrayal as a &quot;hugely sympathetic reading of the punk figurehead as a lost and bewildered manchild.&quot; In 2011, &quot;Total Film&quot; said of the performance: &quot;It&#x27;s an early high point in Oldman&#x27;s varied career that showed just what the young actor was made of. Playing the part of an icon known and beloved by many comes with its own demands and risks, but Oldman more than rises to the challenge, completely transforming into the troubled punk bassist.&quot; The magazine described Oldman&#x27;s rendition of &quot;My Way&quot; as &quot;fantastic – [it] might even be better than Sid&#x27;s original version.&quot; In 2003, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked &quot;Sid and Nancy&quot; as the third-best rock movie ever made, and in 2014, &quot;ShortList&quot; named it the ninth-greatest music biopic of all time.

Not all reviews of the film were positive. Leslie Halliwell reiterated a line from a review that appeared in &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot;: &quot;Relentlessly whingeing performances and a lengthy slide into drugs, degradation and death make this a solemnly off-putting moral tract.&quot;

Andrew Schofield was ranked #1 in &quot;Uncut&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;10 Worst actors in rockin&#x27; roles&quot;, which described his performance as Sex Pistols lead singer Johnny Rotten (real name John Lydon) as a &quot;short-arse Scouse Bleasdale regular never once looking like he means it&quot;. Commentary on the Criterion DVD dismisses the film&#x27;s portrayal of Lydon as wholly inaccurate. Paul Simonon of The Clash also criticised the movie for portraying Lydon as &quot;some sort of fat, bean-slurping idiot.&quot;

Although not a box office success (generating $2,826,523 in the U.S. on a $4 million budget), &quot;Sid and Nancy&quot; has become a cult hit; Yahoo! Movies described the film as a &quot;poignant and uncompromising cult classic&quot;.

===John Lydon&#x27;s reaction===
Lydon commented on the film in his 1994 autobiography, &quot;&quot;:

Strummer claimed to have met with Alex Cox for the first time after the completion of the film, at a wrap party, but this is not entirely accurate. The wrap party was the conclusion of the London phase of the filming, which was followed by filming in Los Angeles and New York City, performed by a largely different crew. The pair&#x27;s meeting involved discussion over soundtrack work for the film, not the film&#x27;s script.

In a later interview, Lydon was asked the question, &quot;Did the movie get anything right?&quot; to which he replied: &quot;Maybe the name Sid.&quot; Cox&#x27;s attitude toward his subjects was negative; one of the reasons he was attracted to the project was that he was afraid that if someone else made it, it would portray its subjects as &quot;real exemplars of Punk, rather than sold-out traitors to it.&quot; He acknowledged that Lydon&#x27;s hatred of the movie was &quot;understandable, given that it was based on incidents from his life and centred around one of his friends.&quot; Lydon claimed that drummer Paul Cook was more upset over the movie than he was, though the latter has not spoken publicly about it. In a 1987 interview on &quot;The Late Show&quot; when asked by interviewer Elayne Boosler about his thoughts on the movie, guitarist Steve Jones said: &quot;For someone who didn&#x27;t know anything about the Sex Pistols I guess it was a good way of describing it, but it&#x27;s really hard for me to be judgemental of it because I was actually there at the time. I mean I didn’t like the guy who played me. […] The only thing I liked about it was the way they portrayed where and how drugs take you. That was the best thing I thought about the movie”.

In Cox&#x27;s own, 2008, autobiography he refuted Lydon&#x27;s claim about not meeting before the film, stating that they enjoyed a 90-minute, alcohol-fuelled, discussion about the script, who should play &#x27;Johnny Rotten&#x27;, and other aspects of production. Cox stated that Andrew Schofield (who played Lydon in the film) also met with Lydon; and when Lydon noticed Schofield was a Liverpudlian, rather than a Londoner like himself, he encouraged Schofield to play the part as a Scouser, which Cox took as a sign that they agreed it would be better to portray a more fictionalised version of the characters, rather than a strictly accurate re-telling of facts. Cox said he then offered the role to Schofield the following day. He suggested that Lydon&#x27;s alcohol consumption at the meeting could explain why Lydon did not recall the event. 

==Awards and nominations==

==Soundtrack==
The official soundtrack contains no songs by either the Sex Pistols or Sid Vicious. Much of the film&#x27;s soundtrack (as opposed to soundtrack album) was composed by Dan Wool (of Pray for Rain) and Joe Strummer, who was contractually limited to contribute only two songs. Strummer continued to contribute more (unpaid) work because of his interest in the project and composing for film in general. This additional material was credited to fictitious bands in the credits, so as to keep Strummer&#x27;s label, Epic Records, from knowing what he had done. Another large portion of the music was composed by The Pogues.

==Home media==
&quot;Sid and Nancy&quot; was first released on DVD by The Criterion Collection in the late 1990s; this version has since gone out of print. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (the video distributor of the catalog of Embassy Pictures, which released the film on VHS) released the film on DVD in 2000. The Criterion Collection released the film on Blu-ray and DVD on 24 August 2017.

==See also==
*List of cult films

==References==
==Sources==

==External links==
* 
* 
* &quot;Sid &amp; Nancy&quot; an essay by Jon Savage at the Criterion Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="74" end="91" title="biographical film" label="biographical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q778865" start="104" end="112" title="Alex Cox" label="Alex Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q83492" start="154" end="165" title="Gary Oldman" label="Gary Oldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q509117" start="170" end="180" title="Chloe Webb" label="Chloe Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q47878" start="212" end="223" title="Sid Vicious" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="240" end="249" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="259" end="270" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q241669" start="321" end="334" title="Nancy Spungen" label="Nancy Spungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476952" start="388" end="400" title="David Hayman" label="David Hayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q361610" start="402" end="417" title="Xander Berkeley" label="Xander Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="423" end="436" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="465" end="485" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="716" end="730" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q240711" start="789" end="802" title="Hotel Chelsea" label="Hotel Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="806" end="819" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q241669" start="837" end="850" title="Nancy Spungen" label="Nancy Spungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="879" end="890" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q47878" start="899" end="910" title="Sid Vicious" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="1089" end="1102" title="John Lydon" label="Johnny Rotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="1117" end="1123" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145660" start="1142" end="1149" title="groupie" label="groupie"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1166" end="1172" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="1184" end="1195" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="1762" end="1777" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q540391" start="1967" end="1977" title="dominatrix" label="dominatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2343" end="2348" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="2563" end="2573" title="Clinical depression" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305388" start="2608" end="2620" title="suicide pact" label="suicide pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2642" end="2654" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026938" start="2859" end="2866" title="opiates" label="opiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3049" end="3056" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q62281" start="3677" end="3687" title="postscript" label="postscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="3716" end="3731" title="drug overdose" label="heroin overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280565" start="4142" end="4150" title="Repo Man (film)" label="Repo Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="4272" end="4279" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q208685" start="4284" end="4298" title="Rupert Everett" label="Rupert Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="5673" end="5689" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q918625" start="5837" end="5848" title="Edward Bond" label="Edward Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="6880" end="6893" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065276" start="7312" end="7328" title="Straight to Hell (film)" label="Straight to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q509117" start="7343" end="7353" title="Chloe Webb" label="Chloe Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="7488" end="7506" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q34166" start="7517" end="7522" title="Slash (musician)" label="Slash"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="8152" end="8155" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="8227" end="8236" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238970" start="8375" end="8388" title="Pray for Rain (band)" label="Pray for Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q310052" start="8390" end="8402" title="Joe Strummer" label="Joe Strummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48304" start="8408" end="8418" title="The Pogues" label="The Pogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q269091" start="8431" end="8446" title="Tears for Fears" label="Tears for Fears"/>
<link wikidata="Q530083" start="8634" end="8647" title="The Seeds of Love" label="Seeds of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q522463" start="8729" end="8741" title="Circle Jerks" label="Circle Jerks"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="8743" end="8747" title="Courtney Love" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q182665" start="8749" end="8757" title="Iggy Pop" label="Iggy Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q44634" start="8759" end="8763" title="Nico" label="Nico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048711" start="8768" end="8785" title="Edward Tudor-Pole" label="Edward Tudor-Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q649666" start="8789" end="8802" title="Tenpole Tudor" label="Tenpole Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="8997" end="9008" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q495369" start="9013" end="9034" title="El Centro, California" label="El Centro, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="9126" end="9141" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="9412" end="9423" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="9496" end="9517" title="The Chicago Sun-Times" label="The Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009551" start="9712" end="9746" title="The Late Show (1986 TV series)" label="The Late Show Starring Joan Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q240933" start="9784" end="9790" title="Joan Rivers" label="Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="9866" end="9872" title="Academy Awards" label="[Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="10167" end="10183" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q446627" start="10197" end="10209" title="Richard Hell" label="Richard Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q130706" start="10560" end="10596" title="Premiere (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Premiere&amp;quot; magazine&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q795422" start="10648" end="10674" title="Uncut (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Uncut&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270191" start="10904" end="10914" title="Total Film" label="Total Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q925657" start="11319" end="11325" title="My Way" label="My Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="11434" end="11447" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501707" start="11546" end="11555" title="ShortList" label="ShortList"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="11596" end="11602" title="Biographical film" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820792" start="11660" end="11676" title="Leslie Halliwell" label="Leslie Halliwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="11732" end="11749" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758522" start="11906" end="11922" title="Andrew Schofield (actor)" label="Andrew Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="12060" end="12071" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="12109" end="12119" title="John Lydon" label="John Lydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804441" start="12143" end="12149" title="Scouse" label="Scouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543145" start="12150" end="12159" title="Alan Bleasdale" label="Bleasdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="12239" end="12242" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q449804" start="12310" end="12322" title="Paul Simonon" label="Paul Simonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="12326" end="12335" title="The Clash" label="The Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304846" start="12581" end="12594" title="Yahoo! Movies" label="Yahoo! Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="12653" end="12665" title="Cult film" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="12747" end="12760" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q363260" start="13824" end="13833" title="Paul Cook" label="Paul Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009551" start="13952" end="13977" title="The Late Show (1986 talk show)" label="&amp;quot;The Late Show&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050472" start="14004" end="14018" title="Elayne Boosler" label="Elayne Boosler"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="14062" end="14073" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="14872" end="14884" title="Liverpudlian" label="Liverpudlian"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="14969" end="14976" title="Scouser" label="Scouser"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="15434" end="15445" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q47878" start="15449" end="15460" title="Sid Vicious" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214615" start="15546" end="15554" title="Dan Wool" label="Dan Wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q310052" start="15578" end="15590" title="Joe Strummer" label="Joe Strummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="15889" end="15901" title="Epic Records" label="Epic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q48304" start="15985" end="15995" title="The Pogues" label="The Pogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="16068" end="16092" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="16154" end="16173" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="16345" end="16352" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="16395" end="16413" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="16528" end="16548" title="Criterion Collection" label="Criterion Collection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="265977" wikidata="Q3792047" url="?curid=265977" title="Palladium hydride">
<text>Palladium hydride is palladium metal with hydrogen within its crystal lattice. Despite its name, it is not an ionic hydride but rather an alloy of palladium with metallic hydrogen that can be written PdH. At room temperature, palladium hydrides may contain two crystalline phases, α and β (also called α′). Pure α-phase exists at &quot;x&quot; &lt; 0.017 while pure β-phase exists at &quot;x&quot; &gt; 0.58; intermediate values of &quot;x&quot; correspond to α–β mixtures.

Hydrogen absorption by palladium is reversible and therefore has been investigated for hydrogen storage. Palladium electrodes have been used in some cold fusion experiments, under the theory that hydrogen can be &quot;squeezed&quot; between palladium atoms to help it fuse at lower temperatures than normal.

== History ==
The absorption of hydrogen gas by palladium was first noted by T. Graham in 1866 and absorption of electrolytically produced hydrogen, where hydrogen was absorbed into a palladium cathode, was first documented in 1939. Graham produced an alloy with the composition PdH.

== Making palladium hydride ==
The hydrogen atoms occupy interstitial sites in palladium hydride. The H–H bond in H is cleaved. The ratio in which H is absorbed on Pd is defined by formula_1. When Pd is brought into a H environment with a pressure of 1 atm, the resulting concentration of H reaches &quot;x&quot; ≈ 0.7. However, the concentration of H to obtain superconductivity is higher, in the range &quot;x&quot; &gt; 0.75. This is done via three different routes, with measures to prevent the ready desorption of the hydrogen from the palladium.

The first route is loading from gas phase. A Pd sample is placed into a high-pressure cell of H, at room temperature. The H is added through a capillary. To maintain the high absorption, the pressure cell is cooled to liquid N temperature (77 K). The resulting concentration may be as high as [H]/[Pd] = 0.97.

The second route is electrochemical bonding. This is a method where the critical concentration for superconductivity can easily be exceeded without using a high-pressure environment, via a reaction as equilibrium between H in an electrochemical phase and H in a solid phase. The hydrogen is added to Pd and Pd–Ni alloys by an H concentration of ~ 0.95. Thereafter, it has been loaded into electrolysis of 0.1n-HSO with a current density of 50 to 150 mA/cm. Finally, after lowering the loading temperature to ~ 190 K, a H concentration of &quot;x&quot; ≈ 1 has been reached.

The third route is known as ion implantation. Before the implantation of H ions into Pd, the Pd foil was pre-charged with H. This is done in H high-temperature gas. This shortens the implantation time which follows. The concentration reached is about x ≈ 0.7. Afterwards the foil is cooled to a temperature of 77 K to prevent a loss of H before the implantation can take place. The implantation of H in PdH happens at a temperature of 4 K. The H ions penetrate in an H-beam. This results in a high concentration layer of H in a Pd foil.

== Chemical structure and properties ==
Palladium is sometimes metaphorically called a &quot;metal sponge&quot; (not to be confused with literal metal sponges) because it soaks up hydrogen &quot;like a sponge soaks up water&quot;. At standard temperature and pressure, palladium can absorb up to 900 times its own volume of hydrogen. Hydrogen can be absorbed into the metal hydride and then desorbed back out for thousands of cycles. Researchers look for ways to extend the useful life of palladium storage.

=== Size effect ===
The absorption of hydrogen produces two different phases, both of which contain palladium metal atoms in a face-centered cubic (fcc, rocksalt) lattice, which is the same structure as pure palladium metal. At low concentrations up to PdH the palladium lattice expands slightly, from 388.9 pm to 389.5 pm. Above this concentration the second phase appears with a lattice constant of 402.5 pm. Both phases coexist until a composition of PdH when the alpha phase disappears. Neutron diffraction studies have shown that hydrogen atoms randomly occupy the octahedral interstices in the metal lattice (in an fcc lattice there is one octahedral hole per metal atom). The limit of absorption at normal pressures is PdH, indicating that about 70% of the octahedral holes are occupied. When &quot;x&quot; = 1 is reached, the octahedral interstices are fully occupied. The absorption of hydrogen is reversible, and hydrogen rapidly diffuses through the metal lattice. Metallic conductivity reduces as hydrogen is absorbed, until at around PdH the solid becomes a semiconductor.

This formation of the bulk hydride does depend on the size of the catalyst palladium. When palladium becomes smaller than 2.6 nm, hydrides are no longer formed.

Hydrogen dissolved in the bulk differ from hydrogen dissolved on the surface. When the particles of palladium decrease in size, less hydrogen dissolves in these smaller palladium particles. Therefore, relatively more hydrogen adsorbs on the surface of the small particles. This hydrogen adsorbed onto the particles do not form an hydride. Therefore, bigger particles have more places available for the formation of hydrides.

=== Electron and phonon band ===

The most important property of the band structure of PdH(oct) is that filled Pd states are lowered with the presence of hydrogen. Also, the lowest energy levels, which are the bonding states, of PdH are lower than that of Pd.

Additionally, empty Pd states, that are below the fermi energy, are also lowered with the presence of H.

Palladium prefers to be with hydrogen due to the interaction between the s state of hydrogen and the p states of palladium. The energy of an independent H atom lies in the energy range of the dominating p-states of the Pd bands.

Therefore, these empty states under the fermi-energy and holes in the d-band are filled.

Additionally, the hydride formation raises the fermi level above the d-band. Empty states, above the d-band, are also filled. This results in filled p-states and shifts the ‘edge’ to a higher energy level.

=== Superconductivity ===
PdH is a superconductor with a transition temperature &quot;T&quot; of about 9 K for &quot;x&quot; = 1. (Pure palladium is not superconducting.) Drops in resistivity vs. temperature curves were observed at higher temperatures (up to 273 K) in hydrogen-rich (&quot;x&quot; ≈ 1), nonstoichiometric palladium hydride and interpreted as superconducting transitions. These results have been questioned and have not been confirmed thus far.

A great advantage of palladium hydride over many other hydride systems is that palladium hydride does not need to be highly pressurized to become superconducting. This makes measurements easier and gives more opportunity for different kinds of measurements (many superconducting materials require extreme pressure in order to superconduct, on the order of 100 GPa). Palladium hydride could therefore also be used to explore the role that hydrogen plays in these hydride systems being superconductors.

=== Susceptibility ===

One of the magnetic properties of Palladium hydride is susceptibility. The susceptibility of PdH varies largely when changing the concentration of H. This is due to the β-phase of PdH. The α-phase of PdH lies in the same range of the fermi surface as Pd itself, therefore 𝛼-phase does not influence the susceptibility. However, the β-phase of PdH is characterized by s-electrons filling the d-band. Therefore, the susceptibility of the α–β mixture decreases at room temperature with an increasing concentration of H. Finally, when the spin fluctuations of pure Pd are decreased, the superconductivity will occur.

=== Specific heat capacity ===
Another metallic property is the electronic heat coefficient &quot;γ&quot;. This coefficient depends on the density of states. For pure Pd the heat coefficient is 9.5 mJ(mol⋅K2). When H is added to the pure Pd, the electronic heat coefficient drops. For the range of &quot;x&quot; = 0.83 to &quot;x&quot; = 0.88&quot;γ&quot; is observed to be six times smaller than for pure Pd. This region is the superconducting region. However, Zimmerman et al. also measured the heat coefficient &quot;γ&quot; for a concentration of &quot;x&quot; = 0.96. A broadening of the superconducting transition was observed at this concentration. One of the reasons for this could be explained by an inhomogeneity of the macroscopic structure of PdH. &quot;γ&quot; at this value of &quot;x&quot; has a large fluctuation and is therefore uncertain.

The critical concentration for superconductivity to happen is estimated at &quot;x&quot; ≈ 0.72. The critical temperature or the superconducting transition temperature is estimated at 9 K. This was achieved at a stoichiometric concentration of &quot;x&quot; = 1.

Pressure also influences the critical temperature. It is shown that an increase in the pressure on PdH decreases &quot;T&quot;. This can be explained by a hardening of the phonon spectrum, which includes a decrease in the electron–phonon constant &quot;λ&quot;.

=== Surface absorption process ===
The process of absorption of hydrogen has been shown by scanning tunnelling microscopy to require aggregates of at least three vacancies on the surface of the crystal to promote the dissociation of the hydrogen molecule. The reason for such a behaviour and the particular structure of trimers has been analyzed.

== Uses ==
The absorption of hydrogen is reversible and is highly selective. A palladium-based diffuser separator is used, although they are not employed industrially. Impure gas is passed through tubes of thin walled silver–palladium alloy as protium and deuterium readily diffuse through the alloy membrane. The gas that comes through is pure and ready for use. Palladium is alloyed with silver to improve its strength and resistance to embrittlement. To ensure that the formation of the beta phase is avoided, as the lattice expansion noted earlier would cause distortions and splitting of the membrane, the temperature is maintained above 300 °C.

Another use of palladium hydride is increased adsorption of H-molecules with respect to pure palladium. In 2009, a study was conducted which tested this fact. At a pressure of 1 bar, the probability was measured of Hydrogen molecules sticking to the surface of Palladium versus the probability of sticking to surface of palladium hydride. The sticking probability of Palladium was found to be greater at temperatures where the phase of the used Palladium and hydrogen mixture was pure β-phase, which is in this context corresponds to palladium hydride (at 1 bar this means temperatures greater than roughly 160 degrees Celsius), as opposed to temperatures where β- and α-phases coexist and even lower temperatures where there is pure α-phase (α-phase here corresponds to a solid solution of Hydrogen atoms in Palladium). Knowing these sticking probabilities enables one to calculate the rate of adsorption formula_2 by virtue of the equation
: formula_3
where formula_4 is the aforementioned sticking probability and formula_5 is the flux of hydrogen molecules in the toward the surface of the palladium/palladium-hydride.

When the system is in a steady state, we must have that the rate of adsorption and, oppositely, the rate of desorption (formula_6) are equal. This gives
: formula_7

The rate of desorption is assumed to be given by a Boltzmannian distribution, i.e.
: (*) formula_8
where formula_9 is some unknown constant,formula_10 is the desorption energy, formula_11 is the Boltzmann constant and formula_12 is the temperature.

The relation (*) can be fitted to find the value of formula_10. It was found that, within the uncertainty of their experiment, the values for of Palladium and Palladium hydride respectively were roughly equal. Thus palladium hydride has as higher average adsorption rate than Palladium, while the energy required for desorption is the same.

Density functional theory was performed to find an explanation for this fact. It was found that the bond of hydrogen with the palladium hydride surface is weaker than the bond with the palladium surface and that the desorption activation barrier is lower by a small amount for Palladium hydride than for palladium, although the adsorption barriers are comparable in magnitude. Moreover, the heat of adsorption is lower for palladium hydride than for Palladium, which leads to lower equilibrium surface coverage of H. This means that the surface of palladium hydride would be less saturated, which leads to greater opportunity for sticking, i.e. a higher sticking probability.

The reversible absorption of palladium is a means to store hydrogen, and the above findings indicate that even in the hydrogen-absorbed state of palladium, there is further opportunity for hydrogen storing.

== See also ==
* Hydrogen sensor

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3792047" start="0" end="17" title="Palladium hydride" label="Palladium hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="21" end="30" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="42" end="50" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="62" end="77" title="crystal lattice" label="crystal lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q106520" start="116" end="123" title="hydride" label="hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="138" end="143" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428895" start="162" end="179" title="metallic hydrogen" label="metallic hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203442" start="562" end="578" title="hydrogen storage" label="hydrogen storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q180381" start="624" end="635" title="cold fusion" label="cold fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q333762" start="861" end="870" title="Thomas Graham (chemist)" label="T. Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485440" start="1126" end="1143" title="interstitial site" label="interstitial site"/>
<link wikidata="Q900548" start="3191" end="3203" title="metal sponge" label="metal sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="3280" end="3313" title="standard temperature and pressure" label="standard temperature and pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="3682" end="3701" title="face-centered cubic" label="face-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3708" end="3716" title="Cubic crystal system#Rock-salt structure" label="rocksalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192274" start="3863" end="3865" title="picometer" label="pm"/>
<link wikidata="Q910499" start="4046" end="4065" title="Neutron diffraction" label="Neutron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q188884" start="4201" end="4211" title="octahedron" label="octahedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q175646" start="9202" end="9232" title="scanning tunnelling microscopy" label="scanning tunnelling microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643508" start="9703" end="9710" title="Hydrogen atom" label="protium"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="9715" end="9724" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048589" start="11993" end="12018" title="Density functional theory" label="Density functional theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q613490" start="12895" end="12910" title="Hydrogen sensor" label="Hydrogen sensor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="265986" wikidata="Q17104845" url="?curid=265986" title="Nickel hydride">
<text>Nickel hydride is either an inorganic compound of the formula NiH or any of a variety of coordination complexes. It was discovered by Polish chemist Bogdan Baranowski in 1958.

==Binary nickel hydrides and related materials==
&quot;The existence of definite hydrides of nickel and platinum is in doubt&quot;. This observation does not preclude the existence of nonstoichiometric hydrides. Indeed, nickel is a widely used hydrogenation catalyst. Experimental studies on nickel hydrides are rare and principally theoretical.

Hydrogen hardens nickel (as it does most metals), inhibiting dislocations in the nickel atom crystal lattice from sliding past one another. Varying the amount of alloying hydrogen and the form of its presence in the nickel hydride (precipitated phase) controls qualities such as the hardness, ductility, and tensile strength of the resulting nickel hydride. Nickel hydride with increased hydrogen content can be made harder and stronger than nickel, but such nickel hydride is also less ductile than nickel. Loss of ductility occurs due to cracks maintaining sharp points due to suppression of elastic deformation by the hydrogen, and voids forming under tension due to decomposition of the hydride. Hydrogen embrittlement can be a problem in nickel in use in turbines at high temperatures.

In the narrow range of stoichiometries adopted by nickel hydride, distinct structures are claimed. At room temperature, the most stable form of nickel is the face-centred cubic (FCC) structure α-nickel. It is a relatively soft metallic material that can dissolve only a very small concentration of hydrogen, no more than 0.002 wt% at , and only 0.00005% at . The solid solution phase with dissolved hydrogen, that maintains the same structure as the original nickel is termed the α-phase. At 25°C, 6 kbar of hydrogen pressure is needed to dissolve in β-nickel, but the hydrogen desorbs at pressures below 3.4 kbar.

===Surface===
Hydrogen dissociates on nickel surfaces. The dissociation energies on Ni(111), Ni(100), and Ni(11O) crystal faces are respectively 46, 52, and 36 kJ/mol. The H dissociates from each of these surfaces at distinct temperatures: 320–380, 220–360, and 230–430 K.

===High pressure phases===
Crystallographically distinct phases of nickel hydride are produced with hydrogen gas at 600 MPa; or electrolytically. The crystal form is face-centred cubic or β-nickel hydride. Hydrogen to nickel atomic ratios are up to one, with hydrogen occupying an octahedral site. The density of the β-hydride is 7.74 g/cm. It is grey. At a current density of 1 amp per square decimeter, in 0.5 mol/liter of sulfuric acid and thiourea a surface layer of nickel will be converted to nickel hydride. This surface is replete with cracks up to millimeters long. The direction of cracking is in the {001} plane of the original nickel crystals. The lattice constant of nickel hydride is 3.731 Å, which is 5.7% more than that of nickel.

The near-stoichiometric NiH is unstable and loses hydrogen at pressures below 340 MPa.

==Molecular nickel hydrides==
A large number of nickel hydride complexes are known. Illustrative is the complex trans-NiH(Cl)(P(CH)).

== References ==
== See also ==
*Solid solution
*Lattice energy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17104845" start="0" end="14" title="Nickel hydride" label="Nickel hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q190065" start="28" end="46" title="inorganic compound" label="inorganic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="89" end="109" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q890408" start="149" end="166" title="Bogdan Baranowski" label="Bogdan Baranowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="270" end="276" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="281" end="289" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="421" end="434" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="435" end="443" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q737571" start="585" end="596" title="dislocation" label="dislocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="617" end="632" title="crystal lattice" label="crystal lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="807" end="815" title="hardness (materials science)" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="817" end="826" title="ductility" label="ductility"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="832" end="848" title="tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="1011" end="1018" title="ductile" label="ductile"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="1418" end="1434" title="room temperature" label="room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="1474" end="1492" title="cubic crystal system" label="face-centred cubic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2046" end="2058" title="crystal face" label="crystal face"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="2334" end="2350" title="Electrolysis" label="electrolytically"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="2372" end="2390" title="face-centred cubic" label="face-centred cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="2631" end="2644" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q528995" start="2649" end="2657" title="thiourea" label="thiourea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157280" start="3097" end="3112" title="hydride complex" label="hydride complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="3210" end="3224" title="Solid solution" label="Solid solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q685892" start="3226" end="3240" title="Lattice energy" label="Lattice energy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266011" wikidata="Q16825236" url="?curid=266011" title="Calamity James">
<text>Calamity James is a comic strip in the UK comic &quot;The Beano&quot;. It is about a boy, named Calamity James (a pun on Calamity Jane), who has disastrous luck. He first appeared on 1 November 1986, in issue no. 2311. A copy of his first strip is viewable here. His strip replaced Biffo the Bear and Little Plum, which had both been reduced to a half-page by this time. He has a pet called Alexander Lemming, (a pun on Alexander Fleming).

==Creation and Concept==
There were several variations of the visual appearance of Calamity James before a final image was decided on. Calamity James has black hair, wears black trousers, and has a red jumper with the number 13 on it. He has big eyes, and many buck teeth, but he originally had small eyes and only two buck teeth. In earlier strips, he was also shown under a permanent black rain cloud. According to the 4 December 2014 issue of the Beano, he has a crush on Minnie the Minx and hopes to become her boyfriend one day.

The strip features much surreal and incidental background detail, with various recurring themes: notably the &quot;Little Squelchy Things&quot; which appear in a wide variety of guises and tend to be visual gags, though they may take part in the story (for instance, James may trip over one), randomly placed smelly socks and a constant scatter of winning lottery tickets, notes with a large sum of money on them, diamonds, gold bars, and bags with &#x27;Vast Dosh&#x27; written on them which James walks past yet somehow never manages to notice. Once, when he was complaining about his lack of money, Alex told him to look around (he was surrounded by one of each of the above), as if he had just noticed them, but then it turns out he was referring to busking. Another recurring feature is the appearance of bizarrely-named factories and other buildings, such as &quot;Lumpy Custard Factory&quot; and &quot;Knicker Elastic Testing Sheds&quot;, that appear in the background throughout the strips (all accompanied by appropriate sounds).

Tom Paterson has been the main artist for the strip, although Steve Bright has drawn it on occasions, and Bob Dewar ghosted the strip in the 1980s. John Geering and Henry Davies drew some preliminary sets for the character before he first appeared in the comic. He hasn&#x27;t appeared as regularly as some other characters, as Paterson has also drawn other strips for the same comic including Minnie the Minx, The Numskulls and Dennis the Menace.

===Alexander Lemming===
James&#x27; long-suffering lemming friend and pet, who rarely has as much bad luck as his owner. One of Alexander&#x27;s hobbies is plummeting from great heights, which often helps James overcome his fate. He also tends to anoint James with balm or ointment if he gets hurt. In one strip, James gave his shirt to Alexander Lemming, and he had a day of bad luck and James had a day of good luck. Soon, Alexander got fed up with the jumper and gave it back. This credits the belief that James&#x27; number 13 is a source of his bad luck.

As loyal a friend as he seems to be, he rather seems to enjoy watching his friend suffer. His name is a play on &quot;Alexander Fleming&quot;, the famous biologist and discoverer of penicillin.

==Timeline==

 1 November 1986 Calamity James debuts in the comic. Issue No. 2311

 22 November 1986 James&#x27; pet, Alexander Lemming, debuts. Issue No. 2314

 29 October 1988 &quot;Little Squelchy Things&quot; debut. Issue No. 2415

c.1989 James&#x27; eyes were enlarged and he was given more buckteeth.

1993 The strip is rendered in full colour

1997 the strip is digitally rendered in brighter, shinier colour

2001 Tom Paterson takes over Minnie the Minx. By 2003 this, and Paterson&#x27;s other work for D.C. Thomson, means that James begins to appear on an increasingly infrequent basis.

2004 Steve Bright draws several strips during the year. Of the James strips in 2004, 11 were drawn by Paterson and 8 were drawn by Bright.

2007 the strip is retired, as Tom Paterson starts drawing Dennis the Menace. His final appearance in the weekly comic came in Issue No. 3375.

31 October 2009 James&#x27;s strip makes a surprise reappearance in the weekly Beano. Issue No. 3507.

7 November 2012 James&#x27; strip returns permanently. Issue No. 3660.

==Reception and legacy==
Due to the artwork and humour of the character, as well as his relatability, Calamity James has been regarded as a classic British Comic character. The scripts behind the strip commonly satirise consumerist values, which may be held by the writer. Some readers, such as George Gale see James&#x27; misfortunes as a cruel punishments for him being poor, ugly and stupid, whilst others relate to his misfortunes and can see themselves in such positions. James can be seen as a symbol of inspiration, because even though everything in his life seems to end badly, he always tries to lead a normal life.

As the &quot;Beano&quot; editor Alan Digby was not keen on the strip, Calamity James gradually appeared less frequently, became reprints and was eventually dropped. However, ex-Beano editor Euan Kerr, who had played a significant role in the creation of the character, was editing the monthly BeanoMax, which he continued to appear in, although Digby has since become editor of that publication. He has appeared as reprints, both in the weekly Beano and BeanoMax and returns in new strips in the Beano Annuals.

Because of his goalkeeping mishaps, English goalkeeper David James has been nicknamed after the character.

==TV adaptation==
The comic strip was loosely adapted for television as a BBC Three short film in 2023, starring Dylan Blore in the title role and Mark Bonnar as his father.

==External links==
* Beanotown
* Calamity James Teeth 
* Examples of Calamity James comic strips

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16825236" start="0" end="14" title="Calamity James" label="Calamity James"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="54" end="63" title="The Beano" label="The Beano"/>
<link wikidata="Q236795" start="121" end="134" title="Calamity Jane" label="Calamity Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904758" start="282" end="296" title="Biffo the Bear" label="Biffo the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651359" start="301" end="312" title="Little Plum" label="Little Plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37064" start="420" end="437" title="Alexander Fleming" label="Alexander Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509755" start="916" end="931" title="Minnie the Minx" label="Minnie the Minx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817177" start="2016" end="2028" title="Tom Paterson" label="Tom Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2078" end="2090" title="Steve Bright" label="Steve Bright"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2122" end="2131" title="Bob Dewar" label="Bob Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235047" start="2164" end="2176" title="John Geering" label="John Geering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2181" end="2193" title="Henry Davies (artist)" label="Henry Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509755" start="2410" end="2425" title="Minnie the Minx" label="Minnie the Minx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754492" start="2427" end="2440" title="The Numskulls" label="The Numskulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259097" start="2445" end="2462" title="Dennis the Menace (UK)" label="Dennis the Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q234150" start="2516" end="2523" title="lemming" label="lemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q37064" start="3144" end="3161" title="Alexander Fleming" label="Alexander Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="3208" end="3218" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203542" start="3733" end="3745" title="D. C. Thomson &amp;amp; Co. Ltd" label="D.C. Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539592" start="4572" end="4583" title="George Gale (journalist)" label="George Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="4935" end="4945" title="Alan Digby" label="Alan Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="5093" end="5102" title="Euan Kerr" label="Euan Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5196" end="5204" title="BeanoMax" label="BeanoMax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716007" start="5399" end="5411" title="Beano Annual" label="Beano Annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q10598" start="5470" end="5481" title="David James (footballer, born 1970)" label="David James"/>
<link wikidata="Q107011665" start="5597" end="5606" title="BBC Three" label="BBC Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845536" start="5670" end="5681" title="Mark Bonnar" label="Mark Bonnar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266012" wikidata="Q509117" url="?curid=266012" title="Chloe Webb">
<text>Chloe Webb (born June 25, 1956) is an American actress, best known for her roles in the films &quot;Sid and Nancy&quot; (1986), &quot;The Belly of an Architect&quot; (1987), &quot;Twins&quot; (1988), and &quot;Heart Condition&quot; (1990). She also was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for her role as Laurette Barber in the ABC drama series &quot;China Beach&quot;, and had a recurring role as Monica Gallagher on the Showtime comedy-drama &quot;Shameless&quot;.

==Early life==
Webb was born June 25, 1956, in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Manhattan in New York City. She spent her youth in various locations on the East Coast, depending on where her father, a bridge and road designer, was employed, though she was primarily raised in Syracuse, New York, where she attended Bishop Grimes High School. At age sixteen, she enrolled at The Boston Conservatory and later, Berklee College of Music. Originally, she pursued her passion for singing by singing in bars despite being underaged; she realized that even though she greatly enjoyed singing, she was better at acting.

== Career ==
In April 1982, Webb joined &quot;Forbidden Broadway&quot;, an Off-Broadway revue parodying musical theatre, particularly Broadway musicals. Four years later, she made her film debut in Alex Cox&#x27;s &quot;Sid &amp; Nancy&quot; (1986); she portrayed Nancy Spungen, the mentally ill, heroin-addicted girlfriend of punk rock singer Sid Vicious. Her performance garnered best actress awards from the National Society of Film Critics, the Boston Film Critics and the San Francisco Film Critics.

She also appeared as Brian Dennehy&#x27;s estranged socialite girlfriend in Peter Greenaway&#x27;s 1987 drama film &quot;The Belly of an Architect&quot; and as Laurette, a young woman from Paoli, Pennsylvania who dreams of becoming a successful singer, in ABC&#x27;s drama television series &quot;China Beach&quot;. Other roles include the eccentric girlfriend of Danny DeVito&#x27;s character in the Ivan Reitman comedy &quot;Twins&quot; (1988), and a cameo as a woman convinced that she had been abducted by aliens in &quot;Ghostbusters II&quot; (1989). Between roles in motion pictures and television series, Webb frequently appeared in several Los Angeles based stage productions: &quot;The House of Blue Leaves&quot;, for which she won a Drama-Logue Award, and &quot;The Model Apartment&quot;; her performance earned her a Los Angeles Drama Critics Circle Award and another Drama-Logue Award.

Webb co-starred alongside Denzel Washington and Bob Hoskins in &quot;Heart Condition&quot; (1990). In 1991, she played a hairdresser in &quot;Queens Logic&quot; and a woman with a developmental disability who wins the lottery in ABC&#x27;s made-for-TV film &quot;Lucky Day&quot;.

Other roles included the eccentric Mona Ramsey in the first season of Armistead Maupin miniseries &quot;Tales of the City&quot; (1993).

Webb has appeared on several television series: CBS&#x27;s &quot;Judging Amy&quot; (2003), FOX&#x27;s &quot;House&quot; (2005), CBS&#x27;s &quot;Two and a Half Men&quot; (2005), NBC&#x27;s &quot;Medium&quot; (2005), and CBS&#x27;s &quot;&quot; (2008). Webb reunited with Cox in 2009 for his film &quot;Repo Chick&quot;; she played Sister Duncan.

Her most recent role was as Monica Gallagher, William H. Macy&#x27;s character&#x27;s estranged and unstable wife in Showtime&#x27;s comedy-drama TV series &quot;Shameless&quot;; her performance earned her a nomination for Critics&#x27; Choice Television Award for Best Guest Performer in a Drama Series.

==Partial filmography==

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q509117" start="0" end="10" title="Chloe Webb" label="Chloe Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q600950" start="100" end="113" title="Sid and Nancy" label="Sid and Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q573762" start="134" end="159" title="The Belly of an Architect" label="The Belly of an Architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q785157" start="180" end="185" title="Twins (1988 film)" label="Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027640" start="210" end="225" title="Heart Condition (film)" label="Heart Condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="269" end="289" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q747928" start="352" end="363" title="China Beach" label="China Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="423" end="431" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q23599" start="451" end="460" title="Shameless (U.S. TV series)" label="Shameless"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="520" end="537" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="554" end="563" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="630" end="640" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="750" end="768" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303621" start="848" end="871" title="Boston Conservatory" label="The Boston Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q248970" start="883" end="907" title="Berklee College of Music" label="Berklee College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467300" start="1133" end="1151" title="Forbidden Broadway" label="Forbidden Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="1162" end="1174" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="1175" end="1180" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q778865" start="1285" end="1293" title="Alex Cox" label="Alex Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q600950" start="1307" end="1322" title="Sid &amp;amp; Nancy" label="Sid &amp;amp; Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241669" start="1351" end="1364" title="Nancy Spungen" label="Nancy Spungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="1384" end="1390" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1414" end="1423" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q47878" start="1431" end="1442" title="Sid Vicious" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206671" start="1498" end="1530" title="National Society of Film Critics" label="National Society of Film Critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q150138" start="1536" end="1555" title="Boston Film Critics" label="Boston Film Critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471437" start="1564" end="1590" title="San Francisco Film Critics" label="San Francisco Film Critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q313545" start="1614" end="1627" title="Brian Dennehy" label="Brian Dennehy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55282" start="1669" end="1684" title="Peter Greenaway" label="Peter Greenaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q573762" start="1714" end="1739" title="The Belly of an Architect" label="The Belly of an Architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021562" start="1782" end="1801" title="Paoli, Pennsylvania" label="Paoli, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="1849" end="1852" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q747928" start="1890" end="1901" title="China Beach" label="China Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q26806" start="1957" end="1969" title="Danny DeVito" label="Danny DeVito"/>
<link wikidata="Q380272" start="1994" end="2006" title="Ivan Reitman" label="Ivan Reitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q785157" start="2020" end="2025" title="Twins (1988 film)" label="Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q492214" start="2119" end="2134" title="Ghostbusters II" label="Ghostbusters II"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2241" end="2252" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305686" start="2336" end="2353" title="Drama-Logue Award" label="Drama-Logue Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q42101" start="2518" end="2535" title="Denzel Washington" label="Denzel Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q211283" start="2540" end="2551" title="Bob Hoskins" label="Bob Hoskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027640" start="2561" end="2576" title="Heart Condition (film)" label="Heart Condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476932" start="2634" end="2646" title="Queens Logic" label="Queens Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142806" start="2672" end="2696" title="developmental disabilities" label="developmental disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q423597" start="2843" end="2859" title="Armistead Maupin" label="Armistead Maupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="2860" end="2870" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231517" start="2877" end="2894" title="Tales of the City (1993 miniseries)" label="Tales of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247192" start="2975" end="2986" title="Judging Amy" label="Judging Amy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="3001" end="3004" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="FOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q23558" start="3018" end="3023" title="House (TV series)" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q189267" start="3055" end="3073" title="Two and a Half Men" label="Two and a Half Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="3088" end="3091" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q470111" start="3105" end="3111" title="Medium (TV series)" label="Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314096" start="3212" end="3222" title="Repo Chick" label="Repo Chick"/>
<link wikidata="Q224159" start="3303" end="3318" title="William H. Macy" label="William H. Macy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503319" start="3374" end="3382" title="Showtime Networks" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q23599" start="3419" end="3428" title="Shameless (U.S. TV series)" label="Shameless"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988828" start="3480" end="3560" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Television Award for Best Guest Performer in a Drama Series" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Television Award for Best Guest Performer in a Drama Series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266014" wikidata="Q532101" url="?curid=266014" title="Micromouse">
<text>Micromouse is an event where small robotic mice compete to solve a 16×16 maze. It began in the late 1970s. Events are held worldwide, and are most popular in the UK, U.S., Japan, Singapore, India, South Korea and becoming popular in subcontinent countries such as Sri Lanka.

The maze is made up of a 16×16 grid of cells, each 180 square mm with walls 50 mm high. The mice are completely autonomous robots that must find their way from a predetermined starting position to the central area of the maze unaided. The mouse needs to keep track of where it is, discover walls as it explores, map out the maze and detect when it has reached the goal. Having reached the goal, the mouse will typically perform additional searches of the maze until it has found an optimal route from the start to the finish. Once the optimal route has been found, the mouse will traverse that route in the shortest achievable time.

Competitions and conferences are run regularly.

== Half-Size Micromouse ==
A version of Micromouse called the Half-Size Micromouse was introduced at the 30th All Japan Micromouse Competition in 2009. Instead of a 16×16 maze, the Half-Size competition uses up to a 32×32 maze. Cell and wall dimensions have been reduced by half, providing a new challenge.

== Maze solving ==

Mice used in competitions employ the fundamental elements of robot navigation, including mapping, planning, and localization. Additionally, they optimize their path through the maze using various search algorithms. Common search algorithms use variations of the Bellman flood-fill method, Dijkstra&#x27;s algorithm, A* search algorithm, among various graph traversal and tree traversal algorithms.

== Performance ==
Mice can run at over three meters per second, depending on the maze design. Some of the best micromouse builders are Yusuke Kato, Ng Beng Kiat and Fumitaka Nakashima. The current world record is 3.921 seconds and is held by Ng Beng Kiat.

Performance in recent years has improved considerably. As of 2015, winning mice are likely to run with forward acceleration and braking well over 1g. Cornering with centripetal acceleration as high as 2g is possible. Micromice are among the highest-performing autonomous robots.

Most recently, robots are being equipped with a fan to create a partial vacuum under the mouse while it is running. The additional downforce available has made possible a huge improvement in performance. Compared to a non-fan mouse, the newer robots are likely to be able to achieve centripetal accelerations of 6g or more. Straight line accelerations can easily exceed 2.5g.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q532101" start="0" end="10" title="Micromouse" label="Micromouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="35" end="42" title="robot" label="robotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q606777" start="73" end="77" title="maze" label="maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="162" end="164" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="166" end="170" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="172" end="177" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="179" end="188" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="190" end="195" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="197" end="208" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="264" end="273" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916098" start="388" end="404" title="autonomous robot" label="autonomous robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887224" start="1348" end="1364" title="robot navigation" label="robot navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q755673" start="1483" end="1500" title="Search algorithm" label="search algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196156" start="1557" end="1567" title="Flood fill" label="flood-fill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8548" start="1576" end="1601" title="Dijkstra&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Dijkstra&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q277680" start="1603" end="1622" title="A* search algorithm" label="A* search algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q907955" start="1638" end="1653" title="graph traversal" label="graph traversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210082" start="1658" end="1672" title="tree traversal" label="tree traversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11376" start="2108" end="2132" title="Acceleration" label="centripetal acceleration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266015" wikidata="Q889970" url="?curid=266015" title="Scandinavian York">
<text>Scandinavian York or Viking York () is a term used by historians for what is now Yorkshire during the period of Scandinavian domination from late 9th century until it was annexed and integrated into England after the Norman Conquest; in particular, it is used to refer to York, the city controlled by these kings and earls. The Kingdom of Jórvík was closely associated with the longer-lived Kingdom of Dublin throughout this period.

== History ==
===Pre-Viking age===

York was first recorded by Ptolemy around the year 150 as &quot;Eborakon&quot;. Under the Romans it became the provincial capital and bishopric of &quot;Eburacum&quot;. The Roman settlement was regularly planned, well defended and contained a stone legionary fortress. The Romans withdrew around 407 and the Anglo-Saxons occupied the settlement from the early 7th century. Post-Roman York was in the kingdom of Deira; it was taken over in 655 by its northern neighbour Bernicia to form the kingdom of Northumbria. The Anglo-Saxon king Edwin of Northumbria was baptized there in 627 and the first Anglo-Saxon archbishop Ecgbert of York consecrated in 780. The settlement became the Anglo-Saxon trading port of &quot;Eoforwic&quot;.

===Viking invasion===
The Vikings had been raiding the coasts of England from the late 8th century, but in 865 a Viking army landed with the intention of conquering rather than just raiding. The &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; described the army as the &quot;mycel heathen here&quot; (Great Heathen Army). They landed in East Anglia where the locals, under Edmund of East Anglia, &quot;made peace&quot; with them in return for horses.

The army, led by Ivar the Boneless and his brother Halfdan Ragnarsson, made its way north to Northumbria where the Anglo-Saxons were embroiled in a civil war. In 862 the ruler of Northumbria, Osberht, had been deposed by Ælla of Northumbria. Ivar the Boneless was able to capitalize on the Anglo-Saxons disarray and captured York in 866/ 867.

===Scandinavian rule 866–901===
After Ivar the Boneless had annexed York, the two Anglo-Saxon leaders settled their differences, they joined forces and attempted to retake the city. When the Northumbrians attacked, the Vikings withdrew behind the crumbling Roman city walls, but the Anglo-Saxon leaders were both killed and the Northumbrians defeated during the ensuing battle on 21 March 867. Symeon of Durham wrote:
The remaining Northumbrian leaders, probably led by archbishop, Wulfhere, &quot;made peace&quot; with the Vikings. The Vikings appointed a compliant native prince Ecgberht as puppet ruler of Northumbria. Five years later, in 872, when the Great Army was elsewhere, the local Northumbrians capitalized on their absence by driving Wulfhere and Ecgberht out. The two exiles found refuge at the court of Burgred of Mercia. The revolt was short lived with the Vikings regaining control of York in 873. Wulfhere was recalled to the See but the Anglo-Saxon Ricsige became ruler, as Ecgberht died in 873.

In 875/ 876 part of the Great Army returned, headed by Halfdan Ragnarsson. York was retaken and although Halfdan was proclaimed King of Northumbria, in reality he was only the ruler of southern Northumbria (Deira). Deira became known as the Kingdom of York (Jórvík) with Halfdan as its first king. According to the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot;:
Halfdan&#x27;s reign did not last long, as he was killed, trying to assert his claim to the Kingdom of Dublin, in 877.

There was an interregnum after Halfdan died until Guthred became king in 883. Guthred was the first Christian Viking king of York. It is traditionally thought that Guthred&#x27;s election was sponsored by Archbishop Wulfhere&#x27;s religious community from Lindisfarne. Churches and religious centres in Northumbria had been systematically stripped of their wealth since the arrival of the Vikings, however although it had become impoverished the amount of ecclesiastical artefacts that have been excavated in York, from various periods between the 7th and 11th centuries, indicate that the cathedral remained a religious centre throughout. Guthred died in 895 and was buried at York Minster.
Siefredus of Northumbria replaced Guthred as ruler of Jórvík and although not a great deal is known about him there has been some information provided by coin evidence. A substantial find in the Ribble Valley, during the 19th century, now known as the Cuerdale Hoard, contained approximately 8,000 Anglo-Scandinavian coins as well as continental and Kufic coins. Some of the coins discovered have Siefredus&#x27;s name on providing an indication to when he reigned. The coin evidence suggests that Siefredus succeeded Guthred and ruled from about 895 until 900.

The writing of the medieval chronicler Æthelweard has led some historians to suggest that Siefriedus may be the same person, as Sichfrith, who had previously been raiding the coast of Wessex.

A further hypothesis, proposed by the historian Alfred P. Smyth, is that Siefriedus is the same as the jarl Sichfrith who lay claim to the Kingdom of Dublin in that same year.

The Cuerdale Hoard also contained some coins with the name Cnut or &quot;Knútr&quot; on them, the coin evidence suggests that he reigned between 900 and 905. He is listed as ruler of York but has proved to be something of a , for historians, as Cnut is not recorded on any written contemporary sources. Historians have posited several hypotheses. These include, &quot;no coins have been found from Gunfriths[Guthred] reign so perhaps they could be his? &quot;. As some of the coins had both Siefredus and Cnuts name on them &quot;perhaps these are the same person?&quot;. Another possibility is that he was &quot;a Danish noble, mentioned in Norse sources, who was assassinated in 902 after a very brief reign. So brief that there was not enough time to produce coins in quantity.&quot;

===A West Saxon rules Northumbria===
The next ruler, Æthelwold, was the son of Æthelred, the king of Wessex from 865 to 871. Following his father&#x27;s death, in 871, his uncle Alfred the Great became king. When Alfred died in 899. Alfred&#x27;s son Edward the Elder ascended the throne of Wessex. However, Æthelwold made a bid for power, seizing his father&#x27;s old estate in Wimbourne. Edward&#x27;s forces besieged Æthelwold&#x27;s position, forcing him to flee. He went to York, where the locals accepted him as king, in 901. According to the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot;:

Æthelwold did not stay in York long; in 903 he began a campaign to regain the crown of Wessex. The &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; describes how he raised a fleet and landed first in Essex, then went on to East Anglia where he persuaded their king Eohric to help him in his campaign. The combined armies raided Wessex in the Cricklade area. Edward and his allies responded by attacking East Anglia. Edward&#x27;s Kentish allies engaged Æthelwold&#x27;s army, and in this battle Æthelwold was killed.

===Scandinavian rule restored 903–926===
Edward followed up his attack on East Anglia with raids into the Viking kingdom. The following year the Vikings retaliated, led by their new joint kings Eowils and Halfdan II their intention was to raid Mercia and Wessex but were intercepted and killed when they met a joint army from Wessex and Mercia at Tettenhall on 5 August 910.

Ragnall I was York&#x27;s next ruler, he was the grandson of Ímar and was probably one of the Vikings expelled from Dublin in 902. He fought against Constantín II, King of Scotland, in the Battle of Corbridge in 918. It is not clear from the annals, who actually won the battle, but the outcome did allow Ragnall to establish himself as king at York. It seems that the people of York were unhappy with Ragnall as they promised obedience to Æthelflæd, Lady of the Mercians in early 918, but the negotiations were ended prematurely by her death in June of that year. Later in his reign, Ragnall submitted to Edward as overlord, but was allowed to keep his kingdom. Ragnall had three separate issues of coins produced while he ruled York the coins bearing the name RAIENALT, RACNOLDT or similar. He died late in 920 or early 921.

The next ruler was Sihtric, who was a kinsman of Ragnall, and another Viking leader that had been expelled from the Kingdom of Dublin, in 902. Sihtric, however had returned to Ireland to retake Dublin and become their king. Then in 920 he travelled to York and joined Ragnall where in 921 Ragnall died and Sihtric replaced him as king.

Sihtric raided Davenport, Cheshire, in violation of the terms of submission agreed between Ragnall and Edward. Edward the Elder died in 924. It seems that Sihtric took advantage of the situation to expand his kingdom. There is some numismatic evidence to support this as there are coins, from this time, minted at Lincoln, in the Kingdom of Mercia, as well those from York.

Edward was replaced by his son Æthelstan, and although the annals indicated that Sihtric was reluctant to submit to Edward, he submitted to Æthelstan at Tamworth in January 926. Part of the agreement was that Sihtric should marry Æthelstan&#x27;s sister Eadgyth, and that he should be baptised. According to Roger of Wendover, Sihtric was baptised but he &quot;repudiated&quot; the faith and rejected his bride shortly after, without the marriage being consummated.

===West Saxon rule 927–939===
In 927 Sihtric died. His brother Gofraid left Dublin and headed to Northumbria to replace Sihtric as king but his attempt to rule was unsuccessful, and he was driven out by King Æthelstan. The &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; makes no mention of Gofraid, simply stating that Æthelstan succeeded Sihtric as King in Northumbria, and thereafter held a meeting with the other kings in Britain, establishing peace. A later account by William of Malmesbury tells a different story. In his version, Gofraid goes to Scotland following Sihtric&#x27;s death, to attend a meeting at Dacre with Æthelstan, Constantine II of Scotland, and Owen I of Strathclyde. Gofraid and a Viking ally called Thurfrith led a force to York and besieged the city. Æthelstan counterattacked and Gofraid was captured. The city was then looted by the Anglo-Saxons and Gofraid allowed to return to Ireland.

In 937 a coalition of Vikings (led by Gofraid&#x27;s son Olaf Guthfrithson), Constantine II, King of Scotland, and Owain, King of Strathclyde invaded England. The invaders were stopped and defeated by Æthelstan, and his allies, at the Battle of Brunanburh. After this, although Æthelstan&#x27;s relationship with Northumbria was not an easy one, his hold on it remained secure until his death in 939.

During his reign, Æthelstan integrated Northumbria into England and the design of the coinage was changed to conform with the standard English system. On some coins, produced at York, the mint-signature was &quot;Eforwic&quot;, the Old English name for York.

===Restoration of Scandinavian rule 939–944===
Although Æthelstan had integrated the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms into one unified England and suppressed opposition from the Vikings and their allies, when he died in 939, the Viking leader Olaf Guthfrithson (who had been defeated at Brunanburh) arrived from Dublin and took over Northumbria with minimal opposition. Coins minted at York during his reign show the Raven motif.

In 940, his cousin Olaf Cuaran joined him in York. In 941 Olaf Guthfrithson invaded Mercia and East Anglia The Archbishops of York and Canterbury mediated and Edmund I, Æthelstan&#x27;s successor, surrendered much of the south-east Midlands and Lincolnshire.

It is probable that Olaf Guthfrithson died in 942 and was replaced by Olaf Cuaran. Then in 943 the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; says that Olaf Cuaran was baptised, with Edmund as sponsor, and that same year, another king of Northumbria, was named as Ragnall Guthfrithson and he was confirmed also with Edmund as sponsor. Both Olaf and Ragnall are called king, but it is uncertain whether they were co-rulers or rival kings.

The chronology of events for both Olaf Guthfrithson, Olaf Cuaranths and Ragnalls&#x27; reigns have been subject to debate however the annals for 944 all seem to agree that Edmund was able to expel the Viking leaders from Northumbria.

===English rule 944–947===
In 945, Edmund invaded Cumbria and blinded two sons of Domnall mac Eógain, king of Strathclyde. Then according to the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; he &quot;granted&quot; all of Strathclyde, to Malcom king of the Scots in return for an alliance.

In 946 Edmund was assassinated at Pucklechurch.

Edmund was replaced by Eadred who immediately turned his attention to Northumbria, where according to the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot;, he &quot;subdued all Northumberland under his power&quot; and obtained oaths of obedience from the Scots.

In 947 Eadred went to the Anglo-Scandinavian town of Tanshelf, where Archbishop Wulfan and the Northumbrian &quot;witan&quot; submitted to him.

===Scandinavian rule reestablished 947–954===
Eric Bloodaxe capitalizing on the deteriorating political situation in York, established himself as king. Eadred&#x27;s response was to raid Northumbria and drive Eric out. Olaf Cuaran was reestablished as king from 950 to 952. Olaf&#x27;s rule was short-lived as in 952 Eric removed him and then reigned in Northumbria till 954.

===The Earldom of York 954–1066===

Scandinavian domination came to an end when Eadred&#x27;s forces killed Eric Bloodaxe at the Battle of Stainmore in 954. The whole area was then governed by earls, from the local nobility, who were appointed by the kings of England.

In 975 the king of England Edgar died suddenly. The succession was contested between his two sons Edward and Æthelred. Edward became king but was killed under suspicious circumstances in 978. Æthelred replaced him as ruler and in 1002 he was told that the Danish men in his territory &quot;would faithlessly take his life, and then all his councillors, and possess his kingdom afterwards&quot;. In response, he ordered the deaths of all Danes living in England. The orders were carried out on 13 November 1002 (now known as the St Brice&#x27;s Day massacre).

It is thought that the massacre provoked the king of Denmark, Sweyn Forkbeard, to invade England in 1003. The onslaught continued until 1014 when Æthelred and his family were driven into exile and Sweyn installed as king of England. However he only reigned for five weeks before dying.

After Sweyn&#x27;s death, his son Cnut became the leader of the Danish army and Æthelred returned to England. Æthelred drove Cnut out of England and back to Denmark. Then in 1015, Cnut relaunched the campaign against England.

Meanwhile, in 1016 Æthelred died and was succeeded by his son, Edmund Ironside. Edmund and his forces were decisively beaten by Cnut at the Battle of Ashingdon. After the battle, Cnut made a treaty with Edmund whereby Edmund would be king of Wessex and Cnut would rule the rest of England.

Ironside died just a few weeks after the treaty. Cnut then became king of all England. He divided England into four semi-independent earldoms using a system of governance based on the Scandinavian system of the time. He appointed his most trusted followers as earls, with the Norwegian Erik of Hlathir appointed to the Earldom of Northumbria. The previous Earl of Northumbria Uhtred, had been murdered, probably on Cnut&#x27;s orders. Although a Scandinavian king ruled all of England. Northumbria was not well integrated into the rest of the country.

Siward became the last Scandinavian Earl of Northumbria when he succeeded Erik in about 1033. He governed for 22 years without difficulty. On Siward&#x27;s death in 1055, the king of England, Edward the Confessor, chose a West Saxon to govern Yorkshire, in place of Siward&#x27;s son, Waltheof. Edward&#x27;s choice, Tostig Godwinson, was unpopular with locals. In 1065 Tostig was deposed by the northern nobility and replaced with Morcar (the brother of Edwin of Mercia). The northerners choice of new earl was accepted by Edward.

After Edward the Confessor&#x27;s death in 1066, Harold Godwinson became King of England. He visited York early in his reign and according to the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; returned to Westminster at Easter 1066. In September 1066 Tostig was back on the scene this time with his ally, Harald Hardrada of Norway. On 20 September 1066 the allies defeated, the northern earls, Morcar and Edwin at the Battle of Fulford. The people of York submitted to Tostig and Hardrada who did not occupy the city. Five days later Tostig and Hadrada were defeated and killed, by Harold Godwinson, at the Battle of Stamford Bridge. Shortly after William of Normandy landed at Pevensey on 28 September and on 13 October Harold of England fought his last battle on the Sussex coast at Hastings. Although William had won the battle it took several years for the Normans to consolidate their rule over England. It is likely that the Conqueror exercised little authority north of the Humber during 1067 as he simply did not have the troops there to enforce his will although the northern earls did submit to him.

===Norman rule post 1066===
Copsi, a supporter of Tostig, was a native of Northumbria and his family had a history of being rulers of Bernicia, and at times Northumbria. Copsi had fought in Harald Hardrada&#x27;s army with Tostig, against Harold Godwinson at the Battle of Stamford Bridge. He had managed to escape after Harald&#x27;s defeat. When Copsi offered homage to William at Barking in 1067, William rewarded him by making him earl of Northumbria. After just five weeks as earl, Copsi was murdered by Osulf, son of Earl Eadwulf IV of Bernicia. When, in turn, the usurping Osulf was also killed, his cousin, Cospatrick, bought the earldom from William. He was not long in power before he joined Edgar Ætheling in rebellion against William in 1068.

William&#x27;s response was brutal. During the winter of 1069, in an action known as the Harrying of the North, he laid waste to Yorkshire and eventually replaced its nobility with his own trusted men. The Domesday Book, for Yorkshire, indicates the extent of the Norman takeover, most of the former landowners who survived the conquest, retained only a fraction of their estates, and then as tenants of a Norman lord. With 25 of William the Conquerors magnates holding 90% of the county&#x27;s manors, the days when English kings appointed Scandinavian Earls of Northumbria were at an end.

After the Norman conquest there were several unsuccessful attempts by Scandinavian kings to regain control of England, the last of which took place in 1086. However raiding did continue and the last recorded one was in 1152, when Eystein II of Norway taking advantage of the confusion caused by the English civil war looted places on the east coast of Britain, including Yorkshire.

==Commerce==
===Coinage===
Small silver coins, known as &quot;sceattas&quot;, were minted in England by the early 8th century, and from the late 8th century, locally produced coins of this nature have been excavated in York. The bankrupt nature of the Northumbrian economy is illustrated by the continued production of small silver coins and eventually replacing them with copper pennies (known as &quot;stycas&quot;) while the other English kingdoms were producing the larger standard silver penny established by Offa of Mercia. The minting of coinage in York was controlled by the Northumbrian monarch and the archbishop.The coins produced under command of the king seems to have stopped around 850 and Archbishop Wulfhere around 855. The Vikings reintroduced the minting of coins, in York, . These coins had a similar design to continental coins, some with short religious texts on them and others with the name of the mint where they were produced, for example EBRAICE for &quot;Eboracum&quot; (York). Although where the mint was located, in York has not been found, a workshop that produced and tested the dies has been identified at Coppergate.

In about 973 King Edgar, reformed the monetary system to give Anglo-Saxon England a uniform currency. This involved approximately sixty moneyers in the various boroughs around the country. The most important mints were in London, Winchester, Lincoln, Chester and York. They produced a standard design so that each coin could be used anywhere in England. The design was changed about every six years. This model for the production of currency remained unchanged until the reign of Henry II, around two hundred years later.

===Trade===
Archaeological evidence indicates that Jórvík had a busy international trade with thriving workshops, and well-established mints. York was part of the wider Scandinavian trading system with one route leading to Norway by way of Shetland and another to Sweden, then via the Dnieper and Volga rivers to Byzantium and the Muslim world.

York was a major manufacturing centre particularly in metalwork, with Jórvík craftspeople sourcing their raw materials both near and far. There was gold and silver coming from Europe, copper and lead from the Pennines and tin from Cornwall. Also, there was amber from the Baltic for the production of jewellery, and soapstone probably from Norway or Shetland, used to make large cooking pots. Wine was imported from the Rhineland and silk, used to make into caps for sale, came from Byzantium.

==Religion==

Christianity had been established in Northumbria by the end of the 7th century. Very little evidence of the old Viking pagan religion in Yorkshire has been found although there is coin evidence minted during Ragnall I&#x27;s reign, from the 10th century, that had Thor&#x27;s hammer on them. The arrival of the pagan Vikings seems to have had little effect on the Christian religion, with the incoming Scandinavians converting to Christianity within a few decades of their arrival and largely adopting local burial customs, however there are stone crosses and grave markers, that introduced Scandinavian motifs to the designs and instituted new forms, notably the so-called Hogback gravestone.

Hogbacks were introduced in 10th century, they are a house-shaped stone with a bowed roof ridge and often with long sides, many were accompanied by standing crosses. In England, the incidence of them is most dense in northern Yorkshire, suggesting that the form was initiated in this region.
==Legacy==
===Administration===
====Ridings====

Scandinavian Yorkshire was divided into three parts, for administration purposes, these were known as the North Riding, the West Riding and the East Riding. The name Riding derives from the Old Norse &quot;þriðjungr&quot; meaning &quot;third part&quot;. Under Scandinavian rule each Riding was a unitary authority with its own assemblies. They were created during the Scandinavian period but continued until 1974, when they were abolished under the Local Government Act 1972, although the East Riding of Yorkshire was revived as a unitary authority in 1996.

====Wapentakes====

From the Old Norse &quot;vápnatak&quot; an administrative sub division of the Ridings in Yorkshire. The term is of Scandinavian origin and meant the taking of weapons; it later signified the clash of arms by which the people assembled in a local court expressed assent. In Scandinavian York it is likely that initially the Wapentakes were formed by groups of smaller Hundreds but confusingly later on the Wapentake itself was regarded as the direct equivalent to the Anglo-Saxon Hundred. Wapentakes lasted until 1974, when they were phased out by the Local Government Act 1972.

===Yorkshire dialect===
The English language contains many hundreds of words that have a Scandinavian origin. However, in Yorkshire and northern England there are thousands of words with Scandinavian roots. A contemporary local literary tradition plus the large amount of non-Norman population, indicated by the charters of the time, was the basis of the distinct modern Yorkshire dialect.

An example, in literature, of the Yorkshire dialect can be found in Emily Brontë&#x27;s Wuthering Heights, where the servant Josephs dialogue is written in dialect. An example, quoting Joseph from Chapter 2 of the book:

In standard English the meaning is:
===Placenames===
After the Norman Conquest, the frequency of Anglo-Scandinavian place-names and the absence of Norman-French place-names indicate that the Norman settlers were purely of the top rank.

Place-names can give an indication to what an area was used for. For example, in York, the Old Norse placename &quot;Konungsgurtha&quot; (Kings Court), recorded in the late fourteenth century was possibly the royal residence. It is in the area immediately outside
the site of the &quot;porta principalis sinistra&quot;, the east gatehouse of the Roman encampment, perpetuated today as King&#x27;s Square, which nucleates the Ainsty. New streets, lined by regular building fronts for timber houses were added to an enlarging city between 900 and 935, dates arrived at by tree-ring chronology carried out on remaining posts preserved in anaerobic clay subsoil.

Many of the city of York&#x27;s street names end in &quot;~gate&quot;. The name derives from the Old Norse &quot;~gata&quot; meaning street. One of the best known of these is Coppergate, which translates as the &quot;street of the woodworkers&quot;.

===Archaeological findings ===
From 1976 to 1981, the York Archaeological Trust conducted a five-year excavation in and around the street of Coppergate in central York. This demonstrated that, in the 10th century, Jórvík&#x27;s trading connections reached to the Byzantine Empire and beyond: a cap made of silk survives, and coins from Samarkand were familiar enough and respected enough for a counterfeit to have passed in trade. Both these items, as well as a large human coprolite known as the Lloyds Bank coprolite, were famously recovered in York a millennium later. Amber from the Baltic is often expected at a Viking site and at Jórvík an impractical and presumably symbolic axehead of amber was found. A cowrie shell indicates contact with the Red Sea or the Persian Gulf. Although little is known about the internal events of &quot;Jórvík&quot;, during this time, it is known that there was an accommodation with the church as Christian and pagan objects have survived side-by-side.

After the excavation, the York Archaeological Trust took the decision to recreate the excavated part of Jórvík on the Coppergate site, and this is now the Jorvik Viking Centre.

== See also ==
*Coppergate Helmet
*Ebrauc
*History of York
*Uí Ímair

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*

== External links ==
* Brenda Ralph Lewis &amp; David Nash Ford, &quot;York: Viking Times&quot;
*Timeline of Anglo-Saxon England</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q889970" start="0" end="17" title="Scandinavian York" label="Scandinavian York"/>
<link wikidata="Q889970" start="21" end="32" title="Scandinavian York" label="Viking York"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="81" end="90" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="217" end="232" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="272" end="276" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q436994" start="391" end="408" title="Kingdom of Dublin" label="Kingdom of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="497" end="504" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="560" end="565" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="719" end="737" title="castra" label="legionary fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q506008" start="881" end="886" title="Deira" label="Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="939" end="947" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q348955" start="1005" end="1025" title="Edwin of Northumbria" label="Edwin of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049131" start="1089" end="1104" title="Ecgbert of York" label="Ecgbert of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="1403" end="1424" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419965" start="1489" end="1507" title="Great Heathen Army" label="Great Heathen Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q381815" start="1561" end="1582" title="Edmund the Martyr" label="Edmund of East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q350321" start="1657" end="1674" title="Ivar the Boneless" label="Ivar the Boneless"/>
<link wikidata="Q779168" start="1691" end="1709" title="Halfdan Ragnarsson" label="Halfdan Ragnarsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q880635" start="1832" end="1839" title="Osberht of Northumbria" label="Osberht"/>
<link wikidata="Q271398" start="1861" end="1880" title="Ælla of Northumbria" label="Ælla of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q98785100" start="2354" end="2360" title="Battle of York (867)" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039174" start="2466" end="2474" title="Wulfhere of York" label="Wulfhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q353849" start="2565" end="2573" title="Ecgberht I of Northumbria" label="Ecgberht"/>
<link wikidata="Q852077" start="2802" end="2819" title="Burgred of Mercia" label="Burgred of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q353837" start="2952" end="2959" title="Ricsige" label="Ricsige"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809664" start="3520" end="3527" title="Guthred" label="Guthred"/>
<link wikidata="Q252575" start="4149" end="4161" title="York Minster" label="York Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q20128083" start="4163" end="4187" title="Siefredus of Northumbria" label="Siefredus of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116317" start="4358" end="4371" title="Ribble Valley" label="Ribble Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622849" start="4415" end="4429" title="Cuerdale Hoard" label="Cuerdale Hoard"/>
<link wikidata="Q29647" start="4513" end="4518" title="Kufic" label="Kufic"/>
<link wikidata="Q272297" start="4765" end="4775" title="Æthelweard (historian)" label="Æthelweard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483519" start="4854" end="4863" title="Sichfrith Jarl" label="Sichfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835382" start="4967" end="4982" title="Alfred P. Smyth" label="Alfred P. Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198086" start="5155" end="5159" title="Cnut of Northumbria" label="Cnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518450" start="5937" end="5946" title="Æthelwold ætheling" label="Æthelwold"/>
<link wikidata="Q272233" start="5963" end="5971" title="Æthelred of Wessex" label="Æthelred"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="5985" end="5991" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="6062" end="6078" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q187114" start="6135" end="6151" title="Edward the Elder" label="Edward the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q535233" start="6264" end="6273" title="Wimbourne" label="Wimbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410638" start="6720" end="6726" title="Eohric of East Anglia" label="Eohric"/>
<link wikidata="Q533456" start="6797" end="6806" title="Cricklade" label="Cricklade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055660" start="7167" end="7188" title="Eowils and Halfdan" label="Eowils and Halfdan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253682" start="7320" end="7330" title="Battle of Tettenhall" label="Tettenhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416063" start="7349" end="7358" title="Ragnall ua Ímair" label="Ragnall I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156264" start="7410" end="7414" title="Ímar" label="Ímar"/>
<link wikidata="Q333748" start="7498" end="7511" title="Constantín mac Áeda" label="Constantín II"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="7513" end="7529" title="King of Scotland" label="King of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991963" start="7538" end="7557" title="Battle of Corbridge" label="Battle of Corbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q235250" start="7789" end="7798" title="Æthelflæd" label="Æthelflæd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106272" start="8196" end="8203" title="Sihtric Cáech" label="Sihtric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517345" start="8529" end="8538" title="Davenport, Greater Manchester" label="Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="8540" end="8548" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170017" start="8920" end="8929" title="Æthelstan" label="Æthelstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111482" start="9419" end="9426" title="Gofraid ua Ímair" label="Gofraid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243151" start="9959" end="9964" title="Dacre, Cumbria" label="Dacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316342" start="10013" end="10034" title="Owen I of Strathclyde" label="Owen I of Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q934558" start="10319" end="10336" title="Olaf Guthfrithson" label="Olaf Guthfrithson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246615" start="10497" end="10517" title="Battle of Brunanburh" label="Battle of Brunanburh"/>
<link wikidata="Q259114" start="11362" end="11373" title="Olaf Cuaran" label="Olaf Cuaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q190166" start="11502" end="11510" title="Edmund I" label="Edmund I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439698" start="11858" end="11878" title="Ragnall Guthfrithson" label="Ragnall Guthfrithson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188613" start="11890" end="11899" title="Confirmation" label="confirmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057908" start="12350" end="12368" title="Dyfnwal ab Owain" label="Domnall mac Eógain"/>
<link wikidata="Q225890" start="12378" end="12389" title="kingdom of Strathclyde" label="Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q333730" start="12493" end="12517" title="Malcolm I of Scotland" label="Malcom king of the Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258264" start="12580" end="12592" title="Pucklechurch" label="Pucklechurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q191767" start="12618" end="12624" title="Eadred" label="Eadred"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12896" end="12904" title="Pontefract#Tanshelf and Kirkby" label="Tanshelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q497578" start="12957" end="12962" title="witan" label="witan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213791" start="13034" end="13047" title="Eric Bloodaxe" label="Eric Bloodaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992687" start="13494" end="13513" title="Battle of Stainmore" label="Battle of Stainmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="13662" end="13667" title="Edgar, King of England" label="Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192920" start="13733" end="13739" title="Edward the Martyr" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q183499" start="13744" end="13752" title="Æthelred the Unready" label="Æthelred"/>
<link wikidata="Q377753" start="14163" end="14191" title="St Brice&amp;#x27;s Day massacre" label="St Brice&amp;#x27;s Day massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="14240" end="14255" title="king of Denmark" label="king of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q181896" start="14257" end="14272" title="Sweyn Forkbeard" label="Sweyn Forkbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="14516" end="14520" title="Cnut" label="Cnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q188684" start="14772" end="14787" title="Edmund Ironside" label="Edmund Ironside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704268" start="14849" end="14868" title="Battle of Assandun" label="Battle of Ashingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="15133" end="15140" title="earldom" label="earldom"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017" start="15286" end="15301" title="Eiríkr Hákonarson" label="Erik of Hlathir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738090" start="15376" end="15382" title="Uhtred of Bamburgh" label="Uhtred"/>
<link wikidata="Q68366" start="15553" end="15559" title="Siward, Earl of Northumbria" label="Siward"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="15745" end="15765" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q940404" start="15838" end="15846" title="Waltheof, Earl of Northumbria" label="Waltheof"/>
<link wikidata="Q345420" start="15870" end="15886" title="Tostig Godwinson" label="Tostig Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347677" start="15934" end="15966" title="Northumbrian Revolt of 1065" label="deposed by the northern nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q971752" start="15985" end="15991" title="Morcar" label="Morcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249648" start="16008" end="16023" title="Edwin of Mercia" label="Edwin of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="16135" end="16151" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q203647" start="16378" end="16393" title="Harald Hardrada" label="Harald Hardrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113659" start="16491" end="16508" title="Battle of Fulford" label="Battle of Fulford"/>
<link wikidata="Q203225" start="16680" end="16705" title="Battle of Stamford Bridge" label="Battle of Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="16721" end="16740" title="William of Normandy" label="William of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q734453" start="16751" end="16759" title="Pevensey" label="Pevensey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83224" start="16828" end="16834" title="Battle of Hastings" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q29245" start="16858" end="16866" title="Hastings" label="Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131570" start="17212" end="17217" title="Copsi" label="Copsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q203647" start="17374" end="17389" title="Harald Hardrada" label="Harald Hardrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q377720" start="17567" end="17574" title="Barking, London" label="Barking"/>
<link wikidata="Q538077" start="17693" end="17698" title="Osulf, Earl of Bamburgh" label="Osulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046318" start="17712" end="17734" title="Eadwulf IV of Bernicia" label="Eadwulf IV of Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632928" start="17799" end="17809" title="Cospatrick of Northumbria" label="Cospatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q215224" start="17886" end="17900" title="Edgar Ætheling" label="Edgar Ætheling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703402" start="18029" end="18050" title="Harrying of the North" label="Harrying of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="18146" end="18159" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q329826" start="18762" end="18782" title="Eystein II of Norway" label="Eystein II of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q743768" start="18831" end="18848" title="The Anarchy" label="English civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723650" start="18977" end="18985" title="sceattas" label="sceattas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894248" start="18998" end="19004" title="Coining (mint)" label="minted"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680051" start="19319" end="19325" title="stycas" label="stycas"/>
<link wikidata="Q233573" start="19429" end="19443" title="Offa of Mercia" label="Offa of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="20080" end="20090" title="Edgar the Peaceful" label="King Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861571" start="20203" end="20210" title="moneyer" label="moneyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="20547" end="20555" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111205" start="20759" end="20786" title="Trade during the Viking Age" label="Scandinavian trading system"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="20830" end="20838" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q378346" start="20875" end="20912" title="Route from the Varangians to the Greeks" label="Dnieper and Volga rivers to Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q35647" start="21145" end="21153" title="Pennines" label="Pennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865570" start="21158" end="21175" title="Mining in Cornwall and Devon" label="tin from Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="21553" end="21578" title="Old Norse religion" label="old Viking pagan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193813" start="21709" end="21727" title="Thor&amp;#x27;s hammer" label="Thor&amp;#x27;s hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570646" start="22119" end="22137" title="Hogback (sculpture)" label="Hogback gravestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q939644" start="22288" end="22304" title="High cross" label="standing crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="22808" end="22818" title="Thing (assembly)" label="assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="22930" end="22955" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="23427" end="23435" title="Hundred (county division)" label="Hundreds"/>
<link wikidata="Q80137" start="24098" end="24110" title="Emily Brontë" label="Emily Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q202975" start="24118" end="24135" title="Wuthering Heights" label="Wuthering Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q14437894" start="24254" end="24270" title="standard English" label="standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q98414091" start="24626" end="24637" title="King&amp;#x27;s Square (York)" label="Kings Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697497" start="24913" end="24919" title="Ainsty" label="Ainsty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055358" start="25453" end="25478" title="York Archaeological Trust" label="York Archaeological Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="25501" end="25511" title="Excavation (archaeology)" label="excavation"/>
<link wikidata="Q98414094" start="25540" end="25550" title="Coppergate" label="Coppergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="25662" end="25678" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="25735" end="25744" title="Samarkand" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q544041" start="25873" end="25882" title="coprolite" label="coprolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662866" start="25896" end="25917" title="Lloyds Bank coprolite" label="Lloyds Bank coprolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="25971" end="25976" title="Amber" label="Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q579938" start="25986" end="25992" title="Baltic region" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q366291" start="26111" end="26117" title="Cowry" label="cowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="26151" end="26158" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="26166" end="26178" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="26349" end="26354" title="Paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704043" start="26547" end="26567" title="Jorvik Viking Centre" label="Jorvik Viking Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127298" start="26586" end="26603" title="Coppergate Helmet" label="Coppergate Helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47349832" start="26605" end="26611" title="Ebrauc" label="Ebrauc"/>
<link wikidata="Q47349832" start="26613" end="26628" title="History of York" label="History of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100974" start="26630" end="26638" title="Uí Ímair" label="Uí Ímair"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266016" wikidata="Q1141048" url="?curid=266016" title="1999 Rugby World Cup">
<text>The 1999 Rugby World Cup (), was the fourth Rugby World Cup, the quadrennial international rugby union championship, the first World Cup to be held in the sport&#x27;s professional era.

Four automatic qualification places were available for the 1999 tournament; Wales qualified automatically as hosts, and the other three places went to the top three teams from the previous World Cup in 1995: champions South Africa, runners-up New Zealand and third-placed France. 63 nations took part in the qualification process, with 14 nations progressing directly to the tournament. the remaining two qualifiers were determined by a repechage, introduced for the first time in the tournaments history. This was also the first World Cup to feature 20 teams (expanded from 16).

The 20 teams were divided into five pools of four. The winner of each pool progressed to the last eight automatically, with the remaining quarter-finalists determined by three play-off matches, played between the runners-up from each pool and the best third-placed team. The tournament began with the opening ceremony in the newly constructed Millennium Stadium, with Wales beating Argentina 23–18, and Colin Charvis scoring the first try of the tournament. Australia won the tournament, becoming the first nation to do so twice and also to date the only team ever to win after having to qualify for the tournament, with a 35–12 triumph over France, who were unable to repeat their semi-final victory over pre-tournament favourites New Zealand. The overall attendance for the tournament was 1.75 million.

==Qualifying==

The following 20 teams, shown by region, qualified for the 1999 Rugby World Cup. Of the 20 teams, only four of those places were automatically allocated and did not have to play any qualification matches. These went to the champions, runners-up and the third-placed nations at the 1995 and the tournament host, Wales. A record 65 nations from five continents were therefore involved in the qualification process designed to fill the remaining 16 spots.

==Venues==

Wales won the right to host the World Cup in 1999. The centrepiece venue for the tournament was the Millennium Stadium, built on the site of the old National Stadium at Cardiff Arms Park at a cost of £126 million from Lottery money and private investment. Other venues in Wales were the Racecourse Ground and Stradey Park. An agreement was reached so that the other unions in the Five Nations Championship (England, France, Ireland and Scotland) also hosted matches.

Venues in England included Twickenham Stadium and Welford Road Stadium, rugby union venues, as well as Ashton Gate Stadium in Bristol, which normally hosts football, and the McAlpine Stadium in Huddersfield, which normally hosts football and rugby league. Scottish venues included Murrayfield Stadium, the home of the Scottish Rugby Union; Hampden Park, the home of the Scottish Football Association; and the smallest venue in the 1999 tournament, Netherdale, in Galashiels, in the Scottish Borders. Venues in Ireland included Lansdowne Road, the traditional home of the Irish Rugby Football Union; Ravenhill Stadium; and Thomond Park. France used five venues, the most of any nation, including the French national stadium, Stade de France, which hosted the final of the 1998 FIFA World Cup, and would later go on to host the finals of both the 2007 and 2023 editions of the tournament.


==Pools and format==

With the expansion of the Rugby World Cup from 16 to 20 teams an unusual and complex format was used with the teams split into five pools of four teams with each team playing each other in their pool once.
*Pool A was played in Scotland
*Pool B was played in England
*Pool C was played in France
*Pool D was played in the principal host nation Wales
*Pool E was played in Ireland

Points system

The points system that was used in the pool stage was unchanged from both 1991 and 1995:
*3 points for a win
*2 points for a draw
*1 point for playing

The five pool winners qualified automatically to the quarter-finals. The five pool runners-up and the best third-placed side qualified for the quarter-final play-offs.

Knock-out stage

The five pool runners-up and the best third-placed team from the pool stage (which was Argentina) contested the quarter-final play-offs in three one-off matches that decided the remaining three places in the quarter-finals, with the losers being eliminated. The unusual format meant that two pool winners in the quarter-finals would have to play each other. From the quarter-final stage it became a simple knockout tournament. The semi-final losers played off for third place. The draw and format for the knock-out stage was set as follows.

Quarter-final play-offs draw

*Match H: Pool B runner-up v Pool C runner-up
*Match G: Pool A runner-up v Pool D runner-up
*Match F: Pool E runner-up v Best third-placed team

Quarter-finals draw

*Match M: Pool D winners v Pool E winners
*Match J: Pool A winners v Play-off H winners
*Match L: Pool C winners v Play-off F winners
*Match K: Pool B winners v Play-off G winners

Semi-finals draw

*Match J winners v Match M winners
*Match L winners v Match K winners

A total of 41 matches (30 pool stage and 11 knock-out) were played throughout the tournament over 35 days from 1 October 1999 to 6 November 1999.

==Squads==
==Referees==
==Pool stage==
The tournament began on 1 October 1999 in the newly built Millennium Stadium in Cardiff, with Wales beating Argentina in a hard-fought game 23–18 to get their campaign off to a positive start. The Pool stage of the tournament played out as was widely expected with the Tri Nations teams of New Zealand (who inflected a massive 101–3 win against Italy at the McAlpine Stadium in Huddersfield), South Africa and Australia all winning their pools easily without losing a single game. For the then Five Nations Championship teams who all played their pool matches in their own countries it was a case of mixed fortunes with France winning their pool without losing a game. Host Wales also won their pool, though they suffered 31–38 defeat at the hands of Samoa in front of a home crowd at the Millennium Stadium. However, as expected England, Ireland and Scotland all finished second in their pools and were forced to try to qualify for the quarter-finals via the play-offs alongside fellow runners-up Samoa and Fiji, and Argentina as the best third placed side from all five pools, having been the only third-placed side to win two matches (against Samoa and Japan). Indeed, Argentina had finished level with Wales and Samoa on 7 points each in the group stages, and could only be separated by &quot;total points scored&quot;: playing and winning their final match against Japan, they had the chance to overtake either of Samoa or Wales, but were 14 points short of overtaking Samoa&#x27;s total score and a further 18 points short of Wales.

===Pool A===







===Pool B===







===Pool C===







===Pool D===







===Pool E===







===Ranking of third-placed teams===


==Play-off stage==
The quarter-final play-offs were three one-off knock-out matches between the runners-up of each pool and the best third-placed side from all five pools to decide the remaining three places in the quarter-finals. The matches were played in mid-week between the completion of the pool stage and the start of the quarter-finals. The matches produced fairly easy wins for England, beating Fiji 45–24, and also for Scotland, beating Samoa 35–20. However, the final match produced the shock of the round where Argentina upset Ireland 28–24 in Lens.

===Quarter-final play-offs===



==Knockout stage==
The winners from the quarter-final play-offs, who had played in mid-week, joined the pool winners, who had enjoyed a week long rest, in the quarter-finals. England, hosts Wales and Scotland were all knocked out, and France, who beat Argentina, were the only team left from the Northern Hemisphere.

The semi-finals, which were both played at Twickenham Stadium, produced two of the most dramatic matches of the tournament, with Australia beating South Africa 27–21 in extra-time after normal time ended with the scores locked at 18-18. The second semi-final between favourites New Zealand and underdogs France was an all-time classic, as France overturned a 24–10 deficit to win 43–31 and reach their second World Cup final. France and Australia met at the Millennium Stadium on 6 November 1999, with Australia winning 35–12 to become the first team to win the Webb Ellis Cup twice. The cup was presented by Queen Elizabeth II to Australian captain John Eales.

The overall attendance for the tournament was 1.75 million.

===Quarter-finals===




===Semi-finals===


===Third-place play-off===
===Final===

==Statistics==
The tournament&#x27;s top point scorer was Argentina&#x27;s Gonzalo Quesada, who scored 102 points. Jonah Lomu scored the most tries, eight in total, a rugby world cup record.

==Broadcasting==
British television rights holders ITV acted as the host broadcaster for the tournament, with S4C also broadcasting matches in the Welsh language. with coverage shown in 209 countries, to an audience of 3.1 billion viewers. In Australia, the event was broadcast by Seven Network.

===Broadcast UK history===
*&quot;ITV&quot; (1 October 1999 – 6 November 1999)
*&quot;S4C&quot; (1 October 1999 – 6 November 1999)

==References==
==External links==

*Rugbyworldcup.com
*1999 Rugby World Cup Reports and Statistics (Archived)
*1999 Rugby World Cup on Worldcupweb.com
*Statistics on ESPN Scrum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1141048" start="4" end="24" title="1999 Rugby World Cup" label="1999 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="44" end="59" title="Rugby World Cup" label="Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="91" end="102" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="168" end="184" title="History of rugby union#The professional era" label="professional era"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="263" end="268" title="Welsh national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130017" start="367" end="393" title="1995 Rugby World Cup" label="previous World Cup in 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="405" end="417" title="South Africa national rugby union team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="430" end="441" title="New Zealand national rugby union team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q518116" start="459" end="465" title="France national rugby union team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423755" start="624" end="633" title="repechage" label="repechage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010369" start="1069" end="1085" title="opening ceremony" label="opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="1111" end="1129" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="1136" end="1141" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q646070" start="1150" end="1159" title="Argentina national rugby union team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q934602" start="1171" end="1184" title="Colin Charvis" label="Colin Charvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595056" start="1391" end="1416" title="1999 Rugby World Cup Final" label="35–12 triumph over France"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="1500" end="1511" title="New Zealand national rugby union team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130017" start="1871" end="1875" title="1995 Rugby World Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="1901" end="1906" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="2156" end="2174" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q432321" start="2225" end="2242" title="Cardiff Arms Park" label="Cardiff Arms Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202579" start="2343" end="2360" title="Racecourse Ground" label="Racecourse Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152808" start="2365" end="2377" title="Stradey Park" label="Stradey Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642" start="2436" end="2461" title="Six Nations Championship" label="Five Nations Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q209725" start="2551" end="2569" title="Twickenham Stadium" label="Twickenham Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210262" start="2574" end="2594" title="Welford Road Stadium" label="Welford Road Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q726370" start="2627" end="2646" title="Ashton Gate Stadium" label="Ashton Gate Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q619407" start="2698" end="2714" title="Kirklees Stadium" label="McAlpine Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024926" start="2805" end="2824" title="Murrayfield Stadium" label="Murrayfield Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q594917" start="2842" end="2862" title="Scottish Rugby Union" label="Scottish Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193651" start="2864" end="2876" title="Hampden Park" label="Hampden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q478320" start="2894" end="2923" title="Scottish Football Association" label="Scottish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338521" start="2972" end="2982" title="Netherdale" label="Netherdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016925" start="2987" end="2997" title="Galashiels" label="Galashiels"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="3006" end="3022" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q601162" start="3051" end="3065" title="Lansdowne Road" label="Lansdowne Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672926" start="3095" end="3121" title="Irish Rugby Football Union" label="Irish Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q887517" start="3123" end="3140" title="Ravenhill Stadium" label="Ravenhill Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542757" start="3146" end="3158" title="Thomond Park" label="Thomond Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q13205" start="3248" end="3263" title="Stade de France" label="Stade de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="3295" end="3314" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q124753" start="3369" end="3373" title="2007 Rugby World Cup" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124960" start="3378" end="3382" title="2023 Rugby World Cup" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="3461" end="3476" title="Rugby World Cup" label="Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="3663" end="3671" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3694" end="3701" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3724" end="3730" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="3779" end="3784" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="3807" end="3814" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322713" start="3905" end="3909" title="1991 Rugby World Cup" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130017" start="3914" end="3918" title="1995 Rugby World Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q646070" start="4256" end="4265" title="Argentina national rugby union team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="5421" end="5439" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="5443" end="5450" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="5457" end="5462" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q646070" start="5471" end="5480" title="Argentina national rugby union team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q58344" start="5632" end="5643" title="Tri Nations (rugby union)" label="Tri Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="5653" end="5664" title="New Zealand national rugby union team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q113135" start="5708" end="5713" title="Italy national rugby union team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q619407" start="5721" end="5737" title="John Smith&amp;#x27;s Stadium" label="McAlpine Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q201812" start="5741" end="5753" title="Huddersfield" label="Huddersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="5756" end="5768" title="South Africa national rugby union team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="5773" end="5782" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642" start="5857" end="5882" title="Six Nations Championship" label="Five Nations Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q518116" start="5983" end="5989" title="France national rugby union team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="6037" end="6042" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138539" start="6114" end="6119" title="Samoa national rugby union team" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="6152" end="6170" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="6193" end="6200" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="6202" end="6209" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="6214" end="6222" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138539" start="6361" end="6366" title="Samoa national rugby union team" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134669" start="6371" end="6375" title="Fiji national rugby union team" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q646070" start="6381" end="6390" title="Argentina national rugby union team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="7428" end="7435" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134669" start="7445" end="7449" title="Fiji national rugby union team" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="7470" end="7478" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138539" start="7488" end="7493" title="Samoa national rugby union team" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q646070" start="7564" end="7573" title="Argentina national rugby union team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="7580" end="7587" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q165271" start="7597" end="7601" title="Lens, Pas-de-Calais" label="Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="7812" end="7819" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="7827" end="7832" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="7837" end="7845" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q518116" start="7872" end="7878" title="France national rugby union team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q646070" start="7889" end="7898" title="Argentina national rugby union team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q209725" start="7998" end="8016" title="Twickenham Stadium" label="Twickenham Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="8084" end="8093" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="8102" end="8114" title="South Africa national rugby union team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="8233" end="8244" title="New Zealand national rugby union team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q521098" start="8517" end="8531" title="Webb Ellis Cup" label="Webb Ellis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="8564" end="8582" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q926351" start="8605" end="8615" title="John Eales" label="John Eales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174510" start="8839" end="8854" title="Gonzalo Quesada" label="Gonzalo Quesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q363717" start="8879" end="8889" title="Jonah Lomu" label="Jonah Lomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="9007" end="9010" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q426637" start="9066" end="9069" title="S4C" label="S4C"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="9103" end="9117" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="9237" end="9250" title="Seven Network" label="Seven Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="9287" end="9290" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q426637" start="9339" end="9342" title="S4C" label="S4C"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266028" wikidata="Q335260" url="?curid=266028" title="Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon">
<text>Antony Charles Robert Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon (7 March 1930 – 13 January 2017) was a British photographer. He is best known internationally for his portraits of world notables, many of them published in &quot;Vogue&quot;, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, &quot;The Sunday Times Magazine&quot;, &quot;The Sunday Telegraph Magazine&quot;, and other major venues. More than 280 of his photographs are in the permanent collections of the National Portrait Gallery. From 1968 through 1973, he also made several television documentary films. 

Snowdon was also a relentless and successful campaigner for disabled people, achieving dozens of groundbreaking political, economic, structural, transportation, and educational reforms for persons with disabilities during his adult life.

From 1960 to 1978, he was married to Princess Margaret, the sister of Queen Elizabeth II.

== Early life ==
Armstrong-Jones was born at Eaton Terrace in Belgravia, central London, the only son of the marriage of the Welsh barrister Ronald Armstrong-Jones (1899–1966) and his first wife, Anne Messel (later Countess of Rosse; 1902–1992). He was called &quot;Tony&quot; by his close relatives.

Armstrong-Jones&#x27;s paternal grandfather was Sir Robert Armstrong-Jones, a Welsh psychiatrist. His paternal grandmother, Lady Armstrong-Jones (née Margaret Roberts), was a graduate of Somerville College, Oxford, and was the daughter of the Welsh educationalist Sir Owen Roberts. Armstrong-Jones&#x27;s mother&#x27;s family was of German-Jewish descent. A maternal uncle was the stage designer Oliver Messel (1904–1978); a maternal great-grandfather was the &quot;Punch&quot; cartoonist Linley Sambourne (1844–1910); and his great-great-uncle Alfred Messel was a Berlin architect. Additionally, his great-great-grandmother, Frances Linley, was a first cousin of Elizabeth Linley, wife of Richard Brinsley Sheridan.

Armstrong-Jones&#x27;s parents divorced in early 1935, before his fifth birthday. His mother remarried later that year.

As a 16-year-old he contracted polio while on holiday in Wales; during the six months that he was in the Liverpool Royal Infirmary recuperating, the only visitor from his family was his sister Susan. The illness left him with a withered left leg, one inch shorter than the other, and a slight permanent limp.

== Education ==
Armstrong-Jones was educated at two private boarding schools: first at Sandroyd School in Wiltshire from the autumn term of 1938 to 1943. After Sandroyd he attended Eton College, beginning in the autumn term (&quot;Michaelmas half&quot;) of 1943. In March 1945, he qualified in the &quot;extra special weight&quot; class of the School Boxing Finals. He continued to box in 1946, gaining at least two flattering mentions in the &quot;Eton College Chronicle&quot;. In 1947, he was a coxswain in Eton&#x27;s traditional &quot;Fourth of June&quot; Daylight Procession of Boats.

He then matriculated at the University of Cambridge, where he studied architecture at Jesus College, but failed his second-year exams. He coxed the winning Cambridge boat in the 1950 Boat Race.

== Career ==

After university, Armstrong-Jones began a career as a photographer in fashion, design and theatre. His stepmother had a friend who knew Baron the photographer; Baron visited Armstrong-Jones in his London flat, which doubled as his work studio. Baron, impressed, agreed to bring on Armstrong-Jones as an apprentice, first on a fee-paying basis but eventually, as his talent and skills became apparent to Baron, as a salaried associate.

Much of his early commissions were theatrical portraits, often with recommendations from his uncle Oliver Messel, and &quot;society&quot; portraits highly favoured in &quot;Tatler&quot;, which, in addition to buying many of his photographs, gave him byline credit for the captions. He later became known for his royal studies, among which were the official portraits of Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh during their 1957 tour of Canada. He was also an early contributor to &quot;Queen&quot; magazine, the magazine owned by his friend Jocelyn Stevens.

After marrying Princess Margaret in May 1960, Armstrong-Jones&#x27;s first solo public engagement was on 7 December 1960, when he presented the 1960 National Challenge Trophies for the trade organisation the Photographic Information Council&#x27;s School Photography competition, with entries from 200 schools in Britain with camera clubs, at the opening of an exhibition of the work. News of this event was covered in American and Australian newspapers, as well as in England.

In line with the usual royal practice when a king&#x27;s daughter married a commoner, in October 1961 Armstrong-Jones was granted a peerage, becoming Earl of Snowdon, or Lord Snowdon.

In the early 1960s, Snowdon became the artistic adviser of &quot;The Sunday Times Magazine&quot;, and by the 1970s had established himself as one of Britain&#x27;s most respected photographers. Though his work included everything from fashion photography to documentary images of inner-city life and the mentally ill, he is best known for his portraits of world notables, many of them published in &quot;Vogue&quot;, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, &quot;The Sunday Times Magazine&quot;, and &quot;The Sunday Telegraph Magazine&quot;. His subjects included Marlene Dietrich, Laurence Olivier, Maggie Smith, Leslie Caron, Lynn Fontanne, David Bowie, Elizabeth Taylor, Rupert Everett, Anthony Blunt, David Hockney, Princess Grace of Monaco, Diana, Princess of Wales, Barbara Cartland, Raine Spencer (when she was Lady Lewisham), Desmond Guinness, British prime minister Harold Macmillan, Iris Murdoch, Tom Stoppard, Vladimir Nabokov, and J. R. R. Tolkien. More than 280 of his photographs are in the permanent collections of the National Portrait Gallery.

In 1968, he made his first documentary film, &quot;Don&#x27;t Count the Candles&quot;, for the US television network CBS, on the subject of aging. It won seven awards, including two Emmys. This was followed by &quot;Love of a Kind&quot; (1969), about the British and animals, &quot;Born to Be Small&quot; (1971) about people of restricted growth and &quot;Happy Being Happy&quot; (1973).

In October 1981, a group portrait by Snowdon of the British rock band Queen was used on the cover of their &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; album. A Snowdon portrait of Freddie Mercury was used in 2000 on the cover of Mercury&#x27;s compilation box set &quot;The Solo Collection&quot;.

In 2000, Snowdon was given a retrospective exhibition at the National Portrait Gallery, &quot;Photographs by Snowdon: A Retrospective&quot;, which travelled to the Yale Center for British Art the following year. More than 180 of his photographs were displayed in an exhibition that honoured what the museums called &quot;a rounded career with sharp edges&quot;.

Snowdon was an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Photographic Society—he was awarded the Hood Medal of the Society in 1978 and the Progress Medal in 1985.

In 2006, Tomas Maier, creative director of the Italian fashion brand Bottega Veneta, brought in Snowdon to photograph his Autumn/Winter 2006 campaign.

== Designs and inventions ==
Snowdon co-designed (in 1963, with Frank Newby and Cedric Price) the &quot;Snowdon Aviary&quot; of the London Zoo (which opened in 1964); he later said it was one of his creations of which he was most proud, and affectionately called it the &quot;birdcage&quot;. He also had a major role in designing the physical arrangements for the 1969 investiture of his nephew Prince Charles as Prince of Wales.

He was granted a patent for a type of electric wheelchair in 1971.

== Philanthropy and charity ==
===Disabled persons===
Contracting polio as a teenager left Snowdon with a shortened leg and a limp. As a result, in adulthood, he was a fierce and tireless campaigner for disabled people, and over several decades achieved dozens of groundbreaking political, economic, structural, transportation, and educational reforms for persons with any type of disability. 

In the 1960s, he served as a council member of the Polio Research Fund, later renamed the National Fund for Research into Crippling Diseases. He served as a trustee of the National Fund for Research into Crippling Diseases, since renamed Action Medical Research.

In June 1980, Snowdon started an award scheme for disabled students. This scheme, administered by the Snowdon Trust, provides grants and scholarships for students with disabilities. 

He was president for England of the International Year of Disabled Persons in 1981.

In 1981, he formed the Snowdon Council; it consisted of 12 members who coordinated a dozen different bodies concerned with helping disabled people.

===The arts===
During his first marriage, Snowdon was patron of the National Youth Theatre, the Contemporary Art Society for Wales, the Welsh Theatre Company, and the Civic Trust for Wales. He was also President of the British Theatre Museum.

He was provost of the Royal College of Art from 1995 to 2003.

== Personal life ==
Snowdon was married twice, first to Princess Margaret (1960 to 1978) and secondly to Lucy Mary Lindsay-Hogg (1978 to 2000).

=== First marriage ===
In February 1960, Snowdon, then known as Antony Armstrong-Jones, became engaged to the Queen&#x27;s sister, Princess Margaret, and they married on 6 May 1960 at Westminster Abbey. The ceremony was the first royal wedding to be broadcast on television. Despite the enthusiasm of the public, some critics disapproved of a commoner marrying into the royal family. The couple made their home in apartments at Kensington Palace. He was created &quot;Earl of Snowdon&quot; and &quot;Viscount Linley&quot;, of Nymans in the County of Sussex, on 6 October 1961. The couple had two children: David, 2nd Earl of Snowdon, born 3 November 1961, and Lady Sarah, born 1 May 1964.

The marriage began to collapse early and publicly; various causes may have been behind the failure. On Margaret&#x27;s end, there was her penchant for late-night partying, while on Snowdon&#x27;s part there was his undisguised sexual addiction (&quot;&#x27;If it moves, he&#x27;ll have it&#x27;, was the summing-up of one close friend&quot;). Anne de Courcy, in her 2008 authorised biography, writes &quot;&#x27;[T]o most of the girls who worked in the Pimlico Road studio, there seemed little doubt that Tony was gay&#x27;. To which Tony responds: &#x27;I didn&#x27;t fall in love with boys – but a few men have been in love with me.&#x27;&quot; Snowdon&#x27;s entry in the &quot;Dictionary of National Biography&quot; identifies him as bisexual, a label which he never denied during his life. In his 2009 memoir, &quot;Redeeming Features&quot;, British interior designer Nicky Haslam claimed that he had an affair with Snowdon before the latter&#x27;s marriage to Princess Margaret and that Snowdon had also been the lover of Tom Parr, another leading interior designer. De Courcy reveals a series of affairs with women, including a 20-year relationship with his mistress, journalist Ann Hills, which lasted from 1976 until her suicide in 1996. 

The couple remained married for eighteen years. &quot;They were both pretty strong-willed and accustomed to having their own way, so there were bound to be collisions&quot;, according to de Courcy. His work also consumed a great deal of time. &quot;She expected her husband to be with her more, but one of Tony&#x27;s strongest motivations was work.&quot; The marriage was accompanied by drugs, alcohol, and bizarre behaviour by both parties, such as his leaving lists of &quot;Twenty Reasons Why I Hate You&quot; for the princess to find between the pages of books she read. According to biographer Sarah Bradford, one note read: &quot;You look like a Jewish manicurist and I hate you&quot;. According to biographer de Courcy, &quot;Most people, including the Royal Family, took his side.&quot;

When high society palled for Snowdon, he would escape to a hideaway cottage with his lovers or on overseas photographic assignments. Among Snowdon&#x27;s lovers in the late 1960s was Lady Jacqueline Rufus-Isaacs, daughter of the 3rd Marquess of Reading. In spite of her own affairs, Margaret was said to be particularly upset when hearing about this woman. Margaret and Snowdon separated in 1976, and the marriage ended in divorce in 1978.

In 2004, &quot;The Sunday Telegraph&quot; reported that Snowdon had fathered an illegitimate daughter shortly before marrying Princess Margaret. Polly Fry, born on 28 May 1960 in the third week of Lord Snowdon&#x27;s marriage to Princess Margaret, was brought up as a daughter of Jeremy Fry, inventor and member of the Fry&#x27;s chocolate family, and his wife Camilla. Polly Fry asserted that a DNA test in 2004 proved Snowdon&#x27;s paternity. Jeremy Fry rejected her claim, and Snowdon denied having taken a DNA test. However, four years later, after Fry had died, Snowdon admitted that this account was true.

=== Second marriage ===
After his divorce from Princess Margaret, Lord Snowdon married Lucy Mary Lindsay-Hogg (née Davies), the former wife of Sir Michael Lindsay-Hogg, 5th Baronet, in December 1978. In 1979, they had a daughter, Lady Frances Armstrong-Jones, who became a designer and board member of the Snowdon Trust. In 2006, Lady Frances married Rodolphe von Hofmannsthal (b. 1980), the great-grandson of Hugo von Hofmannsthal.

The Snowdons separated in 2000 after the revelation that in 1998 Snowdon had fathered a son, Jasper William Oliver Cable-Alexander, by Melanie Cable-Alexander, an editor at &quot;Country Life&quot; magazine.

=== Death ===
Lord Snowdon died from kidney failure at his home in Kensington on 13 January 2017, aged 86. His funeral took place on 20 January at St Baglan&#x27;s Church in the remote village of Llanfaglan near Caernarfon. He was buried in the family plot in the churchyard.

== Publications ==
Snowdon authored and curated a book of his own photographs, entitled &quot;Snowdon: A Life in View&quot;. It was edited by his daughter Lady Frances von Hofmannsthal. Graydon Carter wrote the foreword and Patrick Kinmonth wrote the introduction. Tom Ford is listed as a contributor in the book&#x27;s credentials. It was published by Rizzoli in 2017.

Generally, Snowdon&#x27;s publications have been attributed to Antony Armstrong-Jones. Occasionally, the byline includes Earl of Snowdon, and most of the titles at least contain Snowdon in the title.
* &quot;London.&quot; London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1958. (A later edition has .)
*&quot;Private View: The Lively World of British Art&quot; (1965, with text by Bryan Robertson and John Russell)
* &quot;Assignments.&quot; London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1972. .
* &quot;A View of Venice.&quot; [Ivrea]: Olivetti, c1972. 
* &quot;Snowdon: A Photographic Autobiography&quot; (Times Books, 1979)
* &quot;Personal View.&quot; London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1979. .
* &quot;Snowdon Tasmania Essay.&quot; Hobart: Ronald Banks, 1981. . Text by Trevor Wilson.
* &quot;Sittings, 1979–1983.&quot; London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1983. .
* &quot;Israel: A First View.&quot; London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1986. .
* &quot;Stills 1984–1987.&quot; London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1987. .
* &quot;Serendipity: A Light-hearted Look at People, Places and Things.&quot; Brighton: Royal Pavilion, Art Gallery &amp; Museums, 1989. .
* &quot;Pride of the Shires: The Story of the Whitbread Horses&quot;
* &quot;Public Appearances 1987–1991.&quot; London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1991. .
* &quot;Hong Kong: Portraits of Power.&quot; Boston: Little, Brown, 1995. . Text by Evelyn Huang and Lawrence Jeffery.
* &quot;Wild Flowers.&quot; London: Pavilion, 1995. .
* &quot;Snowdon on Stage: With a Personal View of the British Theatre 1954–1996.&quot; London: Pavilion, 1996. .
* &quot;Wild Fruit.&quot; London: Bloomsbury, 1997. . Text by Penny David.
* &quot;London: Sight Unseen.&quot; London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1999. . Text by Gwyn Headley.
* &quot;Photographs by Snowdon: A Retrospective.&quot; London: National Portrait Gallery, 2000. .
* &quot;Snowdon.&quot; London: Chris Beetles Gallery, 2006. .
== Titles, honours and arms ==
=== Peerage ===
Following his wedding, Armstrong-Jones was granted an earldom and introduced to the House of Lords as the Earl of Snowdon on 28 February 1962. The awarding of the earldom was in line with the practice of granting a peerage upon marriage into the royal family. Snowdon was appointed Constable of Caernarfon Castle in 1963; as part of this role, he designed and organised the Investiture of the Prince of Wales in 1969.

He made his maiden speech in the House of Lords in April 1972 on the problems that disabled people suffered in everyday life. One of his last contributions to the Lords was in response to the Queen&#x27;s Speech of 1992.

On 16 November 1999, Lord Snowdon was created Baron Armstrong-Jones, of Nymans in the County of West Sussex. This was a life peerage given to him so that he could keep his seat in the House of Lords after most hereditary peers had been excluded. An offer of a life peerage was made to all hereditary peers of the first creation (those for whom a peerage was originally created, as opposed to those who inherited a peerage from an ancestor) at that time. The government of the day had expected Lord Snowdon to follow the example of members of the royal family and turn down his right to a life peerage. At the time, Labour MP Fraser Kemp said he was &quot;shocked and surprised that someone who achieved their position in the House of Lords by virtue of marriage should accept a seat in the reformed Lords&quot;.

Snowdon retired from the House of Lords on 31 March 2016, having seldom attended nor claimed any expenses for many years.

=== Awards and honours ===
* 7 July 1969: Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order (GCVO)
*1985: Progress Medal of the Royal Photographic Society and an Honorary Fellowship
* 1989: honorary degree of Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) of the University of Bath.

=== Arms ===
== Issue ==
==In popular culture==
Armstrong-Jones is portrayed in the Netflix series &quot;The Crown&quot; in season 2 by Matthew Goode and in season 3 by Ben Daniels.

== See also ==

* List of Cambridge University Boat Race crews
* List of Old Etonians born in the 20th century
* List of photographers
* List of University of Cambridge members

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q335260" start="0" end="58" title="Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon" label="Antony Charles Robert Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="222" end="227" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="241" end="252" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767395" start="266" end="291" title="The Sunday Times Magazine" label="The Sunday Times Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="305" end="334" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Sunday Telegraph Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="439" end="464" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q96414365" start="808" end="815" title="Wedding of Princess Margaret and Antony Armstrong-Jones" label="married"/>
<link wikidata="Q153815" start="819" end="836" title="Princess Margaret" label="Princess Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="852" end="870" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q123370314" start="918" end="931" title="Eaton Terrace" label="Eaton Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q123024" start="935" end="944" title="Belgravia" label="Belgravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="1004" end="1013" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364647" start="1014" end="1036" title="Ronald Armstrong-Jones" label="Ronald Armstrong-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012729" start="1069" end="1080" title="Anne Parsons, Countess of Rosse" label="Anne Messel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277395" start="1088" end="1105" title="Countess of Rosse" label="Countess of Rosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341588" start="1223" end="1249" title="Sir Robert Armstrong-Jones" label="Sir Robert Armstrong-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="1259" end="1271" title="psychiatrist" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q774489" start="1362" end="1388" title="Somerville College, Oxford" label="Somerville College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114613" start="1439" end="1455" title="Sir Owen Roberts" label="Sir Owen Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161581" start="1571" end="1584" title="Oliver Messel" label="Oliver Messel"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="1641" end="1646" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q504621" start="1664" end="1680" title="Edward Linley Sambourne" label="Linley Sambourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q73131" start="1720" end="1733" title="Alfred Messel" label="Alfred Messel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262263" start="1839" end="1855" title="Elizabeth Linley" label="Elizabeth Linley"/>
<link wikidata="Q352725" start="1865" end="1890" title="Richard Brinsley Sheridan" label="Richard Brinsley Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="2045" end="2050" title="polio" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658476" start="2119" end="2144" title="Liverpool Royal Infirmary" label="Liverpool Royal Infirmary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418495" start="2376" end="2400" title="Private schools in the United Kingdom" label="private boarding schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416885" start="2411" end="2426" title="Sandroyd School" label="Sandroyd School"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="2505" end="2517" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835655" start="2555" end="2565" title="Michaelmas term" label="Michaelmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690874" start="2821" end="2829" title="Coxswain (rowing)" label="coxswain"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="2943" end="2966" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146700" start="3001" end="3014" title="Jesus College, Cambridge" label="Jesus College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690874" start="3053" end="3058" title="Coxswain (rowing)" label="coxed"/>
<link wikidata="Q784593" start="3071" end="3085" title="Cambridge University Boat Club" label="Cambridge boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18587789" start="3093" end="3107" title="The Boat Race 1950" label="1950 Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998777" start="3260" end="3282" title="Baron (photographer)" label="Baron the photographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078212" start="3733" end="3739" title="Tatler" label="Tatler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="3936" end="3948" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="3957" end="3974" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748150" start="4051" end="4056" title="Queen (magazine)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207179" start="4106" end="4121" title="Jocelyn Stevens" label="Jocelyn Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q96414365" start="4130" end="4168" title="Wedding of Princess Margaret and Antony Armstrong-Jones" label="marrying Princess Margaret in May 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q117530358" start="4332" end="4364" title="Photographic Information Council" label="Photographic Information Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="4735" end="4742" title="Peerage of the United Kingdom" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q662055" start="4753" end="4768" title="Earl of Snowdon" label="Earl of Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767395" start="4853" end="4878" title="The Sunday Times Magazine" label="The Sunday Times Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="5192" end="5197" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="5211" end="5222" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="5279" end="5308" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Sunday Telegraph Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="5338" end="5354" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="5356" end="5372" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q172653" start="5374" end="5386" title="Maggie Smith" label="Maggie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q230023" start="5388" end="5400" title="Leslie Caron" label="Leslie Caron"/>
<link wikidata="Q242484" start="5402" end="5415" title="Lynn Fontanne" label="Lynn Fontanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="5417" end="5428" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="5430" end="5446" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208685" start="5448" end="5462" title="Rupert Everett" label="Rupert Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q508392" start="5464" end="5477" title="Anthony Blunt" label="Anthony Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q159907" start="5479" end="5492" title="David Hockney" label="David Hockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="5494" end="5518" title="Princess Grace of Monaco" label="Princess Grace of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="5520" end="5544" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q235965" start="5546" end="5562" title="Barbara Cartland" label="Barbara Cartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792973" start="5564" end="5606" title="Raine Spencer, Countess Spencer" label="Raine Spencer (when she was Lady Lewisham)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264735" start="5608" end="5624" title="Desmond Guinness" label="Desmond Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="5649" end="5665" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217495" start="5667" end="5679" title="Iris Murdoch" label="Iris Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q294773" start="5681" end="5693" title="Tom Stoppard" label="Tom Stoppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="5695" end="5711" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="5717" end="5733" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="5808" end="5833" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="5953" end="5956" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="6018" end="6022" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="6295" end="6300" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157719" start="6338" end="6351" title="Greatest Hits (Queen album)" label="Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q15869" start="6387" end="6402" title="Freddie Mercury" label="Freddie Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q743697" start="6477" end="6496" title="The Solo Collection" label="The Solo Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6352575" start="6669" end="6696" title="Yale Center for British Art" label="Yale Center for British Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q969196" start="6906" end="6932" title="Royal Photographic Society" label="Royal Photographic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q894874" start="7088" end="7102" title="Bottega Veneta" label="Bottega Veneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488648" start="7235" end="7246" title="Frank Newby" label="Frank Newby"/>
<link wikidata="Q555640" start="7251" end="7263" title="Cedric Price" label="Cedric Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q270263" start="7303" end="7313" title="London Zoo" label="London Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q63350780" start="7535" end="7565" title="Investiture of Charles, Prince of Wales" label="1969 investiture of his nephew"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="7584" end="7599" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918338" start="7640" end="7659" title="electric wheelchair" label="electric wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677125" start="8303" end="8326" title="Action Medical Research" label="Action Medical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054409" start="8549" end="8587" title="International Year of Disabled Persons" label="International Year of Disabled Persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087430" start="8815" end="8837" title="National Youth Theatre" label="National Youth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951207" start="8843" end="8867" title="Contemporary Art Society" label="Contemporary Art Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022689" start="8883" end="8896" title="Theatre of Wales" label="Welsh Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124343" start="8914" end="8935" title="Civic Trust for Wales" label="Civic Trust for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777393" start="8974" end="8988" title="Theatre Museum" label="Theatre Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753535" start="9013" end="9033" title="Royal College of Art" label="Royal College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q153815" start="9110" end="9127" title="Princess Margaret" label="Princess Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552642" start="9169" end="9181" title="Lindsay-Hogg baronets" label="Lindsay-Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="9383" end="9400" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q207385" start="9627" end="9644" title="Kensington Palace" label="Kensington Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071172" start="9725" end="9731" title="Nymans" label="Nymans"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="9739" end="9755" title="County of Sussex" label="County of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091237" start="9805" end="9831" title="David Armstrong-Jones, 2nd Earl of Snowdon" label="David, 2nd Earl of Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040807" start="9859" end="9869" title="Lady Sarah Chatto" label="Lady Sarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377965" start="10232" end="10246" title="Anne de Courcy" label="Anne de Courcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="10570" end="10602" title="Dictionary of National Biography" label="Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q15486032" start="10762" end="10774" title="Nicky Haslam" label="Nicky Haslam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422123" start="11738" end="11752" title="Sarah Bradford" label="Sarah Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009295" start="12164" end="12187" title="Michael Alfred Rufus Isaacs, 3rd Marquess of Reading" label="3rd Marquess of Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q12741725" start="12391" end="12411" title="The Sunday Telegraph" label="The Sunday Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181361" start="12656" end="12666" title="Jeremy Fry" label="Jeremy Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107024" start="12695" end="12705" title="J. S. Fry &amp;amp; Sons" label="Fry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="12772" end="12780" title="DNA test" label="DNA test"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308337" start="13133" end="13170" title="Michael Lindsay-Hogg" label="Sir Michael Lindsay-Hogg, 5th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q56538692" start="13354" end="13366" title="Hofmannsthal" label="Hofmannsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q51513" start="13400" end="13421" title="Hugo von Hofmannsthal" label="Hugo von Hofmannsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177346" start="13603" end="13615" title="Country Life (magazine)" label="Country Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="13700" end="13710" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323874" start="13780" end="13803" title="St Baglan&amp;#x27;s Church, Llanfaglan" label="St Baglan&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100159" start="13829" end="13839" title="Llanfaglan" label="Llanfaglan"/>
<link wikidata="Q428829" start="13845" end="13855" title="Caernarfon" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598301" start="14096" end="14110" title="Graydon Carter" label="Graydon Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189348" start="14134" end="14150" title="Patrick Kinmonth" label="Patrick Kinmonth"/>
<link wikidata="Q318149" start="14175" end="14183" title="Tom Ford" label="Tom Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327389" start="14263" end="14270" title="RCS MediaGroup" label="Rizzoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16107339" start="16020" end="16032" title="Gwyn Headley" label="Gwyn Headley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="16325" end="16339" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505781" start="16523" end="16532" title="Castellan" label="Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="16536" end="16553" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon Castle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16615" end="16649" title="Investiture of the Prince of Wales#Investiture of Charles" label="Investiture of the Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="16852" end="16871" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Speech" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071172" start="16954" end="16960" title="Nymans" label="Nymans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="17002" end="17011" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="17118" end="17126" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="excluded"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="17497" end="17503" title="Labour Party (United Kingdom)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493623" start="17507" end="17518" title="Fraser Kemp" label="Fraser Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q94050" start="17860" end="17907" title="Royal Victorian Order" label="Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q969196" start="17922" end="17936" title="Progress Medal (RPS)" label="Progress Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q969196" start="17944" end="17970" title="Royal Photographic Society" label="Royal Photographic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="18006" end="18021" title="honorary degree" label="honorary degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="18025" end="18039" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422458" start="18055" end="18073" title="University of Bath" label="University of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="18160" end="18167" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707362" start="18181" end="18190" title="The Crown (TV series)" label="The Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q317337" start="18212" end="18225" title="Matthew Goode" label="Matthew Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q609458" start="18245" end="18256" title="Ben Daniels" label="Ben Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565624" start="18277" end="18321" title="List of Cambridge University Boat Race crews" label="List of Cambridge University Boat Race crews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592817" start="18324" end="18369" title="List of Old Etonians born in the 20th century" label="List of Old Etonians born in the 20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091260" start="18372" end="18393" title="List of photographers" label="List of photographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399899" start="18396" end="18435" title="List of University of Cambridge members" label="List of University of Cambridge members"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266033" wikidata="Q41380" url="?curid=266033" title="Robert I, Duke of Normandy">
<text>Robert I of Normandy (22 June 1000– July 1035), also known as Robert the Magnificent and by other names, was a Norman noble of the House of Normandy who ruled as duke of Normandy from 1027 until his death in 1035. He was the son of Duke Richard II; the brother of Duke Richard III, against whom he unsuccessfully revolted; and the father of Duke William who became the first Norman king of England after winning the Battle of Hastings in 1066. During his reign, Robert quarrelled with the churchincluding his uncle Robert, archbishop of Rouenand meddled in the disorder in Flanders. He was finally reconciled with his uncle and the church, restoring some property and undertaking a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, during which he died.

==Name==
Robert is generally enumerated as of Normandy (), although he is sometimes considered with his ancestor Rollo listed as . He is also known as (), (), and (). The last is sometimes reckoned a misnomer, as he is not called Robert the Devil in surviving contemporary accounts and the name seems to have been a conflation of the historical figure with a separate fictional one during the late Middle Ages.

== Life ==
===Early life===
Robert was the son of Richard II of Normandy and Judith, daughter of Conan I, Duke of Brittany, and Ermengarde-Gerberga of Anjou. He was also grandson of Richard I of Normandy, great-grandson of William I of Normandy and great-great grandson of Rollo, the Viking who founded Normandy. Before he died, Richard II had decided his elder son Richard III would succeed him while his second son Robert would become Count of Hiémois. In August 1026, their father Richard II died and Richard III became duke, but soon afterwards Robert rebelled against him, and was subsequently defeated and forced to swear fealty to Richard.

=== Reign ===
When Richard III died a year later, there were suspicions that Robert had something to do with his death. Although nothing could be proven, Robert had the most to gain. The civil war Robert I had brought against his brother Richard III was still causing instability in the duchy. Private wars raged between neighbouring barons, which resulted in a new aristocracy arising in Normandy during Robert&#x27;s reign.

It was also during this time that many of the lesser nobility left Normandy to seek their fortunes in southern Italy and elsewhere. Soon after assuming the duchy, possibly in revenge for supporting his brother against him, Robert I assembled an army against his uncle, Robert, Archbishop of Rouen and Count of Évreux. A temporary truce allowed his uncle to leave Normandy, and live in exile at the Capetian court.

Robert also attacked another powerful churchman, his cousin Hugo III d&#x27;Ivry, Bishop of Bayeux, banishing him from Normandy for an extended period of time. Robert also seized a number of church properties belonging to the Abbey of Fecamp.

Despite his domestic troubles, Robert decided to intervene in the civil war in Flanders between Baldwin V, Count of Flanders and his father Baldwin IV, whom the younger Baldwin had driven out of Flanders. Baldwin V, supported by king Robert II of France, his father-in-law, was persuaded to make peace with his father in 1030 when Duke Robert promised the elder Baldwin his considerable military support. Robert gave shelter to Henry I of France against his mother, Queen Constance, who favoured her younger son Robert to succeed to the French throne after his father Robert II. For his help Henry I rewarded Robert with the French Vexin.

In the early 1030s, Alan III, Duke of Brittany began expanding his influence from the area of Rennes and appeared to have designs on the area surrounding Mont Saint-Michel. After sacking Dol and repelling Alan&#x27;s attempts to raid Avranches, Robert mounted a major campaign against his cousin Alan III. However, Alan appealed to their uncle, Archbishop Robert of Rouen, who then brokered a peace between Duke Robert and his vassal Alan III. His cousins, the Athelings Edward and Alfred, sons of his aunt Emma of Normandy and Athelred, King of England, had been living at the Norman Court and at one point Robert, on their behalf, attempted to mount an invasion of England but was prevented in doing so, it was said, by unfavourable winds, that scattered and sank much of the fleet. Robert made a safe landing in Guernsey. &quot;Gesta Normannorum Ducum&quot; stated that King Cnut sent envoys to Duke Robert offering to settle half the Kingdom of England on Edward and Alfred. After postponing the naval invasion, he chose to also postpone the decision until after he returned from Jerusalem.

=== Pilgrimage and death ===
Robert&#x27;s attitude towards the Church had changed noticeably certainly since reinstating his uncle&#x27;s position as Archbishop of Rouen. In his attempt to reconcile his differences with the Church, he restored property that he or his vassals had confiscated, and by 1034 had returned all the properties he had earlier taken from the abbey of Fecamp.

After making his son William his heir, he set out on pilgrimage to Jerusalem. According to the &quot;Gesta Normannorum Ducum&quot; he travelled by way of Constantinople, reached Jerusalem, fell seriously ill and died on the return journey at Nicaea on 2 July 1035. His son William, aged about eight, succeeded him.

According to the historian William of Malmesbury, decades later his son William sent a mission to Constantinople and Nicaea, charging it with bringing his father&#x27;s body back to Normandy for burial. Permission was granted but, having travelled as far as Apulia (Italy) on the return journey, the envoys learned that William himself had meanwhile died. They then decided to re-inter Robert&#x27;s body in Italy.

== Family ==
By his mistress or concubine, Herleva of Falaise, he was father of:
* William the Conqueror (c. 1028–1087).

By Herleva or possibly another concubine, he was the father of:
* Adelaide of Normandy, who married firstly, Enguerrand II, Count of Ponthieu. She married secondly, Lambert II, Count of Lens, and thirdly, Odo II of Champagne.

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41380" start="0" end="20" title="Robert I, Duke of Normandy" label="Robert I of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41380" start="62" end="84" title="Robert I, Duke of Normandy" label="Robert the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="111" end="117" title="Norman people" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450700" start="118" end="123" title="French aristocracy" label="noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q516569" start="131" end="148" title="House of Normandy" label="House of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q460244" start="162" end="166" title="duke of Normandy" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="170" end="178" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312613" start="232" end="247" title="Richard II, Duke of Normandy" label="Duke Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q41381" start="264" end="280" title="Richard III, Duke of Normandy" label="Duke Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="341" end="353" title="William the Conqueror" label="Duke William"/>
<link wikidata="Q82850" start="382" end="386" title="List of English monarchs" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="390" end="397" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q83224" start="416" end="434" title="Battle of Hastings" label="Battle of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q795240" start="489" end="495" title="Roman Catholic Church in France" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q36242" start="515" end="521" title="Robert II (Archbishop of Rouen)" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q569265" start="523" end="533" title="archbishop of Rouen" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q569265" start="537" end="542" title="Roman Catholic archdiocese of Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="573" end="581" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118145" start="682" end="692" title="Christian pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="696" end="705" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q273773" start="843" end="848" title="Rollo" label="Rollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436773" start="960" end="976" title="Robert the Devil" label="Robert the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q312613" start="1192" end="1214" title="Richard II, Duke of Normandy" label="Richard II of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733546" start="1219" end="1225" title="Judith of Brittany" label="Judith"/>
<link wikidata="Q456955" start="1239" end="1264" title="Conan I of Rennes" label="Conan I, Duke of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223972" start="1270" end="1298" title="Ermengarde-Gerberga of Anjou" label="Ermengarde-Gerberga of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q333359" start="1324" end="1345" title="Richard I of Normandy" label="Richard I of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q313017" start="1365" end="1386" title="William I of Normandy" label="William I of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273773" start="1415" end="1420" title="Rollo" label="Rollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41381" start="1508" end="1519" title="Richard III, Duke of Normandy" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q736192" start="1588" end="1595" title="Hiémois" label="Hiémois"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="2179" end="2187" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36242" start="2486" end="2492" title="Robert II (Archbishop of Rouen)" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="2955" end="2963" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q333384" start="2972" end="3000" title="Baldwin V, Count of Flanders" label="Baldwin V, Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q378177" start="3016" end="3026" title="Baldwin IV, Count of Flanders" label="Baldwin IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q178918" start="3110" end="3129" title="Robert II of France" label="Robert II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q178908" start="3304" end="3321" title="Henry I of France" label="Henry I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q231068" start="3342" end="3357" title="Constance of Arles" label="Queen Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q346934" start="3388" end="3394" title="Robert I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476089" start="3508" end="3513" title="Vexin" label="Vexin"/>
<link wikidata="Q465203" start="3536" end="3562" title="Alan III, Duke of Brittany" label="Alan III, Duke of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q647" start="3610" end="3616" title="Rennes" label="Rennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q20892" start="3670" end="3687" title="Mont Saint-Michel" label="Mont Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="3987" end="3993" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q35618" start="3998" end="4004" title="Alfred Aetheling" label="Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q40061" start="4023" end="4039" title="Emma of Normandy" label="Emma of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183499" start="4044" end="4069" title="Æthelred the Unready" label="Athelred, King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118471" start="4347" end="4370" title="Gesta Normannorum Ducum" label="Gesta Normannorum Ducum"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="4389" end="4398" title="Cnut the Great" label="King Cnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="5065" end="5074" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="5152" end="5166" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q739037" start="5240" end="5246" title="Nicaea" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q345524" start="5341" end="5362" title="William of Malmesbury" label="William of Malmesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="5572" end="5578" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q259110" start="5773" end="5780" title="Herleva" label="Herleva"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="5813" end="5834" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415527" start="5918" end="5938" title="Adelaide of Normandy" label="Adelaide of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60932" start="5961" end="5993" title="Enguerrand II, Count of Ponthieu" label="Enguerrand II, Count of Ponthieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801414" start="6017" end="6042" title="Lambert II, Count of Lens" label="Lambert II, Count of Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q952865" start="6057" end="6076" title="Odo II of Champagne" label="Odo II of Champagne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266034" wikidata="Q2032565" url="?curid=266034" title="O. G. S. Crawford">
<text>Osbert Guy Stanhope Crawford (28 October 1886 – 28 November 1957) was a British archaeologist who specialised in the archaeology of prehistoric Britain and Sudan. A keen proponent of aerial archaeology, he spent most of his career as the archaeological officer of the Ordnance Survey (OS) and also wrote a range of books on archaeological subjects.

Born in Bombay, British India, to a wealthy middle-class Scottish family, Crawford moved to England as an infant and was raised by his aunts in London and Hampshire. He studied geography at Keble College, Oxford, and worked briefly in that field before devoting himself professionally to archaeology. Employed by the philanthropist Henry Wellcome, Crawford oversaw the excavation of Abu Geili in Sudan before returning to England shortly before the First World War. During the conflict he served in both the London Scottish Regiment and the Royal Flying Corps, where he was involved in ground and aerial reconnaissance along the Western Front. After an injury forced a period of convalescence in England, he returned to the Western Front, where he was captured by the German Army in 1918 and held as a prisoner of war until the end of the conflict.

In 1920, Crawford was employed by the Ordnance Survey, touring Britain to plot the location of archaeological sites, and in the process identified several that were previously unknown. Increasingly interested in aerial archaeology, he used Royal Air Force photographs to identify the extent of the Stonehenge Avenue, excavating it in 1923. With the archaeologist Alexander Keiller, he conducted an aerial survey of many counties in southern England and raised the finances to secure the land around Stonehenge for The National Trust. In 1927, he established the scholarly journal &quot;Antiquity&quot;, which contained contributions from many of Britain&#x27;s most prominent archaeologists, and in 1939 he served as president of The Prehistoric Society. An internationalist and socialist, he came under the influence of Marxism and for a time became a Soviet sympathiser. During the Second World War he worked with the National Buildings Record, photographically documenting Southampton. After retiring in 1946, he refocused his attention on Sudanese archaeology and wrote several further books prior to his death.

Friends and colleagues remembered Crawford as a cantankerous and irritable individual. His contributions to British archaeology, including in &quot;Antiquity&quot; and aerial archaeology, have been widely acclaimed; some have referred to him as one of the great pioneering figures in the field. His photographic archive remained of use to archaeologists into the 21st century. A biography of Crawford by Kitty Hauser was published in 2008.

==Early life==

===Childhood: 1886–1904===
O. G. S. Crawford was born on 28 October 1886 at Breach Candy, a suburb of Bombay in British India. His father, Charles Edward Gordon Crawford, was a civil servant who had been educated at Marlborough College and Wadham College, Oxford before moving to India, where he became a High Court judge at Thane. The Crawford family came from Ayrshire in Scotland, and the child&#x27;s great-uncle was the politician Robert Wigram Crawford. Crawford&#x27;s mother, Alice Luscombe Mackenzie, was the daughter of a Scottish army doctor and his Devonshire wife. Alice died a few days after her son&#x27;s birth, and so when he was three months old, Crawford was sent to England aboard the P&amp;O liner &quot;Bokhara&quot;. During the journey he was entrusted to the care of his paternal aunt Eleanor, an Anglican nun who was the head of the Poona Convent of the Community of St Mary the Virgin.

In Britain, he spent the next seven years with two paternal aunts who lived together near to Portland Place in the Marylebone district of central London. Like his father, they were devout Christians, having been the children of a Scottish clergyman. Under their guardianship Crawford had little contact with other children or with men. Crawford saw his father on the few occasions that the latter visited England, prior to his death in India in 1894. In 1895, Crawford and his two aunts moved to a rural house in East Woodhay, Hampshire. Initially educated at Park House School, which he enjoyed, he was then moved to Marlborough College, his father&#x27;s &quot;alma mater&quot;. He was unhappy there, complaining about bullying and enforced sporting activities, and characterising it as a &quot;detestable house of torture&quot;.

At the school, Crawford was influenced by his housemaster, F. B. Malim, who presided over the archaeological section of the college&#x27;s Natural History Society and encouraged the boy&#x27;s interest in the subject. It is possible that Malim provided something of a father figure for the young Crawford. With the society, Crawford visited such archaeological sites as Stonehenge, West Kennet Long Barrow, Avebury, and Martinsell. It was also through the society that he obtained Ordnance Survey maps of the landscape, allowing him to explore the downs near to his aunts&#x27; home. He began excavation of a barrow near to Bull&#x27;s Copse, thus attracting the attention of the antiquarian Harold Peake, who was then involved in compiling the &quot;Victoria County History of Berkshire&quot;. Peake and his wife lived a Bohemian lifestyle, being vegetarians and social reformers, and their ideas had a strong impact on Crawford. Under the Peakes&#x27; influence, Crawford rejected his religious upbringing in favour of a rationalist world-view based in science. Crawford gained an appreciation from Peake for the understanding of past societies through an examination of the geographical landscape rather than simply through texts or artefacts.

===University and early career: 1905–1914===

Following his schooling, Crawford won a junior scholarship to study at Keble College, Oxford. There he began reading &quot;literae humaniores&quot; in 1905 but – after gaining only a third-class score in his second year exams – he switched courses to study geography in 1908. In 1910 he gained a distinction for his diploma, for which he had conducted a study of the landscape surrounding Andover. Reflecting his interest in the relationship between geography and archaeology, during a walking tour of Ireland he had also written a paper on the geographic distribution of Bronze Age flat bronze axes and beakers in the British Isles. It was presented to the Oxford University Anthropological Society before being published in &quot;The Geographical Journal&quot;. The archaeologist Grahame Clark later related that the paper &quot;marked a milestone in British Archaeology; it was the first real attempt to deduce prehistoric events from the geographical distribution of archaeological objects&quot;. Crawford&#x27;s fellow archaeologist Mark Bowden stated that while archaeological distribution maps had been previously produced, &quot;archaeological data had never before been married with environmental information&quot; in the way that Crawford did in this article.

After Crawford graduated, Professor A. J. Herbertson offered him a job as a junior demonstrator in the university&#x27;s geography department. Crawford agreed, and served in the teaching position over the ensuing year. Through Herbertson, Crawford was introduced to the geographer Patrick Geddes. Crawford then decided to focus his attentions on archaeology rather than geography even though few professional positions in the field existed in Britain at the time. Looking elsewhere for archaeological employment, he unsuccessfully applied for a Craven Fellowship and for a post at Bombay Museum.

At Herbertson&#x27;s recommendation, in 1913 Crawford gained employment as an assistant on William Scoresby Routledge and Katherine Routledge&#x27;s expedition to Easter Island. The expedition had the intention of learning more about the island&#x27;s first inhabitants and its Moai statues. After the team departed from Britain aboard the schooner &quot;Mana&quot;, Crawford began quarrelling with the Routledges. Informing them that they had demonstrated an &quot;extraordinary lack of courtesy&quot; and &quot;appalling stinginess&quot; toward both him and other crew members, he left the ship at Cape Verde and returned to Britain. He then gained employment from the wealthy philanthropist Henry Wellcome, who sent him to Egypt to gain further training in archaeological excavation from G. A. Reisner. Wellcome then sent him to Sudan, where Crawford was given charge of the excavation of the Meroitic site at Abu Geili, remaining there from January to June 1914. On his return to England—where he was planning on sorting through the artefacts found in Sudan—he and his friend Earnest Hooton began excavation of a long barrow on Wexcombe Down in Wiltshire.

===First World War: 1914–1918===

It was while Crawford was engaged in this excavation that the United Kingdom entered the First World War. At Peake&#x27;s encouragement, Crawford enlisted in the British Army, joining the London Scottish Regiment and was sent to reinforce the First Battalion on the Western Front. The battalion marched to Béthune to relieve the British line, fighting at Givenchy. Crawford was afflicted with influenza and malaria, and in February he was invalided back to England and stationed at Birmingham for his recuperation. After he recovered, he applied to join the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) but was deemed too heavy. He was commissioned in May 1915. In July 1915 he joined the Royal Berkshire Regiment as part of the Third Army, being stationed at Beauval and then St. Pol. Using his existing skills, he served as the regiment&#x27;s maps officer, and was responsible for mapping the areas around the front line, including German Army positions. He also took photographs which were used for British propaganda purposes, and in 1916 he guided the writer H. G. Wells around the trenches on the latter&#x27;s visit to the Front.

In January 1917, Crawford successfully applied to join the RFC as an observer with 23 Squadron RFC, which flew over enemy lines to make observations and draw maps. On his maiden flight, the German Army opened fire on his aircraft, and his right foot was pierced by bullets and badly injured. To recuperate, he spent time at various hospitals in France and England before being sent to the RFC Auxiliary Hospital at the Heligan estate in Cornwall. During this time in England he spent a weekend at Wells&#x27;s home in Dunmow, Essex, embracing the latter&#x27;s desire for a united world government and the idea that writing about global history was a contribution to that cause. While at Heligan, Crawford began work on a book, &quot;Man and his Past&quot;, in which he examined a broad sweep of human history from an archaeological and geographical perspective.

In September 1917, Crawford—who had been promoted to the position of squadron intelligence officer—joined 48 Squadron RFC, for which he again took aerial photographs during reconnaissance missions. While on one flight in February 1918, Crawford&#x27;s aircraft was shot at and forced to land in German-held territory; he and his pilot were taken as prisoners of war. He was initially imprisoned at Landshut in Bavaria, from where he tried to escape by swimming down the River Isar; the river current proved too strong and he was soon recaptured. He was then transferred to Holzminden prisoner-of-war camp, where he was aware of an escape plan involving tunnelling out of the camp, but did not take part. Instead he spent much of his time working on &quot;Man and his Past&quot; and reading works by Wells, Carl Jung, and Samuel Butler. Crawford remained in the camp for seven months, until the declaration of armistice, at which he returned to Britain and was demobilised.

==Career: 1920–1945==

===Ordnance Survey and &quot;Antiquity&quot;===

Back in England, Crawford finished writing &quot;Man and his Past&quot;, which was published by Oxford University Press in 1921. According to the historian of archaeology Adam Stout, the book was &quot;a manifesto, a rallying-cry for a new generation of archaeologists who shared in the idealism and the faith in the potential of Progress&quot;. Bowden suggested that it could be seen as a &quot;manifesto for geoarchaeology, environmental archaeology and economic archaeology. The unifying theme is that all these topics should be approached through the compilation of maps&quot;. In discussing geographical methods for delineating &quot;cultures&quot;, the work fit within the theoretical trend of culture-historical archaeology, but did not attempt to apply the concept of culture in a systematic fashion.

Crawford also returned to field work, carrying out archaeological excavation for the Cambrian Archaeological Association in both Wiltshire and Wales. In mid-1920, he excavated at Roundwood, Hampshire and on the Isle of Wight for Sir William Portal.

His expertise resulted in his being invited by Charles Close, the Director-General of the Ordnance Survey (OS), to join that organisation as their first archaeological officer. Accepting the position, Crawford moved to Southampton and began work at the project in October 1920. His arrival at the OS generated some resentment, with co-workers often seeing his post as superfluous and deeming archaeology to be unimportant. His job entailed correcting and updating information about archaeological monuments as the OS maps were revised, and involved him undertaking much fieldwork, travelling across the British landscape to check the location of previously recorded sites and discover new ones. He began in Gloucestershire in late 1920, visiting 208 sites around the Cotswolds and adding 81 previously unknown barrows to the map. Based on his research in this region, in 1925 he published his book &quot;Long Barrows and the Stone Circles of the Cotswolds and the Welsh Marches&quot;.

As part of his job, he travelled around Britain, from Scotland in the north to the Scilly Isles in the south, often conducting his fieldwork by bicycle. At archaeological sites he took photographs and stored them in his archive, and he also obtained aerial photographs of archaeological sites taken by the Royal Air Force.
In this he was aided by regional antiquarian societies and by his correspondents, whom he called his &quot;ferrets&quot;. In 1921, the Ordnance Survey published Crawford&#x27;s work, &quot;Notes on Archaeology for Guidance in the Field&quot;, in which he explained how amateur archaeologists could identify traces of old monuments, roads, and agricultural activity in the landscape. He also began producing &quot;period maps&quot; in which archaeological sites were marked; the first of these was on Roman Britain, and featured Roman roads and settlements. First published in 1924, it soon sold out, resulting in a second edition in 1928. He followed this with a range of further maps in the 1930s: &quot;England in the Seventeenth Century&quot;, &quot;Celtic Earthworks of Salisbury Plain&quot;, &quot;Neolithic Wessex&quot;, and &quot;Britain in the Dark Ages&quot;. Although his position had initially been precarious, in 1926 it was made permanent, despite the reluctance of the Treasury, which financed the OS at the time. By 1938, he had been able to persuade the OS to employ an assistant, W. F. Grimes, to aid him in his work.

Crawford became particularly interested in the new technique of aerial archaeology, claiming that this new process was to archaeology what the telescope was to astronomy. His association with it was honoured in Wells&#x27; 1939 novel &quot;The Shape of Things to Come&quot;, which names a survey aeroplane that discovers an ancient archaeological device &quot;Crawford&quot;. He produced two OS leaflets containing various aerial photographs, printed in 1924 and 1929 respectively. Through these and other works he was keen to promote aerial archaeology, coming to be firmly identified with the technique. Crawford did not take these photographs himself, but collected them from RAF files and, in the 1930s, from flyers such as George Allen and Gilbert Insall.

Using RAF aerial photographs, Crawford determined the length of the Avenue at Stonehenge before embarking on an excavation of the site with A. D. Passmore in late 1923. This project attracted press attention, resulting in Crawford being contacted by the marmalade magnate and archaeologist Alexander Keiller. Keiller invited Crawford to join him in an aerial survey, financed by Keiller himself, in which they flew over Berkshire, Dorset, Hampshire, Somerset, and Wiltshire in 1924, taking photographs of archaeological traces in the landscape. Many of these images were published in Crawford and Keiller&#x27;s &quot;Wessex from the Air&quot; in 1928. In 1927 Crawford and Keiller helped raise the finances to buy the land around Stonehenge and present it to The National Trust to prevent it from being damaged by further agricultural or urban development. Previously, in 1923, Crawford had assisted Keiller in campaigning to prevent a radio mast being erected on the archaeologically significant Windmill Hill in Wiltshire, with Keiller later purchasing the hill and the surrounding Avebury area. Despite this working relationship, the two never became friends, perhaps a result of their highly divergent opinions and interests outside of archaeology.

In 1927, Crawford founded &quot;Antiquity; A Quarterly Review of Archaeology&quot;, a quarterly journal designed to bring together the research of archaeologists working across the world to supplement the variety of regional antiquarian periodicals that were then available. In particular, Crawford saw &quot;Antiquity&quot; as a rival to the &quot;Antiquaries Journal&quot; published by the Society of Antiquaries. Crawford was contemptuous of the Society, disliking their neglect of prehistory and believing that they did little valuable research. Although designed to have an international scope, &quot;Antiquity&quot; exhibited a clear bias towards the archaeology of Britain, with its release coinciding with the blossoming of British archaeology as a field of study. It contained contributions from a variety of young archaeologists who came to dominate the field of British archaeology, among them V. Gordon Childe, Grahame Clark, Cyril Fox, Christopher Hawkes, T. D. Kendrick, Stuart Piggott, and Mortimer Wheeler. They shared Crawford&#x27;s desire to professionalise the field, thereby taking it away from the domination of antiquarian hobbyists and in a more scientific direction. To some of these individuals, Crawford himself was affectionately known as &quot;Ogs&quot; or &quot;Uncle Ogs&quot;

The journal proved influential from the start. Although not initially using a process of peer review, Crawford asked his friends to read through submissions that he was unsure about. As well as seeking to shape and define the discipline, &quot;Antiquity&quot; sought to spread news of archaeological discoveries to a wider public, thereby being more accessible than pre-existing scholarly journals. This resulted in Crawford receiving letters from proponents of various pseudo-archaeological ideas, such as the ley line theory of Alfred Watkins; he filed these letters under a section of his archive titled &quot;Crankeries&quot; and was annoyed that educated people believed such ideas when they were demonstrably incorrect. He refused to publish an advert in &quot;Antiquity&quot; for &quot;The Old Straight Track&quot; by Watkins, who became very bitter towards him. In 1938, Crawford served as president of the Prehistoric Society; in this position he instigated a series of excavations, inviting the German archaeologist Gerhard Bersu—persecuted in Germany by the Nazi authorities—to move to England to oversee the excavation of Little Woodbury.

===Foreign visits and Marxism===

Crawford enjoyed foreign travel. In 1928 the OS sent him to the Middle East to collect aerial photographs that had been produced during the First World War and which were stored at Baghdad, Amman, and Heliopolis. In mid-1931 he visited Germany and Austria, furthering his interest in photography through the purchase of a Voigtländer. He later visited Italy with the intent of examining the possibility of producing OS maps pinpointing the country&#x27;s archaeological sites; in November 1932 he met with the Italian leader Benito Mussolini, who was interested in Crawford&#x27;s ideas about creating an OS map of archaeological sites in Rome. This was part of a wider project to produce a series of maps covering the entirety of the Roman Empire, for which Crawford visited various parts of Europe during the late 1920s and 1930s. Holiday destinations included Germany, Austria, Romania, Corsica, Malta, Algeria, and Tunisia, and in 1936 he purchased a plot of land in Cyprus on which he had a house built. During these vacations, he visited archaeological sites and met with local archaeologists, encouraging them to contribute articles to &quot;Antiquity&quot;.

Crawford believed that society would progress with the growth of internationalism and the increased application of science. Politically, he had moved toward socialism under the influence of Childe, who had become a close friend. He expressed the view that socialism was &quot;the natural corollary of science in the regulation of human affairs&quot;. He attempted to incorporate Marxist ideas into his archaeological interpretations, as a result producing articles such as &quot;The Dialectical Process in the History of Science&quot;, which was published in &quot;The Sociological Review&quot;. He became enthusiastic about the Soviet Union, a state governed by the Marxist Communist Party, viewing it as the forerunner of a future world state.

With his friend Neil Hunter, he travelled to the Soviet Union in May 1932, sailing to Leningrad aboard the &quot;Smolny&quot;. Once there, they followed a prescribed tourist itinerary, visiting Moscow, Nizhni Novgorod, Stalingrad, Rostov-on-Don, Tiflis, Armenia, Batum, and Sukhum. Crawford admired what he perceived as the progress that the Soviet Union had made since the fall of the Tsarist regime, the increasingly classless and gender-equal status of its population, and the respect accorded to scientists in planning its societal development. He described his holiday with glowing praise in a book, &quot;A Tour of Bolshevy&quot;, stating that he did so to &quot;hasten the downfall of capitalism&quot; while at the same time making &quot;as much money as possible&quot; out of capitalists. The book was rejected by the publisher Victor Gollancz, after which Crawford decided not to approach other publishers, instead giving typed copies of the work to his friends. Although he became involved with the Friends of the Soviet Union and wrote several articles for the &quot;Daily Worker&quot; newspaper, he never joined the Communist Party of Great Britain, nor did he become involved in organised politics at all, perhaps fearing that to do so would jeopardise his employment in the civil service.

In Britain, he photographed sites associated with the prominent Marxists Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin. He also photographed the signs erected by landowners and religious groups, believing that in doing so he was documenting the traces of capitalist society before they would be swept away by socialism. Both in Britain and on a visit to Germany he photographed pro-fascist and anti-fascist propaganda and graffiti. Like many leftists at the time, he believed that fascism was a temporary, extreme expression of capitalist society that would soon be overcome by socialism. He nevertheless expressed admiration for the German archaeological establishment under the Nazi government, highlighting that the British state lagged far behind in terms of funding excavations and encouraging the study of archaeology in universities; he refrained from commenting on the political agenda that the Nazis had in promoting archaeology.

Despite his socialist and pro-Soviet beliefs, Crawford believed in collaborating with all foreign archaeologists, regardless of political or ideological differences. In early 1938, he lectured on aerial archaeology at the German Air Ministry; the Ministry published his lecture as &quot;Luftbild und Vorgeschichte&quot;, and Crawford was frustrated that the British government did not publish his work with the same enthusiasm. From there, he visited Vienna to meet with his friend, the archaeologist Oswald Menghin; Menghin took Crawford to an event celebrating the Anschluss, at which he met the prominent Nazi Josef Bürckel. Shortly after, he holidayed in Schleswig-Holstein, where German archaeologists took him to see the Danevirke.

In 1939, Crawford was involved in photographing the excavation of the Sutton Hoo Anglo-Saxon ship burial in Suffolk. He was present on the site from 24 to 29 July 1939, and took 124 photographs. Several of his photographs are used in the British Museum&#x27;s display of Sutton Hoo artefacts, but he was not originally credited; this may be due to the lack of recognition for certain types of archaeological labour, such as photography. His photographs recorded the excavation process as well artefacts recovered during the dig, such as the Anastasius Dish. A photographic record of an archaeological excavation was novel at the time.

In the late 1930s he began work on a book titled &quot;Bloody Old Britain&quot;, which he described as &quot;an attempt to apply archaeological methods to the study of contemporary society&quot; and in which he was heavily critical of his homeland. It examined 1930s Britain through its material culture, with Crawford reaching the judgement that it was a society in which appearances were given greater importance than value, with clothing, for instance, emphasising bourgeois respectability over comfort. He attributed much of this to the impact of capitalism and consumerism on British culture. The work fitted within an established genre of 1930s publications which lamented the state of British society, in particular the quality of its food and manufactured products as well as its increasing suburbanisation. By the outbreak of the Second World War the work had become less marketable due to its unpatriotic nature, and when in 1943 Crawford proposed it to Methuen Publishing they turned it down; he gave copies to a few friends, but never published it.

===Second World War===

In anticipation of the Second World War, Crawford expressed the view that he would &quot;remain neutral&quot; and not take sides, not because he favoured fascism over liberal democracy but because he saw both as repugnant forms of capitalist society which would ultimately be swept away by a socialist revolution; in his words the war would be &quot;a clash of imperialisms, a gangsters&#x27; feud&quot;. After war broke out, he decided that in the event of a German invasion of Britain he would destroy all of his leftist literature lest he be persecuted for possessing it.

In November 1940, the German Luftwaffe began bombing Southampton, where the OS offices were located. Crawford removed some of the old OS maps and stored them in the garage of his house at Nursling, while also unsuccessfully urging the Director-General to remove the OS&#x27; archive of books, documents, maps and photographs to a secure location. Subsequently, the OS headquarters were destroyed in the bombing, resulting in the loss of most of their archive. The refusal of the OS administration to take his warnings seriously infuriated Crawford, exacerbating his anger about the civil service&#x27;s red tape and bureaucracy. In his words, &quot;trying to get a move on in the Civil Service was like trying to swim in a lake of glue&quot;. Resigning his membership in various British societies, he unsuccessfully tried to find employment abroad.

With little for an archaeology officer to do at the OS in wartime, in mid-1941 Crawford was seconded to the Royal Commission on the Historical Monuments of England &quot;for special duties during wartime&quot;. They assigned him to carry out a project of photographic documentation in Southampton for the National Buildings Record, producing images of many old buildings or architectural features that were threatened by the Luftwaffe&#x27;s bombing campaign. He appreciated the value of this work, taking 5,000 photographs over the course of the war. In 1944, the Council for British Archaeology was founded, and while Crawford was invited to serve on its first council, he declined the offer, being lukewarm about the project.

==Later life: 1946–1957==

In 1946, at the earliest possible opportunity, Crawford resigned his post at the OS, where he was replaced by Charles Philips. He remained in the Southampton area and retained his interest in the city&#x27;s architecture, in particular that of the Middle Ages. In 1946 he was a founding member of a lobby group, Friends of Old Southampton, which sought to protect the city&#x27;s historic architecture from destruction amid post-war development. During the post-war period he also came to be preoccupied and terrified by the prospect of a nuclear war, urging archaeological authorities to make copies of all their information and disperse it in different locations to ensure that knowledge survived any forthcoming Third World War. Retaining his left-wing interests, in 1945 and 1946 he had some involvement with the Labour Party, although elsewhere he mocked the &quot;ignorant&quot; who thought that Labour &quot;genuinely&quot; represented socialism. In the latter part of the 1940s he became increasingly disillusioned with the Soviet Union after reading Arthur Koestler&#x27;s &quot;Darkness at Noon&quot;, a book about Joseph Stalin&#x27;s Great Purge and Moscow show trials, as well as learning of how Soviet scientists who did not support the ideas of Trofim Lysenko had been persecuted. In 1950—after reading the memoir of Margarete Buber-Neumann—he declared himself to be &quot;fanatically anti-Soviet [and] anti-communist&quot;.

In 1949, Crawford was elected a Fellow of the British Academy, and in 1950 he became a Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire. In 1952 he was made an honorary Doctor of Letters by the University of Cambridge for his contributions to aerial archaeology.

Crawford returned his attention to Sudanese archaeology, describing Sudan as &quot;an escape-land of the mind at a time when the island of Britain was an austere prison&quot;. At the invitation of the Sudanese government, he visited the country on an archaeological reconnaissance trip in January 1950, before visiting the Middle Nile in 1951. At Nursling, he wrote a book on the northern Sudanese Funj Sultanate of Sennar, which appeared in the same year as his long-delayed report on the Abu Geili excavation, co-written with Frank Addison. He followed this with the 1953 book &quot;Castles and Churches in the Middle Nile Region&quot;. Another of Crawford&#x27;s book projects in this period was a short history of Nursling, as well as an introductory guide to landscape studies, &quot;Archaeology in the Field&quot;, published in 1953. In 1955 he published his autobiography, &quot;Said and Done&quot;, which the archaeologist Glyn Daniel and the historian Mark Pottle—the authors of Crawford&#x27;s entry in the &quot;Dictionary of National Biography&quot;—described as &quot;a vivacious and amusing autobiography in which his character comes clearly through&quot;.

After the discovery of prehistoric rock art on Stonehenge in 1953, Crawford decided to examine the engravings on the megalithic monuments in Brittany. Inspired by this subject, in 1957 he published &quot;The Eye Goddess&quot;. In this book he argued that many of the abstract designs featured in prehistoric rock art were representations of eyes. He further argued that they provided evidence for a religion devoted to a mother goddess which had existed across the Old World from the Palaeolithic through to the period of Christianisation. That same decade also witnessed similar ideas regarding a Neolithic religion focused around a great goddess being espoused in the works of Childe and Daniel; the historian Ronald Hutton later observed that &quot;whether or not there was ever an &#x27;Age of the Goddess&#x27; in Neolithic Europe, there certainly was one among European intellectuals in the mid twentieth century&quot;. Crawford&#x27;s book was not well received within academia.

Crawford was also interested in cats, and learned how to mimic cat noises, performing these on a BBC broadcast, &quot;The Language of Cats&quot;, which proved popular and led to a range of fan letters. A publisher in the United States invited him to write a book on the subject, but Crawford never completed it. In the mid-1950s, Crawford began to take an interest in astronomy and cosmological ideas about the origin of the universe, favouring Fred Hoyle&#x27;s steady state theory about an eternal universe with no beginning or end.

In 1951, an edited volume, &quot;Aspects of Archaeology in Britain and Beyond: Essays Presented to O. G. S. Crawford&quot;, was published, having been edited by Grimes and brought out to mark Crawford&#x27;s 65th birthday. Reviewing the anthology for &quot;Antiquity&quot;, J. v. d. Waals and R. J. Forbes described it as &quot;an exquisite birthday present&quot;. Many of Crawford&#x27;s associates worried about him, aware that he lived alone at his cottage in Nursling—with only the company of his elderly housekeeper and cats—and that he lacked either a car or telephone. It was there that he died in his sleep on the night of 28–29 November 1957. He had arranged for some of his letters and books to be destroyed, while others were to be sent to the Bodleian Library, with the proviso that some of them would not be opened until the year 2000. His body was buried in the church graveyard at Nursling. In accordance with his instructions, the title &quot;Editor of &quot;Antiquity&quot;&quot; was inscribed on his gravestone, reflecting his desire to be remembered primarily as an archaeologist. On Crawford&#x27;s death, the editorship of &quot;Antiquity&quot; was taken on by Daniel.

==Personality==

Crawford&#x27;s socialist beliefs were known to his colleagues and associates, as was his antipathy toward religion. While he became an atheist during his time at Marlborough College, it is not known exactly when he embraced socialism. He placed a strong emphasis on personal self-sufficiency, and openly expressed contempt for those who required social interaction for their own happiness. His adult life was a solitary one, with no family and no human dependents. His sexual orientation remains unknown, with Bowden noting that Crawford&#x27;s interactions with women were &quot;cordial but not significant&quot;. He was fond of cats, and kept several as pets, also rearing pigs for food as well as growing vegetables in his garden at Nursing. A heavy smoker, he was known for rolling his own cigarettes.

Crawford was often irritable and some colleagues found him exasperating to work with. He was known for his lack of patience, and when angry or frustrated was known to fling his hat to the floor in a gesture of rage. His biographer Kitty Hauser noted that &quot;apparently trifling events left an indelible mark on him&quot;, for he would remember a perceived slight for decades. Bowden expressed the view that while Crawford &quot;had a quick temper, which he strove to control ... he was essentially a friendly man&quot;, adding that he could be &quot;clubbable, hospitable and kind&quot;.

Jonathan Glancey referred to Crawford as &quot;a compelling if decidedly cantankerous anti-hero&quot; and an &quot;essentially Victorian eccentric&quot;. Hauser characterised him as &quot;a very British combination of a snob and a rebel&quot;, also noting that he was &quot;no great intellectual&quot;. Similarly, Clark expressed the view that &quot;Crawford&#x27;s achievements&quot; stemmed from his &quot;moral integrity and singleness of mind&quot; rather than &quot;any outstanding intellectual brilliance&quot;. The journalist Neal Ascherson described Crawford as &quot;not conventionally intellectual&quot;. Ascherson added that Crawford was &quot;withdrawn, generally ill at ease with other members of the human species except on paper, and suspicious of personal celebrity&quot;, in this way contrasting Crawford with his &quot;gregarious&quot; contemporaries Wheeler and Daniel.

Daniel characterised Crawford as having a &quot;messianic desire&quot; to promote archaeology &quot;to the people of the world&quot;. He was opinionated and dogmatic and expressed disdain for those who viewed the past in a different manner to himself. Piggott noted that Crawford was unable to sympathise with the perspectives of those studying past societies through a discipline other than archaeology, such as history or art history, and that he could not sympathise with &quot;anyone not as passionately concerned as himself in field antiquities&quot;. For example, in one of his publications, Crawford dismissed historians as being &quot;bookish&quot; and &quot;clean-booted&quot;. The archaeologist Jacquetta Hawkes commented that in Crawford&#x27;s editorials for &quot;Antiquity&quot;, he directed &quot;righteous indignation&quot; toward &quot;everybody from the State, Dominion and Colonial Governments, Universities and Museums, to tardy reviewers and careless proof-correctors&quot;.

Wheeler—who considered Crawford to be &quot;one of [his] closest friends&quot;—claimed that the latter was &quot;an outspoken and uncompromising opponent&quot; and a man who had a &quot;boyish glee in calling the bluff of convention&quot;. He added that Crawford exhibited the &quot;divine impatience of the pioneer&quot; and that he had an &quot;inability to work in harness. If he joined a committee or a sodality, he did so only to resign at the first opportunity.&quot; Piggott described Crawford as a mentor who &quot;was encouraging, helpful, and unconventional: his racy outspoken criticism of what then passed for the archaeological Establishment was music to a schoolboy&#x27;s ear&quot;.

==Reception and legacy==

Crawford was much respected by his peers. According to Hauser, at the time of his death Crawford had &quot;acquired an almost mythical status among British archaeologists as the uncompromising – if eccentric – progenitor of them all&quot;.
In 1999, the archaeologist John Charlton referred to Crawford as &quot;one of the pioneers of British archaeology this century&quot;, while nine years later Ascherson described him as &quot;beyond question one of the great figures of the &#x27;modern&#x27; generation which transformed British archaeological practice and its institutions between 1918 and – say – 1955&quot;. Ascherson noted that Crawford&#x27;s contributions to archaeology had little to do with archaeological theory and more to do with &quot;the institutions and tools ... which he bequeathed to his profession&quot;, including &quot;Antiquity&quot;. Crawford devoted little time to interpreting the archaeological record, and when he did so usually embraced functionalist interpretations, believing that people in traditional societies devoted almost all of their time to survival rather than behaving according to religious or symbolic concepts; in this he was typical of his time and was influenced by Marxist materialism.

Crawford was recognised for his contributions to bringing archaeology to a wide sector of the British public. The archaeologist Caroline Malone stated that many viewed Crawford as &quot;an &#x27;amateur&#x27;s&#x27; archaeologist, providing the means to publish and comment outside the restrictions of local journals and to offer a vision of a new and universal discipline&quot;. Clark expressed the view that Crawford &quot;always hankered to restore the flesh and blood and to make the past a reality to the living generation&quot;, and in doing so helped to attract a greater public audience for British archaeology than many of his colleagues. Wheeler remarked that &quot;he was our greatest archaeological publicist; he taught the world about scholarship, and scholars about one another&quot;.
Commenting on Crawford&#x27;s editorship of &quot;Antiquity&quot;, Hawkes expressed the view that his &quot;skill in steering between over-simplification and over-specialization has enabled the Magazine to succeed admirably in its role as go-between for experts and public&quot;.

Crawford&#x27;s system of documenting archaeological sites in the OS&#x27; Archaeological Record provided the blueprint on which both the later National Archaeological Records in England, Scotland, and Wales, and the local sites and monuments records were based.
In the 21st century, Crawford&#x27;s photographic archive stored at Oxford University&#x27;s Institute of Archaeology was still consulted by archaeologists seeking to view how various sites appeared during the first half of the 20th century.
In 2008, Kitty Hauser&#x27;s biography, &quot;Bloody Old Britain&quot;, was published. Reviewing her work for &quot;The Guardian&quot;, Glancey described it as &quot;a truly fascinating and unexpected book&quot;. Writing in &quot;Public Archaeology&quot;, Ascherson characterised it as &quot;full of clever perception and sympathetic insight&quot; but was critical of its lack of references and &quot;occasional mistakes of fact&quot;.

==Bibliography==

An anonymously assembled list of Crawford&#x27;s publications up to 1948 was published in his 1951 festschrift.

==References==

===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
*Photo of O.G.S. Crawford </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2032565" start="0" end="28" title="O. G. S. Crawford" label="Osbert Guy Stanhope Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="80" end="93" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q435405" start="132" end="151" title="prehistoric Britain" label="prehistoric Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051560" start="183" end="201" title="aerial archaeology" label="aerial archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q548721" start="268" end="283" title="Ordnance Survey" label="Ordnance Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="358" end="364" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="366" end="379" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="407" end="415" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="505" end="514" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="527" end="536" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276338" start="540" end="561" title="Keble College, Oxford" label="Keble College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133145" start="682" end="696" title="Henry Wellcome" label="Henry Wellcome"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="719" end="729" title="Excavation (archaeology)" label="excavation"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="799" end="814" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670760" start="858" end="882" title="London Scottish Regiment" label="London Scottish Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="891" end="909" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="979" end="992" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="1152" end="1167" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1440" end="1455" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443202" start="1498" end="1515" title="Stonehenge Avenue" label="Stonehenge Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719285" start="1563" end="1580" title="Alexander Keiller (archaeologist)" label="Alexander Keiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="1699" end="1709" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="1714" end="1732" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="The National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775205" start="1786" end="1795" title="Antiquity (journal)" label="Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164233" start="1930" end="1953" title="The Prehistoric Society" label="The Prehistoric Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q695838" start="1958" end="1974" title="Internationalism (politics)" label="internationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1979" end="1988" title="socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="2021" end="2028" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2053" end="2059" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2084" end="2100" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732227" start="2120" end="2145" title="Historic England Archive" label="National Buildings Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="2176" end="2187" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959100" start="2850" end="2862" title="Breach Candy" label="Breach Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="2876" end="2882" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="2886" end="2899" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="2951" end="2964" title="civil servant" label="civil servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902016" start="2990" end="3009" title="Marlborough College" label="Marlborough College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537765" start="3014" end="3036" title="Wadham College, Oxford" label="Wadham College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755201" start="3079" end="3095" title="High Court judge (England and Wales)" label="High Court judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q207749" start="3099" end="3104" title="Thane" label="Thane"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="3136" end="3144" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351045" start="3210" end="3232" title="Robert Wigram Crawford" label="Robert Wigram Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491836" start="3479" end="3486" title="P&amp;amp;O" label="P&amp;amp;O"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="3595" end="3603" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="3604" end="3607" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="3632" end="3637" title="Pune" label="Poona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155016" start="3653" end="3684" title="Community of St Mary the Virgin" label="Community of St Mary the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231999" start="3780" end="3794" title="Portland Place" label="Portland Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q123634" start="3802" end="3812" title="Marylebone" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="3825" end="3839" title="central London" label="central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329708" start="4200" end="4212" title="East Woodhay" label="East Woodhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="4214" end="4223" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137798" start="4247" end="4264" title="Park House School" label="Park House School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178634" start="4788" end="4801" title="father figure" label="father figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="4890" end="4900" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q541312" start="4902" end="4925" title="West Kennet Long Barrow" label="West Kennet Long Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q661855" start="4927" end="4934" title="Avebury" label="Avebury"/>
<link wikidata="Q548721" start="5001" end="5016" title="Ordnance Survey" label="Ordnance Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="5113" end="5123" title="Excavation (archaeology)" label="excavation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="5129" end="5135" title="tumulus" label="barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="5200" end="5211" title="antiquarianism" label="antiquarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130051" start="5212" end="5224" title="Harold Peake" label="Harold Peake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926668" start="5271" end="5307" title="Victoria County History" label="Victoria County History of Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="5342" end="5350" title="Bohemianism" label="Bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="5368" end="5379" title="vegetarianism" label="vegetarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="5543" end="5554" title="Rationalism" label="rationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276338" start="5885" end="5906" title="Keble College, Oxford" label="Keble College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647565" start="5937" end="5955" title="literae humaniores" label="literae humaniores"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5997" end="6008" title="British undergraduate degree classification#Third Class honours" label="third-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="6071" end="6080" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="6110" end="6121" title="Latin honors" label="distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q492805" start="6203" end="6210" title="Andover, Hampshire" label="Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096987" start="6386" end="6396" title="Bronze Age Britain" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q470867" start="6418" end="6425" title="Beaker culture" label="beakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100084" start="6546" end="6570" title="The Geographical Journal" label="The Geographical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542008" start="6596" end="6609" title="Grahame Clark" label="Grahame Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q381848" start="7366" end="7380" title="Patrick Geddes" label="Patrick Geddes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945460" start="7773" end="7799" title="William Scoresby Routledge" label="William Scoresby Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376534" start="7804" end="7823" title="Katherine Routledge" label="Katherine Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746523" start="7831" end="7858" title="Mana Expedition to Easter Island" label="expedition to Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q20350" start="7960" end="7964" title="Moai" label="Moai"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="8022" end="8030" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="8282" end="8292" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133145" start="8376" end="8390" title="Henry Wellcome" label="Henry Wellcome"/>
<link wikidata="Q502932" start="8473" end="8486" title="G. A. Reisner" label="G. A. Reisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780" start="8578" end="8586" title="Meroë" label="Meroitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q517619" start="8762" end="8776" title="Earnest Hooton" label="Earnest Hooton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652352" start="8799" end="8810" title="long barrow" label="long barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q521269" start="8814" end="8827" title="Grafton, Wiltshire" label="Wexcombe Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8966" end="8981" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="9039" end="9051" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670760" start="9065" end="9089" title="London Scottish Regiment" label="London Scottish Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16266987" start="9120" end="9135" title="First Battalion" label="First Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="9143" end="9156" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q207145" start="9183" end="9190" title="Béthune" label="Béthune"/>
<link wikidata="Q366425" start="9232" end="9240" title="Givenchy-en-Gohelle" label="Givenchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="9270" end="9279" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="9284" end="9291" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="9359" end="9369" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="9435" end="9453" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445888" start="9546" end="9570" title="Royal Berkshire Regiment" label="Royal Berkshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q223130" start="9586" end="9596" title="Third Army (United Kingdom)" label="Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092270" start="9617" end="9624" title="Beauval, Somme" label="Beauval"/>
<link wikidata="Q385527" start="9634" end="9641" title="Saint-Pol-sur-Ternoise" label="St. Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="9922" end="9933" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698345" start="10065" end="10073" title="Air observer" label="observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043208" start="10079" end="10094" title="No. 23 Squadron RAF" label="23 Squadron RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705318" start="10415" end="10429" title="Heligan estate" label="Heligan estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="10433" end="10441" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560256" start="10514" end="10520" title="Great Dunmow" label="Dunmow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="10522" end="10527" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q489268" start="10577" end="10593" title="world government" label="world government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661278" start="10966" end="10981" title="No. 48 Squadron RAF" label="48 Squadron RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="11209" end="11225" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974" start="11258" end="11266" title="Landshut" label="Landshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="11270" end="11277" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q106588" start="11330" end="11340" title="Isar" label="River Isar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887277" start="11433" end="11464" title="Holzminden prisoner-of-war camp" label="Holzminden prisoner-of-war camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="11666" end="11675" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q312829" start="11681" end="11694" title="Samuel Butler (novelist)" label="Samuel Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="11754" end="11778" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="declaration of armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="12002" end="12025" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351730" start="12236" end="12244" title="Progress (history)" label="Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q465299" start="12545" end="12553" title="culture (archaeology)" label="cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246726" start="12606" end="12636" title="culture-historical archaeology" label="culture-historical archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025283" start="12801" end="12836" title="Cambrian Archaeological Association" label="Cambrian Archaeological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076334" start="13013" end="13026" title="Charles Close" label="Charles Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="13185" end="13196" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="13673" end="13688" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="13733" end="13742" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="14035" end="14047" title="Scilly Isles" label="Scilly Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="14258" end="14273" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="14775" end="14788" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="15254" end="15266" title="HM Treasury" label="the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q74605" start="15372" end="15384" title="W. F. Grimes" label="W. F. Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051560" start="15475" end="15493" title="aerial archaeology" label="aerial archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="15554" end="15563" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="15571" end="15580" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q627383" start="15651" end="15678" title="The Shape of Things to Come" label="The Shape of Things to Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q44671462" start="16139" end="16151" title="George W. G. Allen" label="George Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561228" start="16156" end="16170" title="Gilbert Insall" label="Gilbert Insall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443202" start="16237" end="16261" title="Stonehenge Avenue" label="the Avenue at Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16313" end="16327" title="A. D. Passmore" label="A. D. Passmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719285" start="16463" end="16480" title="Alexander Keiller (archaeologist)" label="Alexander Keiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="16933" end="16951" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="The National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348373" start="17171" end="17184" title="Windmill Hill, Avebury" label="Windmill Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775205" start="17460" end="17504" title="Antiquity; A Quarterly Review of Archaeology" label="Antiquity; A Quarterly Review of Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417893" start="17777" end="17796" title="Antiquaries Journal" label="Antiquaries Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417893" start="17820" end="17842" title="Society of Antiquaries of London" label="Society of Antiquaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q154655" start="18333" end="18349" title="V. Gordon Childe" label="V. Gordon Childe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200722" start="18366" end="18375" title="Cyril Fox" label="Cyril Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112508" start="18377" end="18395" title="Christopher Hawkes" label="Christopher Hawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668203" start="18397" end="18411" title="T. D. Kendrick" label="T. D. Kendrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4362439" start="18413" end="18427" title="Stuart Piggott" label="Stuart Piggott"/>
<link wikidata="Q733878" start="18433" end="18449" title="Mortimer Wheeler" label="Mortimer Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="18826" end="18837" title="peer review" label="peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345825" start="19207" end="19228" title="pseudo-archaeology" label="pseudo-archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542294" start="19248" end="19256" title="ley line" label="ley line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835512" start="19267" end="19281" title="Alfred Watkins" label="Alfred Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754916" start="19530" end="19552" title="The Old Straight Track" label="The Old Straight Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164233" start="19652" end="19671" title="Prehistoric Society" label="Prehistoric Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q92269" start="19763" end="19776" title="Gerhard Bersu" label="Gerhard Bersu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="19806" end="19810" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652581" start="19871" end="19886" title="Little Woodbury" label="Little Woodbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="20104" end="20111" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="20113" end="20118" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739389" start="20124" end="20134" title="Heliopolis (Cairo suburb)" label="Heliopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q696693" start="20245" end="20256" title="Voigtländer" label="Voigtländer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="20448" end="20464" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="20562" end="20566" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="20658" end="20670" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q695838" start="21155" end="21171" title="Internationalism (politics)" label="internationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="21247" end="21256" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="21469" end="21476" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552813" start="21655" end="21678" title="The Sociological Review" label="The Sociological Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21719" end="21731" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="21765" end="21780" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="21923" end="21932" title="St. Petersburg" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="22031" end="22037" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q891" start="22039" end="22054" title="Nizhni Novgorod" label="Nizhni Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q914" start="22056" end="22066" title="Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q908" start="22068" end="22081" title="Rostov-on-Don" label="Rostov-on-Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="22083" end="22089" title="Tiflis" label="Tiflis"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="22091" end="22098" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="22100" end="22105" title="Batum" label="Batum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40811" start="22111" end="22117" title="Sukhum" label="Sukhum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="22223" end="22227" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522363" start="22673" end="22688" title="Victor Gollancz Ltd" label="Victor Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390451" start="22846" end="22873" title="Friends of the Soviet Union" label="Friends of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948306" start="22915" end="22927" title="Morning Star (British newspaper)" label="Daily Worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q592068" start="22965" end="22997" title="Communist Party of Great Britain" label="Communist Party of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="23125" end="23138" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="23214" end="23223" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="23228" end="23242" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="23506" end="23513" title="fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="23518" end="23530" title="Anti-fascism" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101996" start="23804" end="23819" title="Government of Nazi Germany" label="Nazi government"/>
<link wikidata="Q872169" start="24565" end="24579" title="Oswald Menghin" label="Oswald Menghin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="24631" end="24640" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q77764" start="24677" end="24690" title="Josef Bürckel" label="Josef Bürckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="24723" end="24741" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q689454" start="24791" end="24800" title="Danevirke" label="Danevirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q503256" start="24873" end="24883" title="Sutton Hoo" label="Sutton Hoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="24911" end="24918" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143054" start="25726" end="25742" title="material culture" label="material culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="25990" end="26000" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="26005" end="26016" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091971" start="26238" end="26253" title="suburbanisation" label="suburbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296078" start="26403" end="26421" title="Methuen Publishing" label="Methuen Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="26692" end="26709" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="26886" end="26897" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="27130" end="27139" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569100" start="27146" end="27165" title="Southampton Blitz" label="bombing Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657243" start="27289" end="27297" title="Nursling, Hampshire, England" label="Nursling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761743" start="27704" end="27712" title="red tape" label="red tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="27717" end="27728" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374044" start="28059" end="28114" title="Royal Commission on the Historical Monuments of England" label="Royal Commission on the Historical Monuments of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732227" start="28256" end="28281" title="Historic England Archive" label="National Buildings Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998867" start="28516" end="28547" title="Council for British Archaeology" label="Council for British Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081638" start="28818" end="28833" title="Charles Phillips (archaeologist)" label="Charles Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="28956" end="28967" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="29247" end="29258" title="nuclear war" label="nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q363" start="29423" end="29438" title="World War III" label="Third World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="29525" end="29537" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q78494" start="29767" end="29782" title="Arthur Koestler" label="Arthur Koestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q73580" start="29796" end="29812" title="Darkness at Noon" label="Darkness at Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="29833" end="29846" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="29854" end="29865" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q117320" start="29870" end="29888" title="Moscow Trials" label="Moscow show trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q294234" start="29968" end="29982" title="Trofim Lysenko" label="Trofim Lysenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q77490" start="30040" end="30063" title="Margarete Buber-Neumann" label="Margarete Buber-Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q723551" start="30195" end="30210" title="British Academy" label="British Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="30236" end="30295" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q837343" start="30329" end="30346" title="Doctor of Letters" label="Doctor of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="30354" end="30377" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="30747" end="30758" title="River Nile" label="Middle Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475713" start="30822" end="30846" title="Sennar (sultanate)" label="Funj Sultanate of Sennar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30952" end="30965" title="Frank Addison" label="Frank Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q713440" start="31355" end="31366" title="Glyn Daniel" label="Glyn Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="31447" end="31479" title="Dictionary of National Biography" label="Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932778" start="31619" end="31639" title="Neolithic and Bronze Age rock art in the British Isles" label="prehistoric rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="31737" end="31745" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="32061" end="32070" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="32080" end="32092" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="32118" end="32134" title="Christianisation" label="Christianisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087695" start="32308" end="32321" title="Ronald Hutton" label="Ronald Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="32680" end="32683" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433606" start="32772" end="32783" title="Fan mail" label="fan letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="33028" end="33038" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272612" start="33046" end="33065" title="steady State theory" label="steady state theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711593" start="33131" end="33144" title="edited volume" label="edited volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q82133" start="33874" end="33890" title="Bodleian Library" label="Bodleian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="34463" end="34470" title="atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="34797" end="34815" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170643" start="35727" end="35743" title="Jonathan Glancey" label="Jonathan Glancey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747574" start="36260" end="36274" title="Neal Ascherson" label="Neal Ascherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570201" start="37322" end="37338" title="Jacquetta Hawkes" label="Jacquetta Hawkes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38606" end="38619" title="John Charlton (archaeologist)" label="John Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060881" start="39043" end="39064" title="archaeological theory" label="archaeological theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="39308" end="39321" title="Structural functionalism" label="functionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045145" start="39704" end="39719" title="Caroline Malone" label="Caroline Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531819" start="40879" end="40905" title="sites and monuments record" label="sites and monuments record"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="41277" end="41289" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257314" start="41391" end="41409" title="Public Archaeology (journal)" label="Public Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q933348" start="41715" end="41726" title="festschrift" label="festschrift"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266039" wikidata="Q662055" url="?curid=266039" title="Earl of Snowdon">
<text>Earl of Snowdon is a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. It was created in 1961, together with the subsidiary title of Viscount Linley, of Nymans in the County of Sussex, by Queen Elizabeth II for her then-brother-in-law, Antony Armstrong-Jones, who married Princess Margaret in 1960.

==Titles==
===Choice of names===
&quot;Snowdon&quot;, chosen for the earldom, had previously been used for a peerage title with royal associations. The title of Baron Snowdon had been conferred in 1726 along with the Dukedom of Edinburgh on Prince Frederick Louis, grandson of George I and future Prince of Wales. It merged with the Crown in 1760, when its holder acceded as George III.

&quot;Linley&quot;, chosen for the viscountcy, comes from the 1st Earl of Snowdon&#x27;s maternal great-grandfather, the English cartoonist and illustrator Edward Linley Sambourne.

&quot;Nymans&quot;, chosen as territorial designation of the viscountcy, relates to an English garden near Handcross in West Sussex, where Anne Armstrong-Jones, &quot;née&quot; Messel, Countess of Rosse, mother of the 1st Earl of Snowdon, had grown up.

===Life peerage===
In November 1999, the 1st Earl of Snowdon received a life peerage as Baron Armstrong-Jones, under a device designed to allow first-generation hereditary peers to retain their seats in the House of Lords, after the passing of the House of Lords Act 1999.

==Earls of Snowdon (1961)==

* &quot;Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon (1930–2017)&quot;
** David Armstrong-Jones, 2nd Earl of Snowdon (born 1961)
***(1) Charles Armstrong-Jones, Viscount Linley (b. 1999)

The heir apparent is the present holder&#x27;s only son, Charles Armstrong-Jones, Viscount Linley (b. 1999). He is alone in the line of succession to the earldom.

==Coats of arms==
==Notes==
==External links==
* Cracroft&#x27;s Peerage page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q662055" start="0" end="15" title="Earl of Snowdon" label="Earl of Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="34" end="63" title="Peerage of the United Kingdom" label="Peerage of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632005" start="107" end="123" title="subsidiary title" label="subsidiary title"/>
<link wikidata="Q662055" start="127" end="142" title="Earl of Snowdon" label="Viscount Linley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071172" start="147" end="153" title="Nymans" label="Nymans"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="161" end="177" title="County of Sussex" label="County of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="182" end="200" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q335260" start="230" end="252" title="Antony Armstrong-Jones" label="Antony Armstrong-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q153815" start="266" end="283" title="Princess Margaret" label="Princess Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q217142" start="333" end="340" title="Snowdon" label="Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="363" end="370" title="earldom" label="earldom"/>
<link wikidata="Q824569" start="455" end="468" title="Baron Snowdon" label="Baron Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q824569" start="511" end="531" title="Dukedom of Edinburgh" label="Dukedom of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q165349" start="535" end="557" title="Prince Frederick Louis" label="Prince Frederick Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="571" end="579" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="591" end="606" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="623" end="632" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="669" end="679" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q504621" start="838" end="861" title="Edward Linley Sambourne" label="Edward Linley Sambourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071172" start="870" end="876" title="Nymans" label="Nymans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703764" start="894" end="917" title="territorial designation" label="territorial designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647343" start="971" end="980" title="Handcross" label="Handcross"/>
<link wikidata="Q23287" start="984" end="995" title="West Sussex" label="West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012729" start="1003" end="1023" title="Anne Armstrong-Jones" label="Anne Armstrong-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="1190" end="1202" title="life peerage" label="life peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1325" end="1339" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="1366" end="1389" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="House of Lords Act 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q335260" start="1429" end="1472" title="Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon" label="Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091237" start="1494" end="1536" title="David Armstrong-Jones, 2nd Earl of Snowdon" label="David Armstrong-Jones, 2nd Earl of Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091237" start="1556" end="1596" title="Charles Armstrong-Jones, Viscount Linley" label="Charles Armstrong-Jones, Viscount Linley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091237" start="1665" end="1705" title="Charles Armstrong-Jones, Viscount Linley" label="Charles Armstrong-Jones, Viscount Linley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266043" wikidata="Q6508816" url="?curid=266043" title="Lead–lag effect">
<text>A lead–lag effect, especially in economics, describes the situation where one (leading) variable is cross-correlated with the values of another (lagging) variable at later times.

In nature and climate, bigger systems often display more pronounced lag effects. The Arctic Sea Ice minimum is on September 17, three months after the peak in daylight (sunshine) hours in the northern hemisphere, according to NASA.

For example, economists have found that in some circumstances there is a lead-lag effect between large-capitalization and small-capitalization stock-portfolio prices.

(A loosely related concept is that of lead-lag compensators in control theory, but this is not generally referred to specifically as a &quot;lead-lag effect.&quot;)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6508816" start="2" end="17" title="Lead–lag effect" label="lead–lag effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="33" end="42" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302587" start="100" end="116" title="cross-correlation" label="cross-correlated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508813" start="619" end="639" title="lead-lag compensator" label="lead-lag compensator"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266052" wikidata="Q717356" url="?curid=266052" title="Mandarin Phonetic Symbols II">
<text>Mandarin Phonetic Symbols II (MPS II) is a romanization system formerly used in Taiwan. It was created to replace the complex Gwoyeu Romatzyh system, which used tonal spelling—and to co-exist with the Wade–Giles romanization as well as bopomofo. It is sometimes referred to as Gwoyeu Romatzyh 2 or GR2.

== History ==
Based on the earlier and more complex Gwoyeu Romatzyh, the tentative version of MPS II was released on May 10, 1984, by the Ministry of Education under the Chiang Ching-kuo administration. After two years of feedback from the general public, the official version was established on January 28, 1986. To distinguish bopomofo () from MPS II, the former is officially called &quot;Mandarin Phonetic Symbols I&quot; ().

Despite its official status for almost two decades until it was replaced by Tongyong Pinyin in 2002, MPS II existed only in some governmental publications (such as travel brochures and dictionaries). However, MPS II was not used for the official romanized names of Taiwanese places, though many road signs replaced during this period use it. It never gained the same status as did Wade–Giles. It is virtually unused overseas.

== Table ==
=== Initials ===
=== Finals ===
== Features ==

* Indication of tone by respelling, as used in Gwoyeu Romatzyh, is eliminated. Syllables are spelled like its tone one for non-nasal initials, and like tone two for nasal initials. Tone is then marked with four diacritics identical to Zhuyin&#x27;s.
* The romanization of the consonants is identical to Gwoyeu Romatzyh&#x27;s.
* The empty rime is treated in the same way as Yale romanization:
** It uses &quot;r&quot; for both:
*** (pinyin &quot;r&quot;), and
*** what is written in pinyin as &quot;i&quot; after &quot;zh&quot;, &quot;ch&quot;, &quot;sh&quot;, &quot;r&quot;. (The use of &quot;r&quot; has a tonal diacritic on it and is always final.)
** It uses &quot;z&quot; for both:
*** (pinyin &quot;z&quot;), and
*** what is written in pinyin as &quot;i&quot; after &quot;z&quot;, &quot;c&quot;, &quot;s&quot;. (The use of &quot;z&quot; has a tonal diacritic on it and is always final.)
*** The &quot;z&quot; is not written after &quot;tz&quot; (no &quot;tzz&quot;), however. &quot;Tz&quot; corresponds to Pinyin &quot;zi&quot; (and Yale &quot;dz&quot;).
* Like GR, &quot;-iou&quot;, &quot;-uen&quot;, and &quot;-uei&quot; are all written out, unlike the Pinyin/Wade &quot;-iu&quot;, &quot;-un&quot;, and &quot;-ui&quot;.
* GR&#x27;s &quot;au&quot; persists, as opposed to the &quot;ao&quot; of Pinyin, Wade-Giles, and the later Tongyong Pinyin.
* GR&#x27;s &quot;iu&quot; (Pinyin &quot;ü&quot;) is written as &quot;-iu&quot; and &quot;yu&quot; (alone).
* GR&#x27;s &quot;-ong&quot; is spelled now &quot;-ung&quot; (like Wade-Giles).
* GR&#x27;s &quot;el&quot; is spelled now &quot;er&quot; (like Pinyin).
* &quot;Y-&quot; and &quot;w-&quot; are added to or replace &quot;i&quot; and &quot;u&quot; (respectively), similarly to Gwoyeu Romatzyh and identical to Pinyin.

An example phrase, &quot;The second type of Chinese phonetic symbols&quot;:

Spaces are generally used in place of hyphens, except in personal names, which use hyphens in between the syllables of the given names.

==References==
== External links ==
* Standard Mandarin Pinyin Table The complete listing of all Pinyin syllables used in standard Mandarin, along with native speaker pronunciation for each syllable.
* Conversion chart (syllable level)
* ROC government booklet on MPS II (in English and Chinese)
* Taiwan&#x27;s official romanization system: MPS2</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q717356" start="0" end="28" title="Mandarin Phonetic Symbols II" label="Mandarin Phonetic Symbols II"/>
<link wikidata="Q717356" start="30" end="36" title="Mandarin Phonetic Symbols II" label="MPS II"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="43" end="55" title="romanization" label="romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="80" end="86" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24438" start="126" end="141" title="Gwoyeu Romatzyh" label="Gwoyeu Romatzyh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="161" end="166" title="Standard_Chinese_phonology#Tones" label="tonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208442" start="201" end="211" title="Wade–Giles" label="Wade–Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q198269" start="236" end="244" title="bopomofo" label="bopomofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q717356" start="277" end="294" title="Mandarin Phonetic Symbols II" label="Gwoyeu Romatzyh 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q717356" start="298" end="301" title="Mandarin Phonetic Symbols II" label="GR2"/>
<link wikidata="Q24438" start="356" end="371" title="Gwoyeu Romatzyh" label="Gwoyeu Romatzyh"/>
<link wikidata="Q697093" start="442" end="463" title="Ministry of Education (Taiwan)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q313598" start="474" end="490" title="Chiang Ching-kuo" label="Chiang Ching-kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q700739" start="811" end="826" title="Tongyong Pinyin" label="Tongyong Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208442" start="1116" end="1126" title="Wade–Giles" label="Wade–Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q24438" start="1269" end="1284" title="Gwoyeu Romatzyh" label="Gwoyeu Romatzyh"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="1433" end="1442" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983810" start="1596" end="1613" title="Yale romanization of Mandarin" label="Yale romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="2383" end="2389" title="Pinyin" label="Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208442" start="2390" end="2394" title="Wade-Giles" label="Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="2523" end="2529" title="Pinyin" label="Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208442" start="2531" end="2541" title="Wade-Giles" label="Wade-Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q700739" start="2557" end="2572" title="Tongyong Pinyin" label="Tongyong Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208442" start="2749" end="2759" title="Wade-Giles" label="Wade-Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="2825" end="2831" title="Pinyin" label="Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q380933" start="3074" end="3079" title="Space (punctuation)" label="Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q180309" start="3112" end="3118" title="hyphen" label="hyphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82799" start="3140" end="3144" title="name" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="3197" end="3207" title="given name" label="given name"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266055" wikidata="Q7174018" url="?curid=266055" title="Peter Fluck">
<text>Peter Nigel Fluck (born 7 April 1941) is a British caricaturist and one half of the partnership known as &quot;Luck and Flaw&quot; (with Roger Law), creators of the popular satirical TV puppet show &quot;Spitting Image&quot;.

He attended Cambridgeshire High School for Boys, a grammar school, and then Cambridge School of Art (now part of Anglia Ruskin University).

Fluck taught art in the 1970s at the Colchester School of Art in Colchester, Essex.
After &quot;Spitting Image&quot; finished its run, he moved to Cornwall to work as an artist.

He married Anne-Cécile de Bruyne in 1963 in Cambridge. They have a daughter and a son. He lives in Cadgwith, Cornwall.

==References==
==External links==
* Peter Fluck&#x27;s website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7174018" start="0" end="17" title="Peter Fluck" label="Peter Nigel Fluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910901" start="51" end="63" title="caricaturist" label="caricaturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358515" start="137" end="146" title="Roger Law" label="Roger Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="173" end="182" title="satirical" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="186" end="197" title="puppet show" label="puppet show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="204" end="218" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025662" start="239" end="274" title="Cambridgeshire High School for Boys" label="Cambridgeshire High School for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q540751" start="340" end="364" title="Anglia Ruskin University" label="Anglia Ruskin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q184163" start="433" end="443" title="Colchester" label="Colchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="445" end="450" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="515" end="523" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q950388" start="646" end="654" title="Cadgwith" label="Cadgwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="656" end="664" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266057" wikidata="Q7358515" url="?curid=266057" title="Roger Law">
<text>Roger Law (born 6 September 1941) is a British caricaturist, ceramicist and one half of &quot;Luck and Flaw&quot; (with Peter Fluck), creators of the popular satirical TV puppet show &quot;Spitting Image&quot;. 

Roger Law was a pioneer in bringing political caricatures from newspapers and magazines to television. In 2020 Roger Law was executive producer on the new series of &quot;Spitting Image&quot; made with Avalon Productions and streamed on Britbox.

==Early life and education==
Law was born in Littleport, Cambridgeshire. Law went to Littleport Secondary Modern School in Littleport, Cambridgeshire, and attended Cambridge School of Art (now part of Anglia Ruskin University). He met Peter Fluck during his time there.

==Career==

=== Early work ===
In 1960 whilst Roger was at Cambridge School of Art he was made art director of the university magazine, &quot;Granta&quot;. That same year, Roger was also published by &quot;East Anglian Magazine&quot;.  After graduating from &quot;Cambridge School of Art&quot;, Law started his career working in print, namely magazines. By 1963, Law was creating a weekly cartoon with Peter Cook for &quot;The Observer&quot;, a short-lived venture aptly named &quot;‘Almost the end’&quot;. At the same time, Law was also doing a 14 ft long weekly cartoon strip for &quot;The Establishment Club&quot;, a nightclub opened by Peter Cook in Soho. &quot;The Establishment Club&quot; has since been named as a pivotal meeting spot for the British satirical movement in the 1960s.

In 1966 Law worked as a freelance caricaturist and illustrator for &quot;The Sunday Times&quot;. During this time he made his first 3D caricature model for &quot;Nova Magazine&quot; which won a D&amp;AD silver award. That same year Law also worked on album covers for The Who, &quot;The Who Sell Out&quot; and Jimi Hendrix&#x27;s &quot;Axis Bold as Love&quot;. Law is also said to have made a brief appearance in The Who&#x27;s music video for &quot;Happy Jack&quot;.

In 1967 Law moved to the United States and took up residence at Reed College, Portland. Whilst in the US Law worked on his first film featuring puppets, called &quot;The Milkman. The Milkman&quot; dystopian-satirical look at American capitalism and the technology that surrounded it. The film was awarded Rockefeller grant. Law also freelanced for Esquire and Newsweek. 

After a brief stint working in New York at &quot;Push Pin Studios&quot; with Milton Glaser and Seymour Chwast, Law returned to the UK in 1969 to be a features editor at &quot;The Sunday Times Magazine&quot;. When Rupert Murdoch bought &quot;The Times&quot; and &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; in 1975, Law left the magazine and formed a partnership with Peter Fluck, a group which became &quot;Luck &amp; Flaw&quot;. Together they made 3D caricature models for magazine covers worldwide, including &quot;The&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot; &quot;Magazine&quot;, &quot;Der Spiegel&quot;, &quot;Stern&quot;, &quot;The Economist&quot; &amp; &quot;Radio Times. The pair also did visual satire over several pages for the &quot;National Lampoon&quot;. The piece on the common market was sold to every European country. In 1979 &quot;Luck &amp; Flaw&quot; illustrated Charles Dickens&#x27;s &quot;A Christmas Carol,&quot; published by &quot;Viking.&quot;

Law and Fluck also created caricature ceramics, featuring British politicians including Margaret Thatcher and members of the British royal family. In 1980 the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Arena&quot; made an arts documentary on Luck and Flaw called &quot;The Luck and Flaw Show.&quot;

=== Spitting Image ===
In 1981 Law and Fluck made a plan to transfer political caricatures to television, which was funded by Martin Lambie-Nairn. Two years later the pilot for &quot;Spitting Image&quot; was shot. On 26 February 1984, the first episode of &quot;Spitting Image&quot; was transmitted on &quot;ITV&quot; for &quot;Central Independent Television.&quot; This was the first series of 18. In 1985 &quot;Spitting Image&quot; created puppets for two shows called ‘Michael Nesmith’s Television Parts’ for &quot;NBC Network TV&quot;, USA. In 1986, &quot;Treasure Island&quot; by Robert Louis Stevenson, illustrated by the pair, was published by &quot;Faber &amp; Faber.&quot;

&quot;Arena&quot; made another two specials about &quot;Spitting Image&quot;, &quot;The Spitting Image Factory&quot;, where Law and Fluck toured the workshop where the show was produced. Also in 1985, they made another documentary with Arena called &quot;Luck and Flaw&#x27;s Guide to Caricature&quot;.

In 1986 a song by &quot;Spitting Image, &quot;The Chicken Song&quot;&quot; topped the UK hit parade for three weeks. Under Law&#x27;s creative eye the &quot;Spitting Image&quot; workshop produced merchandise alongside the show, notably rubber dog chews called &quot;&#x27;Pet Hates&quot;&#x27; with the slogan ‘&quot;Throw a politician to your dog’.&quot; &quot;Spitting Image&quot; also released many popular books, such as &quot;The Appallingly Disrespectful Spitting Image Book&quot; and &quot;The Spitting Image Giant Komic Book&quot;. The &quot;Spitting Image&quot; workshop also created the puppets for the music video &quot;Land of Confusion&quot; by Genesis. The same year, Spitting Image published a book titled &quot;Tooth and Claw: Inside Story of &quot;Spitting Image&quot;&quot;. This book gave an insight into working at the Spitting Image workshop and was mainly visual. In 1990 &quot;Spitting Image&quot; brought out &quot;‘The Real Maggie Memoirs’&quot; and Law published his first book, &quot;‘A Nasty Piece of Work’,&quot; written in collaboration with Lewis Chester.

&quot;The Alliance Graphic International&quot; (&quot;AGI&quot;) elected Law as a member in 1993.

By 1994 &quot;Spitting Image&quot; had been franchised in countries such as Japan, Czech Republic, Portugal, Greece, Hungary, Germany and Russia. That same year Law worked on a new puppet TV film &quot;Peter and the Wolf: A Prokofiev Fantasy.&quot; It was the musical tale of &quot;Peter and the Wolf&quot; brought to life by puppets and human characters in a fairy tale world. The film was narrated by Sting and conducted by Claudio Abbado. &quot;Peter and the Wolf&quot; was the first-ever international co-production. In 1995 Law and &quot;Spitting Image&quot; funded a short animated film called &quot;The Big Story&quot; made by David Stoten and Timothy Watts, which was then nominated for an Academy Award (Oscar) and a BAFTA award.

The last series of &quot;Spitting Image&quot; was aired in 1996. The first online sale of the &quot;Spitting Image&quot; puppets was organised in 2000 by Kerry Taylor of Sotheby’s. The second sale was just a year later and hosted at Olympia. In 2018 Cambridge University Library accepted the &quot;Spitting Image&quot; Archive.

In September 2019 &quot;Spitting Image&quot; was confirmed to be returning twenty-three years after it was last aired. &quot;Avalon Productions&quot; produced the ten shows with Roger&#x27;s as Exec Producer alongside Jeff Westbrook, Richard Allen-Turner, Joanna Beresford, and Jon Thoday. The first show was premiered on Britbox in the UK in the Autumn of 2020. The shows were also aired globally on separate platforms. Avalon has confirmed another ten shows to be aired in 2021. 

The second series of &quot;Spitting Image&quot; aired in 2021, with Law being credited as executive producer.

=== Later career ===
From 1996 to 1997 &quot;Crapston Villas&quot;, which was produced in the Spitting Image workshop and studio, was aired. It was a stop-motion animation featuring a set of characters, living in a grim apartment building in the fictional London postcode of SE69, who were plagued by various dilemmas.

Roger then moved to Australia as an artist in residence at the National Art School in Sydney. That same year he was made a fellow of the &quot;International Specialised Skills Foundation in Australia&quot;. In 1999 Roger was made a member of &quot;The Faculty of Royal Designers for Industry&quot; (&quot;RDI&quot;).

In 2000 Roger was an artist in residence at Dartington pottery in Devon, UK. Roger also had three exhibitions &quot;Risk Takers and Pioneers,  Aussie Stuff-Way Beyond the Black Stump and The Royal Academy of Arts Summer Exhibition 2000&quot;. In that same year Roger was also presented an award from the University of Leicester&#x27;s Political Studies Association on their 50th Anniversary 1950 – 2000

In 2005 Roger&#x27;s second book, a semi-autobiography, &quot;Still Spitting at Sixty&quot; was published by Harper Collins with chapters on his Australian travels. Law also worked in Jingdezhen, China producing large carved ceramics. The Sladmore Gallery in London now sells Law&#x27;s ceramics. Law then moved back to the UK in 2012.

===Inspiration===

Whilst Roger was at art school, Paul Hogarth, one of his tutors, showed him the French magazine, &quot;L’Assiette au Buerre&quot;. Roger has stated many times that the drawings and attitudes of the magazine were a great inspiration. &quot;L’assiette au Buerre&quot; was illustrated front to back with cartoons or caricatures with only a short satirical caption written at the bottom of each page. The magazine challenged social norms and commented on problems of the period but had no clear political alliance.

During Roger&#x27;s early career whilst working closely with Peter Cook at &quot;The Observer&quot; and &quot;The Establishment Club&quot; he met many satirists including Lenny Bruce, such meetings gave him his first steps to use his drawing skills for satire. He quotes

&quot;“Only those who attempt the absurd are capable of achieving the impossible.”&quot;

Roger has always cited that the ‘family friendly’ puppet show &quot;Punch and Judy&quot; was a great inspiration when working on &quot;Spitting Image,&quot; they both pushed boundaries. The idea that you can have extreme violence, murder, and infanticide yet is still funny and even enjoyed by children was, retrospectively, his first step in creating the grotesque Spitting Image style.  

Roger has stated that his mentor was Paul Hogarth was a huge inspiration. Hogarth was an English artist and illustrator. Best known for his travel drawings that he made for Graham Greene&#x27;s books, Robert Graves books and the Irish playwright Brendan Bingham.

The Fen&#x27;s where Roger Law was born was outlaw territory until comparatively recently and anti-establishment attitudes still linger on. Roger feels growing up around people who had less of a desire to follow the rules gave him licence to break them throughout his career.

==Personal life==
He married Deidre Amsden (a quilt designer) in 1960 in Cambridge. They have a son (born 1962) and daughter (born 1965).

== Television ==
Spitting Image 

Spitting Image Specials 

== Film ==
== Radio ==
== Books ==
== Exhibitions ==
== Awards and nominations ==
== Music awards ==
== Film ==
== Design awards ==
== References ==
==External links==
* Roger Law - ThreeHumanSinc
* Roger Law Ceramics
* Biography
* Lambiek Comiclopedia article.
* &quot;The Times&quot; March 2005
* Whatever happened to the teapots?
*BBC Four- Arena
*Roger Law Biography
*Roger Law: spitting and spinning
*Roger Law&#x27;s Odyssey from satire on TV to China&#x27;s porcelain city
*Roger Law Fen Ditton Gallery
*Roger Law Scottish Gallery
*Roger Law on discogs.com
*Roger Law spitting image Sainsbury Centre
*John Lloyd Oldie Puppeteer of the Year: Roger Law
*BBC Radio 3 The ceramics of Roger Law
*BBC Radio 4 Roger Law: Art and Seoul
*BBC Radio 4 Roger Law and the Giant Pot
*BBC Radio 4 Roger Law: Art and Seoul
*BBC Radio 4 Extra The New Silk Road with Roger Law
*BBC Radio 4 Extra Roger Law and the Chinese Curiosities
*BBC Radio 3 Private Passions, Roger Law
*BBC Radio 4 Extra Roger Law and the Chinese Curiosities
*BBC Radio 4 Desert Island Discs
*BBC Radio 4 Midweek, Roger Law
*BBC Radio London Rober Elms With Roger Law, Kate Robbins, Joseph Connolly and St John Stephens
*BBC Radio 4 Extra Roger&#x27;s Rabbits
*BBC Radio Manchester Becky Want, 30 years of Spitting Image
*BBC Radio 4 Extra Spitting in Russian
*BBC Radio 4 Extra South Africa spits back
*BBC Radio 4 Extra Spitting Images
*BBC Radio 4 Best of Today
*BBC Radio 4 The Museum of Curiosity
*BBC Radio 4 Extra Whatever happened to the Teapots?
*BBC World Service Witness History Spitting Image
*BBC Radio 4 Extra Wow! How Did They Do That?
*BBC Radio 4 Art Made in China
*BBC Radio 4 Satire: The Great British Tradition
*BBC Radio 4 I&#x27;m A Celebrity, Get Me Into Here
*BBC Radio Scotland Spitting Images
*BBC Radio 4 The Secrets of the Art and the Artist: Caravaggio
*BBC Radio 4 Excess Baggage
*BBC Radio Scotland Comedy Zone
*BBC Radio Scotland The Janice Forsyth Show
*BBC Radio Scotland Arts, Classical and Jazz Zone </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7358515" start="0" end="9" title="Roger Law" label="Roger Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910901" start="47" end="59" title="caricaturist" label="caricaturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464614" start="61" end="71" title="Ceramic art" label="ceramicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174018" start="120" end="131" title="Peter Fluck" label="Peter Fluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="158" end="167" title="satirical" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="171" end="182" title="puppet show" label="puppet show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="189" end="203" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997485" start="505" end="531" title="Littleport, Cambridgeshire" label="Littleport, Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997485" start="583" end="609" title="Littleport, Cambridgeshire" label="Littleport, Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q540751" start="661" end="685" title="Anglia Ruskin University" label="Anglia Ruskin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q525970" start="1133" end="1143" title="Peter Cook" label="Peter Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="1154" end="1166" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732531" start="1319" end="1341" title="The Establishment (club)" label="The Establishment Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q124010" start="1385" end="1389" title="Soho" label="Soho"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="1596" end="1612" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q841995" start="1717" end="1725" title="Design and Art Direction" label="D&amp;amp;AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2017" end="2030" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140775" start="2056" end="2068" title="Reed College" label="Reed College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925990" start="2413" end="2429" title="Push Pin Studios" label="Push Pin Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351481" start="2441" end="2454" title="Milton Glaser" label="Milton Glaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275902" start="2459" end="2473" title="Seymour Chwast" label="Seymour Chwast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767395" start="2539" end="2564" title="The Sunday Times Magazine" label="The Sunday Times Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="2577" end="2591" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028269" start="2859" end="2922" title="The New York Times Magazine" label="&amp;quot;The&amp;quot; &amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; &amp;quot;Magazine&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="2930" end="2941" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q158322" start="2955" end="2960" title="Stern (magazine)" label="Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="2974" end="2987" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="3006" end="3017" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q680408" start="3078" end="3106" title="National Lampoon (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;National Lampoon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q62879" start="3252" end="3269" title="A Christmas Carol" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q921536" start="3296" end="3302" title="Viking Press" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="3349" end="3357" title="Ceramic" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="3399" end="3416" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="3436" end="3456" title="British royal family" label="British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788867" start="3481" end="3498" title="Arena (British TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Arena&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775958" start="3711" end="3730" title="Martin Lambie-Nairn" label="Martin Lambie-Nairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q898097" start="4242" end="4259" title="Faber and Faber" label="Faber &amp;amp; Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722413" start="4618" end="4634" title="The Chicken Song" label="The Chicken Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529432" start="5203" end="5220" title="Land of Confusion" label="Land of Confusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="5230" end="5237" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="5835" end="5840" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="5842" end="5856" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="5858" end="5866" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="5868" end="5874" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="5876" end="5883" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="5885" end="5892" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="5897" end="5903" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q677403" start="6041" end="6059" title="Peter and the Wolf" label="Peter and the Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="6162" end="6167" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="6172" end="6181" title="Conducting" label="conducted"/>
<link wikidata="Q151608" start="6185" end="6199" title="Claudio Abbado" label="Claudio Abbado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240117" start="6393" end="6405" title="David Stoten" label="David Stoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q33189999" start="6410" end="6423" title="Timothy &amp;quot;Yogi&amp;quot; Watts" label="Timothy Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="6457" end="6470" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="6485" end="6490" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028334" start="6749" end="6777" title="Cambridge University Library" label="Cambridge University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053574" start="7401" end="7419" title="executive producer" label="executive producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182297" start="7467" end="7482" title="Crapston Villas" label="Crapston Villas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970484" start="7805" end="7824" title="National Art School" label="National Art School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="7828" end="7834" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056541" start="8500" end="8518" title="Autobiographical novel" label="semi-autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="8573" end="8587" title="HarperCollins" label="Harper Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q34405" start="8648" end="8658" title="Jingdezhen" label="Jingdezhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764728" start="8699" end="8719" title="The Sladmore Gallery" label="The Sladmore Gallery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266060" wikidata="Q5240117" url="?curid=266060" title="David Stoten">
<text>David Stoten (born in Luton, Bedfordshire) is a short film maker and director and caricaturist on TV&#x27;s &quot;Spitting Image&quot;. Stoten won the BAFTA award with longtime collaborator, Tim Watts in 1994 for &quot;The Big Story&quot;.

Since then, Stoten has provided storyboards for, amongst others, &quot;Corpse Bride&quot;, &quot;Mr. Bean&#x27;s Holiday&quot; and the TV series &quot;Charlie and Lola&quot;.

Credited as one of the &quot;Spitting Image team&quot; (under Roger Law), Stoten provided the cover to 2007&#x27;s QI &quot;E&quot; Annual, as well as contributing incidental illustrations. Stoten has been an ongoing contributor to The Oldie. In 2015, Stoten provided caricatures for the ITV show Newzoids.

As a sculptor, Stoten has made maquettes for the animation film industry whilst also sculpting a range of Gorillaz figures for the designer toy company Kidrobot.

Stoten was Head of Story for the animated Feature Film &quot;Gnomeo and Juliet&quot; and subsequently became the Creative Development Lead at Arc Productions in Toronto.

He directed the DVD Specials &quot;Thomas &amp; Friends&quot; and was the head writer for Steam Team to the Rescue and the twenty-fourth (and final) series succeeding Andrew Brenner.

==References==
==External links==
*Official Arc Productions bio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5240117" start="0" end="12" title="David Stoten" label="David Stoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q203889" start="22" end="27" title="Luton" label="Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="114" end="128" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="151" end="156" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804458" start="191" end="200" title="Tim Watts (filmmaker)" label="Tim Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409748" start="219" end="232" title="The Big Story (1994 film)" label="The Big Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q164417" start="312" end="324" title="Corpse Bride" label="Corpse Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q330332" start="338" end="361" title="Mr. Bean&amp;#x27;s Holiday" label="Mr. Bean&amp;#x27;s Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960912" start="392" end="408" title="Charlie and Lola" label="Charlie and Lola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358515" start="479" end="488" title="Roger Law" label="Roger Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286698" start="532" end="534" title="QI" label="QI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754958" start="649" end="658" title="The Oldie" label="The Oldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="705" end="708" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798742" start="714" end="722" title="Newzoids" label="Newzoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q189991" start="831" end="839" title="Gorillaz" label="Gorillaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404853" start="877" end="885" title="Kidrobot" label="Kidrobot"/>
<link wikidata="Q753677" start="949" end="966" title="Gnomeo and Juliet" label="Gnomeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785019" start="1030" end="1045" title="Arc Productions" label="Arc Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q501663" start="1094" end="1114" title="Thomas &amp;amp; Friends" label="Thomas &amp;amp; Friends"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266061" wikidata="Q7804458" url="?curid=266061" title="Tim Watts (filmmaker)">
<text>Tim Watts is a British short filmmaker and animator, best known for his work on &quot;The Big Story&quot;, which was nominated for an Academy Award, and &quot;The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse&quot;, for which he won an Annie Award. He is also known for his caricature work on TV&#x27;s &quot;Spitting Image&quot;.

==Career==
Tim Watts began as a caricaturist and designer on the satirical puppet show &quot;Spitting Image&quot; where he met his now longtime collaborator, David Stoten. It was at Spitting Image that Watts and Stoten had the idea to extend their caricature work to a full-figure puppet. After deciding on Kirk Douglas as the subject, the pair took the idea to Roger Law (executive producer for Spitting Image). Law was intrigued enough to fund the project that would become The Big Story. 

Watts went on to animate on &quot;The Thief and the Cobbler&quot;, &quot;The Tale of Despereaux&quot;, &quot;Rise of the Guardians&quot; and &quot;Home&quot;, to storyboard and animate on &quot;Corpse Bride&quot;, and to create character designs and animate on &quot;Arthur Christmas&quot;.

==Accolades==
Watts won the BAFTA award with David Stoten in 1994 for &quot;The Big Story&quot;.

In addition, he was nominated for an Academy Award for &quot;The Big Story&quot; at the 67th Academy Awards.

In 2023, Watts received the Annie Award for Character Animation in TV for his work on &quot;The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse&quot; at the 50th Annie Awards.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7804458" start="0" end="9" title="Tim Watts (filmmaker)" label="Tim Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409748" start="86" end="99" title="The Big Story (film)" label="The Big Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q116056737" start="159" end="199" title="The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse (film)" label="The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="300" end="314" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="416" end="430" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240117" start="481" end="493" title="David Stoten" label="David Stoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358515" start="685" end="694" title="Roger Law" label="Roger Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409748" start="799" end="812" title="The Big Story (film)" label="The Big Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657071" start="850" end="875" title="The Thief and the Cobbler" label="The Thief and the Cobbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16833450" start="889" end="911" title="The Tale of Despereaux" label="The Tale of Despereaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q136625" start="925" end="946" title="Rise of the Guardians" label="Rise of the Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499813" start="963" end="967" title="Home (2015 film)" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q164417" start="1010" end="1022" title="Corpse Bride" label="Corpse Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q711918" start="1083" end="1099" title="Arthur Christmas" label="Arthur Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="1136" end="1141" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240117" start="1153" end="1165" title="David Stoten" label="David Stoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409748" start="1267" end="1280" title="The Big Story (film)" label="The Big Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q857001" start="1294" end="1313" title="67th Academy Awards" label="67th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q108822351" start="1344" end="1385" title="Annie Award for Outstanding Achievement for Character Animation in an Animated Television/Broadcast Production" label="Annie Award for Character Animation in TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q116056737" start="1408" end="1448" title="The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse (film)" label="The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q116236192" start="1462" end="1479" title="50th Annie Awards" label="50th Annie Awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266062" wikidata="Q2346846" url="?curid=266062" title="Steve Bendelack">
<text>Steve Bendelack is an English filmmaker and television director who has worked primarily on comedy programmes.

Originally an assistant to Peter Fluck and Roger Law on satirical TV puppet show &quot;Spitting Image&quot;, Bendelack went on to direct the show in later years. He directed &quot;The Mary Whitehouse Experience&quot;, &quot;The Royle Family&quot;, &quot;The League of Gentlemen&quot;, &quot;Dark Ages&quot;, &quot;Randall and Hopkirk (Deceased)&quot;, &quot;Cowards&quot; and the first series of &quot;Little Britain&quot;. He directed the BBC3 pilot for &quot;The Mighty Boosh&quot; in 2003, but was replaced by Paul King for the series proper. He produced the opening scene for the 1990s edition of &quot;Whose Line Is It Anyway?&quot; for a short period, but stopped midway through the series. Bendelack has directed the feature films &quot;The League of Gentlemen&#x27;s Apocalypse&quot;, &quot;Mr. Bean&#x27;s Holiday&quot; and &quot;The Harry Hill Movie&quot;. Bendelack also directed the first series of &quot;Friday Night Dinner&quot; and the miniseries &quot;Ill Behaviour&quot;.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2346846" start="0" end="15" title="Steve Bendelack" label="Steve Bendelack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174018" start="139" end="150" title="Peter Fluck" label="Peter Fluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358515" start="155" end="164" title="Roger Law" label="Roger Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="199" end="213" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750507" start="292" end="322" title="The Mary Whitehouse Experience" label="The Mary Whitehouse Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398704" start="336" end="352" title="The Royle Family" label="The Royle Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573292" start="366" end="389" title="The League of Gentlemen" label="The League of Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223121" start="403" end="412" title="Dark Ages (TV series)" label="Dark Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860596" start="426" end="456" title="Randall and Hopkirk (Deceased)" label="Randall and Hopkirk (Deceased)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179473" start="470" end="477" title="Cowards (TV series)" label="Cowards"/>
<link wikidata="Q637033" start="514" end="528" title="Little Britain (sketch show)" label="Little Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478925" start="567" end="595" title="The Mighty Boosh (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Mighty Boosh&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151786" start="625" end="634" title="Paul King (director)" label="Paul King"/>
<link wikidata="Q922713" start="713" end="749" title="Whose Line Is It Anyway? (UK TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Whose Line Is It Anyway?&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489821" start="856" end="897" title="The League of Gentlemen&amp;#x27;s Apocalypse" label="The League of Gentlemen&amp;#x27;s Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q330332" start="911" end="934" title="Mr. Bean&amp;#x27;s Holiday" label="Mr. Bean&amp;#x27;s Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993709" start="951" end="971" title="The Harry Hill Movie" label="The Harry Hill Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503510" start="1029" end="1048" title="Friday Night Dinner" label="Friday Night Dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q62065493" start="1080" end="1093" title="Ill Behaviour (TV series)" label="Ill Behaviour"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266067" wikidata="Q3352983" url="?curid=266067" title="Who Dares Wins">
<text>Who Dares Wins (, &quot;O tolmón niká&quot;; Latin: &quot;Qui audet adipiscitur&quot; ; ; ; Portuguese: &quot;Quem ousa vence&quot;; German: &quot;Wer wagt, gewinnt&quot;; Dutch: &quot;Wie niet waagt, die niet wint; Hebrew: המעז מנצח&quot;) is a motto made popular in the English-speaking world by the British Special Air Service.

The is attested from at least the 18th century. Slight variations go back further. The same is likely true of other languages.

As the motto of the SAS, it is normally credited to its founder, Sir David Stirling. Among the SAS themselves, it is sometimes humorously corrupted to &quot;Who cares [who] wins?&quot;. 

The expression appears in a medieval Arabic book of fairy tales, translated and published in 2014.

The catchphrase &quot;He Who Dares Wins&quot; was commonly used by Del Boy in British sitcom &quot;Only Fools and Horses&quot;. The shortened form &quot;Qui Audet&quot; is also heard on the second episode of &quot;Pennyworth&quot;.

The motto has been used by twelve elite special forces units around the world that in some way have historical ties to the British SAS.

The phrase is the motto of Baron Alvingham of Woodfold in the County Palatine of Lancaster, a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom.


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="45" end="50" title="Latin Language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="92" end="102" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="133" end="139" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="172" end="177" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="216" end="222" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="246" end="251" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="310" end="329" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q519183" start="525" end="543" title="David Stirling" label="Sir David Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504972" start="815" end="822" title="Del Boy" label="Del Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="834" end="840" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247858" start="847" end="868" title="Only Fools and Horses" label="Only Fools and Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q57695644" start="956" end="978" title="Pennyworth (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Pennyworth&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="1021" end="1035" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862101" start="1145" end="1160" title="Baron Alvingham" label="Baron Alvingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366378" start="1164" end="1172" title="Woodfold Hall" label="Woodfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="1225" end="1254" title="Peerage of the United Kingdom" label="Peerage of the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266069" wikidata="Q7612051" url="?curid=266069" title="Steve Brown (composer)">
<text>Steven James Brown (25 October 1954 – 2 February 2024) was a British composer, lyricist, record producer, and arranger.

== Career ==
Although primarily known for his composing, Brown proved himself an adept comic, both in performing and writing. He was a full cast member of the Sony Award winning BBC Radio 4 comedy sketch series &quot;In One Ear&quot; from 1984 to 1986. Part of his character arc revolved around his complaining (jokingly) that not enough time or attention was given to his musical interludes, and that the rest of the cast got all the funny material. 

Brown went on to write many of the songs for the satirical comedy show &quot;Spitting Image&quot; in the late 1980s and the entirety of the 1990s, originally providing just lyrics and eventually taking over permanently from Philip Pope as house composer/musical director, as well as providing many of the sung impressions. He worked and appeared extensively with Rory Bremner in the 1980s and 1990s, completing UK tours and the BBC series, &quot;The Rory Bremner Show&quot;. Brown wrote a number of songs for BBC 2&#x27;s &quot;Dead Ringers&quot;, appearing briefly as Noel Gallagher with Jon Culshaw singing as Liam Gallagher. He also acted as MD for impressionists Alistair McGowan and Ronni Ancona.

In 1995, he composed the music for &quot;The Ant &amp; Dec Show&quot; on Children&#x27;s BBC, and later worked on their &quot;SMTV Live&quot; programme, for which he wrote the &#x27;Wonky Donkey&#x27; jingle, among other themes. He continued to work extensively as a jingle writer for their ITV show &quot;Saturday Night Takeaway&quot;.

Brown played the fictional bandleader Glen Ponder in the Steve Coogan TV show &quot;Knowing Me Knowing You with Alan Partridge&quot;, and worked with Coogan thereafter, writing material and appearing as MD on two major UK tours including a West End run at The Lyceum in &quot;The Man Who Thinks He Is It&quot;, a further UK tour in 2008, &quot;The Tony Ferrino Phenomenon&quot; special and album and the song &quot;Raped In The Face&quot; for the film &quot;Hamlet 2&quot;. In April 2018, he worked again with Coogan on the BBC revival of the Alan Partridge character.

Other television shows include Lee Mack&#x27;s &quot;Not Going Out&quot;, &quot;The Brian Conley Show&quot;, BBC1 series &quot;New Tricks&quot; and &quot;Lenny Henry Goes to Town&quot;. He wrote songs for the BBC Children&#x27;s TV shows, &quot;Playaway&quot; and &quot;Play School&quot;, and also the long-running ITV show &quot;My Parents Are Aliens&quot;. CITV&#x27;s &quot;Scrambled!&quot; on which Brown provided theme song and numerous jingles. In 2018, transmission began of the adventure game show &quot;Spyschool&quot; for which he provided theme music and the entire underscore.

As a performer Brown featured on several radio series including the radio show &quot;Jammin″&quot; with Roland Rivron and &quot;The Lee Mack Show&quot; for BBC Radio 2 in which he took part in many of the sketches.

Brown provided all the music and arrangements for British comedian Harry Hill&#x27;s television, radio, live, recording and film work since 1997, and worked on his ITV &quot;TV Burp&quot; show as musical director and jingle composer, later providing the same for &quot;Harry Hill&#x27;s Tea Time&quot; on Sky and &quot;Harry Hill&#x27;s Alien Fun Capsule&quot; for ITV. In 2013, Brown wrote the orchestral score and all original songs for &quot;The Harry Hill Movie&quot;. Brown arranged and recorded all the music for Hill&#x27;s 2015 revival of ITV&#x27;s &quot;Stars In Their Eyes&quot;.

As a record producer Brown worked on the triple-platinum-selling album &quot;Seasons of My Soul&quot; by Rumer, as well as Laura Mvula&#x27;s, &quot;Sing To The Moon&quot;, both of which were top-ten records on the UK Albums Chart. He also produced Harry Hill’s &quot;Funny Times&quot; and later &quot;Little Black Book&quot; by Sarah Walk. In 2014, Brown produced four tracks for the Italian singer Noemi on her album &quot;Made in London&quot;, which peaked at number 2 in the Italian Albums Chart.

Brown composed the score and co-wrote the book and lyrics of the West End musical &quot;Spend Spend Spend&quot; which starred Barbara Dickson and chronicled Viv Nicholson&#x27;s rise and fall after winning a fortune in the football pools in the early 1960s. With Harry Hill he co-wrote &quot;I Can&#x27;t Sing! The X Factor Musical&quot;, which premiered at the London Palladium on 5 March 2013. It was jointly produced by Stage Entertainment and Simon Cowell&#x27;s company Syco. The show starred Nigel Harman as Simon Cowell and Cynthia Erivo as the main contestant. His musical adaptation of &quot;It&#x27;s A Wonderful Life&quot;, co-written with Francis Matthews, was staged at the New Wolsey Theatre in Ipswich in 2009. In 2017, the two began work on a new commission, &quot;Champion&quot;, for the same theatre. In March 2018, Brown completed filming the new ITV panel game, &quot;The Imitation Game&quot;, appearing with his own six-piece band.

In 2021, Brown and Hill collaborated again on &quot;TONY! The Tony Blair Rock Opera&quot;. The show was presented virtually as part of the Turbine Theatre&#x27;s MTFest. In 2022, the show made its world premiere at London&#x27;s Park Theatre before a run in 2023 at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe, as well as a UK tour.

== Personal life ==
Steven James Brown was born on 25 October 1954. He had two sons, standup comedian Alfie Brown and musician Lenny Brown, from his first marriage to comedy actress and impressionist Jan Ravens, for whom he continued to write material. In 2010 he remarried, to actress Deborah Cornelius; they lived in west London with Cornelius&#x27;s daughter, Manon.

Steve Brown died from pulmonary fibrosis on 2 February 2024, at the age of 69.

==References==
==External links==
* Steve Brown&#x27;s official entry at &quot;Comedy CV&quot;.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7612051" start="0" end="18" title="Steve Brown (composer)" label="Steven James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562517" start="280" end="290" title="Sony Radio Academy Awards" label="Sony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="299" end="310" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010298" start="338" end="348" title="In One Ear" label="In One Ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="651" end="665" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184224" start="798" end="809" title="Philip Pope" label="Philip Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400702" start="937" end="949" title="Rory Bremner" label="Rory Bremner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960585" start="1020" end="1041" title="The Rory Bremner Show" label="The Rory Bremner Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157308" start="1096" end="1120" title="Dead Ringers (comedy)" label="&amp;quot;Dead Ringers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193459" start="1143" end="1157" title="Noel Gallagher" label="Noel Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270552" start="1163" end="1174" title="Jon Culshaw" label="Jon Culshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q216708" start="1186" end="1200" title="Liam Gallagher" label="Liam Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727306" start="1241" end="1257" title="Alistair Mcgowan" label="Alistair McGowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4066481" start="1262" end="1274" title="Ronni Ancona" label="Ronni Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596068" start="1318" end="1340" title="Ant &amp;amp; Dec" label="The Ant &amp;amp; Dec Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q935802" start="1350" end="1369" title="CBBC" label="Children&amp;#x27;s BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391388" start="1403" end="1412" title="SMTV Live" label="SMTV Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770849" start="1583" end="1606" title="Saturday Night Takeaway" label="Saturday Night Takeaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q316709" start="1672" end="1684" title="Steve Coogan" label="Steve Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423221" start="1693" end="1747" title="Knowing Me Knowing You with Alan Partridge (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Knowing Me Knowing You with Alan Partridge&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514641" start="2073" end="2081" title="Hamlet 2" label="Hamlet 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q489671" start="2158" end="2172" title="Alan Partridge" label="Alan Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405844" start="2216" end="2224" title="Lee Mack" label="Lee Mack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062104" start="2238" end="2251" title="Not Going Out" label="Not Going Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719988" start="2265" end="2286" title="The Brian Conley Show" label="The Brian Conley Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748791" start="2312" end="2322" title="New Tricks" label="New Tricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175896" start="2339" end="2350" title="Lenny Henry" label="Lenny Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203182" start="2430" end="2438" title="Playaway" label="Playaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254780" start="2449" end="2472" title="Play School (UK TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Play School&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q651718" start="2515" end="2536" title="My Parents Are Aliens" label="My Parents Are Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997305" start="2544" end="2548" title="CITV" label="CITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q19650172" start="2562" end="2572" title="Scrambled!" label="Scrambled!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147951" start="2854" end="2873" title="Jammin&amp;#x27; (radio programme)" label="&amp;quot;Jammin″&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372181" start="2879" end="2892" title="Roland Rivron" label="Roland Rivron"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="2931" end="2942" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127834" start="3058" end="3068" title="Harry Hill" label="Harry Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842051" start="3165" end="3172" title="TV Burp" label="TV Burp"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467723" start="3310" end="3345" title="Harry Hill&amp;#x27;s Alien Fun Capsule" label="Harry Hill&amp;#x27;s Alien Fun Capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993709" start="3436" end="3456" title="The Harry Hill Movie" label="The Harry Hill Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977899" start="3555" end="3574" title="Stars In Their Eyes" label="Stars In Their Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953606" start="3660" end="3678" title="Seasons of My Soul" label="Seasons of My Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q270534" start="3688" end="3693" title="Rumer (musician)" label="Rumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286484" start="3706" end="3717" title="Laura Mvula" label="Laura Mvula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522783" start="3726" end="3754" title="Sing to the Moon" label="&amp;quot;Sing To The Moon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="3798" end="3813" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q35109" start="3983" end="3988" title="Noemi (singer)" label="Noemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="4150" end="4158" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576276" start="4173" end="4190" title="Spend Spend Spend" label="Spend Spend Spend"/>
<link wikidata="Q807398" start="4211" end="4226" title="Barbara Dickson" label="Barbara Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639135" start="4242" end="4255" title="Viv Nicholson" label="Viv Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845932" start="4377" end="4416" title="I Can&amp;#x27;t Sing! The X Factor Musical" label="I Can&amp;#x27;t Sing! The X Factor Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q162629" start="4532" end="4544" title="Simon Cowell" label="Simon Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755989" start="4560" end="4564" title="Syco" label="Syco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617368" start="4583" end="4595" title="Nigel Harman" label="Nigel Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21592474" start="4616" end="4629" title="Cynthia Erivo" label="Cynthia Erivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204191" start="4686" end="4712" title="It&amp;#x27;s A Wonderful Life" label="It&amp;#x27;s A Wonderful Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q563636" start="4736" end="4752" title="Francis Matthews (actor)" label="Francis Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012459" start="4772" end="4790" title="New Wolsey Theatre" label="New Wolsey Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="4794" end="4801" title="Ipswich" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q116196836" start="5091" end="5122" title="TONY! The Tony Blair Rock Opera" label="TONY! The Tony Blair Rock Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q107240897" start="5178" end="5193" title="Turbine Theatre" label="Turbine Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756152" start="5268" end="5280" title="Park Theatre (London)" label="Park Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q368176" start="5309" end="5334" title="Edinburgh Festival Fringe" label="Edinburgh Festival Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q113656066" start="5461" end="5472" title="Alfie Brown" label="Alfie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149788" start="5559" end="5569" title="Jan Ravens" label="Jan Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248218" start="5645" end="5662" title="Deborah Cornelius" label="Deborah Cornelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q32446" start="5752" end="5770" title="pulmonary fibrosis" label="pulmonary fibrosis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266079" wikidata="Q3054443" url="?curid=266079" title="Enn Reitel">
<text>Enn Reitel (born 21 June 1950) is a Scottish actor who specialises in voice work in films, television series and video games.

==Early life==
Reitel&#x27;s family arrived in Scotland as refugees from Estonia. He trained as an actor at the Central School of Speech and Drama.

==Career==
===Acting===
In 1982, Reitel starred in &quot;The Further Adventures of Lucky Jim&quot;, a sitcom on BBC Two written by Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais. Reitel played Jim Dixon, based on the character created by Kingsley Amis.

He appeared on stage in &quot;Me and My Girl&quot; at the Adelphi Theatre in 1986. On television he worked as an impressionist on the satirical puppet show &quot;Spitting Image&quot; and starred in the ITV sitcom &quot;Mog&quot; as a burglar who spent his days in a psychiatric hospital, pretending to be insane.
He played the lead role in the UK television comedy series &quot;The Optimist&quot; which ran from 1983 for two series. The programme was almost entirely silent. In each episode &#x27;The Optimist&#x27; wandered through life doing his best to look on the bright side. He was usually thwarted in his endeavours by the people he encountered. He also appeared in the first series of the UK comedy show &quot;Whose Line Is It Anyway?&quot;.

Reitel also appeared in a number of BBC radio comedy programmes in the 1980s, including Dial M For Pizza and the radio adaptation of the cartoon strip The Fosdyke Saga.

In 2001, he appeared in a short film called &quot;Coconuts&quot; with Michael Palin, in which they did a demonstration on how coconuts can be used in place of horses. This film can be seen on the second disk of the collector&#x27;s edition of &quot;Monty Python and the Holy Grail&quot;.

He played the lead role in the 2007 film &quot;Trust Me&quot;, a comedy about a pair of con men.

Reitel was the second choice to play Del Boy Trotter in &quot;Only Fools and Horses&quot; (behind Jim Broadbent aka Roy Slater in the series), but was busy with other projects (the role ultimately went to David Jason).

He also played two roles in different episodes of long-running sitcom &quot;One Foot in the Grave&quot;. In the first Christmas special, he played &quot;Mr. Starkey&quot;, a down and out who holds Victor Meldrew (Richard Wilson) and his neighbour Pippa&#x27;s father, Reverend Croker (Geoffrey Chater) at gunpoint to wait for Armageddon on Christmas Day. In the second episode of series 3, &quot;Dreamland&quot;, he played a tramp who took a fancy to Victor&#x27;s shoes, but drew the line at his Noel Edmonds-esque sweater.

===Voiceovers===
Reitel does voiceovers for &quot;The X Factor&quot;. He played the Town Crier and The Maggot in Tim Burton&#x27;s &quot;Corpse Bride&quot; and played &quot;Auric Goldfinger&quot; in the 2004 video game &quot;&quot;. It is his voice that provides the vocals on Lemon Jelly&#x27;s &quot;Nice Weather For Ducks&quot; in 2002. He narrated the in-game promo spot for the Praying Mantis PMC in &quot;Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots&quot;. He also does Lorenzo Belli&#x27;s voice from Capcom&#x27;s survival horror game &quot;Haunting Ground&quot;. He was also the voice of Billy the ventriloquist dummy in James Wan&#x27;s movie &quot;Dead Silence&quot;. He also provided voice performance for the audiobook of the sixth book in Eoin Colfer&#x27;s &quot;Artemis Fowl&quot; series, &quot;The Time Paradox&quot;. Reitel also provided the voice for Delvin Mallory in &quot;The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim&quot; and the Wizard Zabodon in &quot;The Big Knights&quot;. He also provided the voice of Ost Ordura in &quot;Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning&quot; and Alfred Pennyworth in &quot;&quot;. He also played Male Altmer and Dunmer in &quot;The Elder Scrolls Online&quot;. He also provided voices of The Time Keeper in &quot;&quot;, Laufey in &quot;Hulk and the Agents of SMASH&quot;, Master Ding in &quot;Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness&quot;, Sebastian Oliver in &quot;Adr1ft&quot;, Olgan in &quot;Baten Kaitos Origins&quot;, Bootstrap Bill Turner in &quot;Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man&#x27;s Chest&quot;, A Male Pedestrian in &quot;Infamous&quot;, Deraegis in &quot;&quot;, Five Leaf Clover Guy, Japanese Deputy, Robertson, Boss Guraji and Fox in &quot;TripTank&quot;, Edwin Jarvis in &quot;Marvel Heroes&quot;, An English Spy in &quot;American Dad!&quot;, Billy in &quot;Dead Silence&quot; and The Dreamer in &quot;The Secret World&quot;. In May 2014, Reitel replaced Ade Edmondson as the voice of the Animal in the &quot;Peperami&quot; adverts.

==Filmography==
===Film===
*&quot;Animal Madness&quot; – Various
*&quot;Bedrooms&quot; – Walter
*&quot;Bob&#x27;s Weekend&quot; – Voice of Man on Television
*&quot;Carrott U Like&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;Chicanery&quot; – Windsor Silcox
*&quot;Corpse Bride&quot; – Maggot, Town Crier
*&quot;Dead Silence&quot; – Billy
*&quot;Foodfight!&quot; – Kung Tofu, Fracois Fromage
*&quot;Forgotten Daughters&quot; – Liam
*&quot;Gobble&quot; – Voice over artist
*&quot;Just Another Secret&quot; (1989) – Dietrich
*&quot;Labyrinth&quot; – Goblin (uncredited)
*&quot;Made in Estonia&quot; – NATO general
*&quot;Original Gangster&quot; – Cleaner
*&quot;Postman Pat: The Movie&quot; – PC Arthur Selby, Reverend Timms, Pat Wannabe 2, Raed
*&quot;Quackerz&quot; – Emperor Peng Lee
*&quot;Secret History of Religion: Doomsday - Book of Revelation&quot; – Narrator
*&quot;Secret History of Religion: Knights Templar&quot; – Narrator
*&quot;Splitting Image: Down and Out in the White House&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;The Adventures of Tintin&quot; – Nestor, Mr. Crabtree
*&quot;The Best Years&quot; – Father Jude Best
*&quot;The Cannibal in the Jungle&quot; – Jan Voorhees
*&quot;The Full Monty&quot; – Narrator (uncredited)
*&quot;The Judge&quot; – Mourner
*&quot;The Lime Grove Story&quot;
*&quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot; – Launcelot Gobbo
*&quot;The Prestige&quot; – Workman 1
*&quot;The Santa Clause 3: The Escape Clause&quot; – (uncredited)
*&quot;The Willows in Winter&quot; – Otter
*&quot;The Wind in the Willows&quot; – Otter, Rabbit, Policeman, Gaoler
*&quot;Throne of Elves&quot; – Blacksmith
*&quot;Tiny Revolutions&quot; – Secret policeman
*&quot;Trust Me&quot; – Joe

===Shorts===
*&quot;Couples and Robbers&quot; – Keith
*&quot;Day After Yesterday&quot; – The Dad
*&quot;Doppelganger&quot; – Dowdsley
*&quot;Ogri&quot; – Sweeney
*&quot;Splitting Image: The Ronnie and Nancy Show&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;The Band Parts&quot; – Harry

===Documentaries===
*&quot;&quot; – Albert Einstein, hyde Park Gent
*&quot;Heroes of Comedy&quot;
*&quot;How to Use Your Coconuts&quot; – Assistant
*&quot;Inside the Two Worlds of &#x27;The Corpse Bride&quot;&#x27; – Maggot (uncredited)
*&quot;I Love 1980&#x27;s&quot; – Himself
*&quot;Monkey Business&quot; – PG Tips Chimp
*&quot;Science of the Bible&quot; – Narrator

===Television specials===
*&quot;Comic Relief&quot; – Himself

===Television series===
*&quot;2DTV&quot; – Prime Minister Tony Blair, Jack Straw, John Prescott, Michael Jackson, Anthony McPartlin, Jeremy Clarkson, Michael Howard, Simon Cowell, Gordon Ramsay, Prince Harry, Tom Cruise, Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen, Pope John Paul II, Johnny Vegas, Will Young, Tim Henman, Justin Hawkins, Jack Osbourne, Phil Spencer, David Dimbleby, Peter Andre, Frank Skinner, Des Lynam, Robbie Williams, Gareth Gates, Uri Geller, David Blunkett, Charles Kennedy, Dick Cheney, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Prince Philip, Prince Edward, Prince William, Osama bin Laden, Wayne Rooney, Various voices
*&quot;American Dad!&quot; – English Spy
*&quot;Archer&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;Art Ninja&quot; – Narrator
*&quot;Barney&quot; – Narrator / Additional voices
*&quot;&quot; – Deraegis
*&quot;Boston Legal&quot; – Father Kevin Maher
*&quot;Bremner, Bird and Fortune&quot;
*&quot;Comedy Playhouse&quot; – Narrator
*&quot;Canned Carrott&quot; – Narrator
*&quot;Coronation Street&quot; – Photographer
*&quot;Cribb&quot; – Mr. Strange
*&quot;Charlie and Lola&quot; – Hedgehogs, Additional Voices (2 episode)
*&quot;Drop the Dead Donkey&quot; – Voice-Over
*&quot;Family Guy&quot; - Mickey Rooney, Additional voices
*&quot;Fanboy &amp; Chum Chum&quot; – Wizard Tooth Fairy (Episode &quot;Tooth or Scare&quot;)
*&quot;General Hospital&quot; – Policeman
*&quot;Grey&#x27;s Anatomy&quot; – Gerhardt Strauss
*&quot;Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H.&quot; – Laufey
*&quot;ITV Sunday Night Drama&quot; – The Reporter
*&quot;Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness&quot; – Master Ding
*&quot;Minoriteam&quot; – Jewcano, Narrator
*&quot;Misfits&quot; – Skinner
*&quot;Mog&quot; – Mog
*&quot;Monkey Dust&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;Mr. Bean: The Animated Series&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;One Foot in the Grave&quot; – The Tramp, Starkey
*&quot;Pallas&quot; – Actor
*&quot;Percy the Park Keeper&quot; – Male animals
*&quot;Peter Panzerfaust&quot; – Older Gilbert
*&quot;Phineas and Ferb&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;Roadies&quot; – Edgar Cumberland Hughes
*&quot;Rory Bremner&quot; – Various
*&quot;Round the Bend&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;Screen One&quot; – Rick
*Sheeep – Gogol, Moze, Uncle Elliott, Mrs. Wolfgang, Additional voices
*&quot;Spitting Image&quot; – Geoffrey Howe, Cecil Parkinson, Robert Maxwell, Dustin Hoffman, Denis Thatcher, Norman Fowler, Konstantin Chernenko, Prince Philip, Paddy Ashdown, Chris Patten, Michael Jackson, Denis Healey, Nelson Mandela, Julian Clary, Winston Churchill, Donald Sinden, Lester Piggott, Peter Snow, David Owen, Mark Phillips, Alec Guinness, Ian St John, OJ Simpson, Gary Barlow, Prince William, Paul Condon, Jack Straw, Satan, Paul Keating, Kenneth Baker, Phil Cool, Paul Channon, Pope John Paul II, Donald Coggan, Jesse Jackson, David Attenborough, Mikhail Gorbachev, Nicholas Witchell, David Icke, West Midlands Police Sergeant, Norman Tebbit, Polish advertiser, Neil Kinnock, Kenneth Clarke, George Younger, Elton John, Matt Aitken, Laurence Olivier, Frank Bruno, Prince Harry, Frank Bough, Richard Branson, Robert Maclennan, Mark Knopfler, Caspar Weinberger, Rick Rickerson, Q, Desmond Wilcox, Ray Cooney, Nicholas Fairbairn, David Gergen, Vincent Price, Bobby Robson, Ian MacGregor, Roy Jenkins, Paul McCartney, Kieran Prendiville, Translator, Prince
*&quot;Squirrel Boy&quot; – Manzio
*&quot;The Adventures of Dodo&quot; – Dodo (Voice)
*&quot;The Almost Complete History of the 20th Century&quot; – Various Characters
*&quot;The Big Knights&quot; – Wizard Zabodon
*&quot;The Bill&quot; – Nigel Doughtie
*&quot;The Gentle Touch&quot; – TDC Power
*&quot;The Ghosts of Motley Hall&quot; – Assistant Director
*&quot;The Imaginatively Titled Punt &amp; Dennis Show&quot;
*&quot;The Further Adventures of Lucky Jim&quot; – Jim Dixon
*&quot;The Optimist&quot; – The Optimist
*&quot;The Staggering Stories of Ferdinand de Bargos&quot; – Actor
*&quot;The Thundermans&quot; – Basil Healy Hutchinson
*&quot;The Wingfeather Saga&quot; – Zouzab, Shaggy, Buzzard Willie
*&quot;The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends&quot; – Robin, Mr. Bouncer, Cock Robin, Insects, Grocer, Animals, Kep, Mr. Drake Puddle-Duck, Sparrows
*&quot;Tractor Tom&quot; – Narrator
*&quot;TripTank&quot; – Five Leaf Clover Guy, Japanese Deputy, Boss Guraji, Robertson, Fox
*&quot;Union Jackass&quot; – George
*&quot;Virtual Murder&quot; – Jed Frewin

===Television mini-series===
*&quot;Ashenden&quot; – Radio Disc Jockey
*&quot;If You See God, Tell Him&quot; – With the voices of

===Videos===
*&quot;The Beano Video&quot; – Singer on Record, Pa Bear, Ma Bear (burping in &quot;Scorcher&quot;), Ted Bear, Hank, Horse, Dog, Scorcher, Hare, Narrator #2
*&quot;The Beano Videostars&quot; – Walter the Softy (&quot;Flutterby&quot; and &quot;Dennis Meets His Match&quot;), Aliens, Female Alien, Police Officer #1, Winston, Doctor, Hairdresser, Robot, Pa Bear, Ted Bear, Hank, Chicken, Chick, Ma&#x27;s Porridge Narrator, Pedestrian #2, Poolgoer #3, Child

===Video games===

*&quot;007: Quantum of Solace&quot; – Mr. White
*&quot;Adr1ft&quot; – Sebastian Oliver
*&quot;&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;Baten Kaitos Origins&quot; – Olgan
*&quot;Cold Winter&quot; – Amenkoht Ali-Salah
*&quot;Dishonored&quot; – Nurse Trimble – The Brigmore Witches DLC
*&quot;Driver&quot;
*&quot;Epic Mickey&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;Infamous&quot; – Male Pedestrian
*&quot;Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning&quot; – Ost Ordura, additional voices
*&quot;Legendary&quot; – LeFey
*&quot;Meet the Robinsons&quot;
*&quot;Original War&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man&#x27;s Chest&quot; – Bootstrap Bill Turner
*&quot;&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;SpongeBob Moves In!&quot; – Mermaid Man
*&quot;&quot; – Time Keeper
*&quot;Star Wars: The Old Republic: Galactic Starfighter&quot; – Writch Hurley
*&quot;Star Wars: The Old Republic: Rise of the Hutt Cartel&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;The Elder Scrolls Online&quot; – Male Altmer, Male Dunmer
*&quot;The Getaway: Black Monday&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;The Lord of the Rings: Aragorn&#x27;s Quest&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;The Secret World&quot; – The Dreamer, additional voices
*&quot;The Weakest Link&quot; – Contestants (UK version)
*&quot;Warhammer Online: Wrath of Heroes&quot; – Archivist
*&quot;World in Conflict&quot; – Additional voices
*&quot;World in Conflict: Soviet Assault&quot; – Additional voices

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3054443" start="0" end="10" title="Enn Reitel" label="Enn Reitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920017" start="70" end="80" title="voice acting" label="voice work"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="200" end="207" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q981195" start="239" end="273" title="Central School of Speech and Drama" label="Central School of Speech and Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q104849511" start="333" end="368" title="The Further Adventures of Lucky Jim" label="The Further Adventures of Lucky Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="388" end="395" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q711682" start="407" end="419" title="Dick Clement" label="Dick Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982007" start="424" end="438" title="Ian La Frenais" label="Ian La Frenais"/>
<link wikidata="Q220078" start="499" end="512" title="Kingsley Amis" label="Kingsley Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470358" start="545" end="559" title="Me and My Girl" label="Me and My Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q355319" start="573" end="588" title="Adelphi Theatre" label="Adelphi Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="649" end="658" title="Satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913135" start="659" end="665" title="puppet" label="puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="677" end="691" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="717" end="720" title="ITV1" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="734" end="737" title="Mog (TV series)" label="Mog"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="781" end="801" title="psychiatric hospital" label="psychiatric hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184274" start="893" end="905" title="The Optimist (TV series)" label="The Optimist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1233" end="1257" title="Whose Line Is It Anyway? (British TV series)" label="Whose Line Is It Anyway?"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270464" start="1354" end="1370" title="Dial M For Pizza" label="Dial M For Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734929" start="1417" end="1433" title="The Fosdyke Saga" label="The Fosdyke Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q223985" start="1506" end="1519" title="Michael Palin" label="Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25043" start="1685" end="1716" title="Monty Python and the Holy Grail" label="Monty Python and the Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848117" start="1772" end="1780" title="Trust Me (2007 film)" label="Trust Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504972" start="1860" end="1875" title="Del Boy" label="Del Boy Trotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247858" start="1885" end="1906" title="Only Fools and Horses" label="Only Fools and Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q185079" start="1921" end="1934" title="Jim Broadbent" label="Jim Broadbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q964329" start="2028" end="2039" title="David Jason" label="David Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303493" start="2119" end="2140" title="One Foot in the Grave" label="One Foot in the Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926148" start="2240" end="2254" title="Victor Meldrew" label="Victor Meldrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q516671" start="2256" end="2270" title="Richard Wilson (Scottish actor)" label="Richard Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121041" start="2328" end="2343" title="Geoffrey Chater" label="Geoffrey Chater"/>
<link wikidata="Q193151" start="2369" end="2379" title="Armageddon" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388488" start="2540" end="2552" title="Noel Edmonds" label="Noel Edmonds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2619" end="2631" title="The X Factor (British TV series)" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="2682" end="2692" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q164417" start="2706" end="2718" title="Corpse Bride" label="Corpse Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q924817" start="2742" end="2758" title="Auric Goldfinger" label="Auric Goldfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444372" start="2846" end="2857" title="Lemon Jelly" label="Lemon Jelly"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2980" end="3020" title="Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots" label="Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512540" start="3114" end="3129" title="Haunting Ground" label="Haunting Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q543403" start="3224" end="3236" title="Dead Silence" label="Dead Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q211893" start="3318" end="3329" title="Eoin Colfer" label="Eoin Colfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q325283" start="3343" end="3355" title="Artemis Fowl" label="Artemis Fowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617711" start="3376" end="3392" title="Artemis Fowl and the Time Paradox" label="The Time Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3459" end="3486" title="The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim" label="The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215773" start="3525" end="3540" title="The Big Knights" label="The Big Knights"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3598" end="3627" title="Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning" label="Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q159051" start="3638" end="3655" title="Alfred Pennyworth" label="Alfred Pennyworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188904" start="3720" end="3744" title="The Elder Scrolls Online" label="The Elder Scrolls Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935752" start="3828" end="3856" title="Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H." label="Hulk and the Agents of SMASH"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3885" end="3922" title="Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness" label="Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3956" end="3962" title="Adrift (video game)" label="Adr1ft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704499" start="3985" end="4005" title="Baten Kaitos Origins" label="Baten Kaitos Origins"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4044" end="4091" title="Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Chest" label="Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Chest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346174" start="4126" end="4134" title="Infamous (video game)" label="Infamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843781" start="4247" end="4255" title="TripTank" label="TripTank"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283458" start="4285" end="4298" title="Marvel Heroes (video game)" label="Marvel Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210311" start="4330" end="4343" title="American Dad!" label="American Dad!"/>
<link wikidata="Q543403" start="4366" end="4378" title="Dead Silence" label="Dead Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270292" start="4410" end="4426" title="The Secret World" label="The Secret World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160202" start="4463" end="4476" title="Ade Edmondson" label="Ade Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199440" start="4517" end="4525" title="Peperami" label="Peperami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879417" start="4614" end="4622" title="Bedrooms (film)" label="Bedrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q164417" start="4794" end="4806" title="Corpse Bride" label="Corpse Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q543403" start="4841" end="4853" title="Dead Silence" label="Dead Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076451" start="4875" end="4885" title="Foodfight!" label="Foodfight!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5008" end="5027" title="Frederick Forsyth Presents#Just Another Secret" label="Just Another Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q278053" start="5059" end="5068" title="Labyrinth (1986 film)" label="Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5189" end="5211" title="Postman Pat: The Movie" label="Postman Pat: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q980041" start="5553" end="5577" title="The Adventures of Tintin (film)" label="The Adventures of Tintin"/>
<link wikidata="Q775970" start="5716" end="5730" title="The Full Monty" label="The Full Monty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13573278" start="5768" end="5777" title="The Judge (2014 film)" label="The Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631723" start="5835" end="5857" title="The Merchant of Venice (1980 film)" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q46551" start="5889" end="5901" title="The Prestige (film)" label="The Prestige"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5927" end="5964" title="The Santa Clause 3: The Escape Clause" label="The Santa Clause 3: The Escape Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133718" start="6036" end="6059" title="The Wind in the Willows (1995 film)" label="The Wind in the Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q26456766" start="6108" end="6123" title="Throne of Elves" label="Throne of Elves"/>
<link wikidata="Q17183949" start="6199" end="6207" title="Trust Me (2013 film)" label="Trust Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743218" start="6571" end="6587" title="Heroes of Comedy" label="Heroes of Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="6899" end="6911" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633087" start="6960" end="6964" title="2DTV" label="2DTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="6988" end="6998" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="7000" end="7010" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q332393" start="7012" end="7025" title="John Prescott" label="John Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="7027" end="7042" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q573612" start="7044" end="7061" title="Anthony McPartlin" label="Anthony McPartlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216160" start="7063" end="7078" title="Jeremy Clarkson" label="Jeremy Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q325381" start="7080" end="7094" title="Michael Howard" label="Michael Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q162629" start="7096" end="7108" title="Simon Cowell" label="Simon Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15280" start="7110" end="7123" title="Gordon Ramsay" label="Gordon Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q152316" start="7125" end="7137" title="Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex" label="Prince Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="7139" end="7149" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500701" start="7151" end="7174" title="Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen" label="Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="7176" end="7193" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702422" start="7195" end="7207" title="Johnny Vegas" label="Johnny Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q348906" start="7209" end="7219" title="Will Young" label="Will Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q221737" start="7221" end="7231" title="Tim Henman" label="Tim Henman"/>
<link wikidata="Q552608" start="7233" end="7247" title="Justin Hawkins" label="Justin Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q724791" start="7249" end="7262" title="Jack Osbourne" label="Jack Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207227" start="7264" end="7276" title="Phil Spencer (television personality)" label="Phil Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232979" start="7278" end="7292" title="David Dimbleby" label="David Dimbleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q712765" start="7294" end="7305" title="Peter Andre" label="Peter Andre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489658" start="7307" end="7320" title="Frank Skinner" label="Frank Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263489" start="7322" end="7331" title="Des Lynam" label="Des Lynam"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="7333" end="7348" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q381405" start="7350" end="7362" title="Gareth Gates" label="Gareth Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q44657" start="7364" end="7374" title="Uri Geller" label="Uri Geller"/>
<link wikidata="Q264196" start="7376" end="7390" title="David Blunkett" label="David Blunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q332950" start="7392" end="7407" title="Charles Kennedy" label="Charles Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="7409" end="7420" title="Dick Cheney" label="Dick Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="7422" end="7443" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="7445" end="7458" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q154920" start="7460" end="7473" title="Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q36812" start="7475" end="7489" title="William, Prince of Wales" label="Prince William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="7491" end="7506" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q266613" start="7508" end="7520" title="Wayne Rooney" label="Wayne Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q210311" start="7544" end="7557" title="American Dad!" label="American Dad!"/>
<link wikidata="Q632670" start="7585" end="7591" title="Archer (2009 TV series)" label="Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803251" start="7625" end="7634" title="Art Ninja" label="Art Ninja"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7659" end="7665" title="Barney (British TV series)" label="Barney"/>
<link wikidata="Q308984" start="7735" end="7747" title="Boston Legal" label="Boston Legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960585" start="7782" end="7807" title="Bremner, Bird and Fortune" label="Bremner, Bird and Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151469" start="7821" end="7837" title="Comedy Playhouse" label="Comedy Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032620" start="7862" end="7876" title="Canned Carrott" label="Canned Carrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="7901" end="7918" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697130" start="7947" end="7952" title="Cribb" label="Cribb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960912" start="7980" end="7996" title="Charlie and Lola" label="Charlie and Lola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308430" start="8053" end="8073" title="Drop the Dead Donkey" label="Drop the Dead Donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="8100" end="8110" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104081" start="8119" end="8132" title="Mickey Rooney" label="Mickey Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q905387" start="8159" end="8181" title="Fanboy &amp;amp; Chum Chum" label="Fanboy &amp;amp; Chum Chum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136370" start="8253" end="8269" title="General Hospital" label="General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q438406" start="8295" end="8314" title="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy" label="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935752" start="8347" end="8380" title="Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H." label="Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H."/>
<link wikidata="Q18350734" start="8403" end="8425" title="ITV Sunday Night Drama" label="ITV Sunday Night Drama"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8454" end="8491" title="Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness" label="Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869228" start="8519" end="8529" title="Minoriteam" label="Minoriteam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890391" start="8594" end="8597" title="Mog (TV series)" label="Mog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489335" start="8617" end="8628" title="Monkey Dust" label="Monkey Dust"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8662" end="8691" title="Mr. Bean: The Animated Series" label="Mr. Bean: The Animated Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303493" start="8725" end="8746" title="One Foot in the Grave" label="One Foot in the Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167659" start="8809" end="8830" title="Percy the Park Keeper" label="Percy the Park Keeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q217679" start="8906" end="8922" title="Phineas and Ferb" label="Phineas and Ferb"/>
<link wikidata="Q22025376" start="8956" end="8963" title="Roadies (TV series)" label="Roadies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400702" start="9003" end="9015" title="Rory Bremner" label="Rory Bremner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371211" start="9039" end="9053" title="Round the Bend" label="Round the Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439007" start="9087" end="9097" title="Screen One" label="Screen One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637771" start="9112" end="9118" title="Sheeep" label="Sheeep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="9189" end="9203" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q332323" start="9212" end="9225" title="Geoffrey Howe" label="Geoffrey Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q327810" start="9227" end="9242" title="Cecil Parkinson" label="Cecil Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q333468" start="9244" end="9258" title="Robert Maxwell" label="Robert Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42930" start="9260" end="9274" title="Dustin Hoffman" label="Dustin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q46172" start="9276" end="9290" title="Denis Thatcher" label="Denis Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q332919" start="9292" end="9305" title="Norman Fowler" label="Norman Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q127442" start="9307" end="9327" title="Konstantin Chernenko" label="Konstantin Chernenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="9329" end="9342" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q333066" start="9344" end="9357" title="Paddy Ashdown" label="Paddy Ashdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23368" start="9359" end="9371" title="Chris Patten" label="Chris Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="9373" end="9388" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="9390" end="9402" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="9404" end="9418" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307060" start="9420" end="9432" title="Julian Clary" label="Julian Clary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9434" end="9451" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q432316" start="9453" end="9466" title="Donald Sinden" label="Donald Sinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q377345" start="9468" end="9482" title="Lester Piggott" label="Lester Piggott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177015" start="9484" end="9494" title="Peter Snow" label="Peter Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q333085" start="9496" end="9506" title="David Owen" label="David Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q547893" start="9508" end="9521" title="Mark Phillips" label="Mark Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q103894" start="9523" end="9536" title="Alec Guinness" label="Alec Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q428757" start="9538" end="9549" title="Ian St John" label="Ian St John"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="9551" end="9561" title="O. J. Simpson" label="OJ Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q328753" start="9563" end="9574" title="Gary Barlow" label="Gary Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q36812" start="9576" end="9590" title="William, Prince of Wales" label="Prince William"/>
<link wikidata="Q267783" start="9592" end="9603" title="Paul Condon, Baron Condon" label="Paul Condon"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="9605" end="9615" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="9617" end="9622" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q242654" start="9624" end="9636" title="Paul Keating" label="Paul Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q333390" start="9638" end="9651" title="Kenneth Baker, Baron Baker of Dorking" label="Kenneth Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181805" start="9653" end="9662" title="Phil Cool" label="Phil Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069915" start="9664" end="9676" title="Paul Channon" label="Paul Channon"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="9678" end="9695" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q336389" start="9697" end="9710" title="Donald Coggan" label="Donald Coggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310586" start="9712" end="9725" title="Jesse Jackson" label="Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="9727" end="9745" title="David Attenborough" label="David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="9747" end="9764" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949215" start="9766" end="9783" title="Nicholas Witchell" label="Nicholas Witchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q333118" start="9785" end="9795" title="David Icke" label="David Icke"/>
<link wikidata="Q336011" start="9828" end="9841" title="Norman Tebbit" label="Norman Tebbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="9862" end="9874" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q271889" start="9876" end="9890" title="Kenneth Clarke" label="Kenneth Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q333145" start="9892" end="9906" title="George Younger, 4th Viscount Younger of Leckie" label="George Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="9908" end="9918" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788269" start="9920" end="9931" title="Matt Aitken" label="Matt Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="9933" end="9949" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q530220" start="9951" end="9962" title="Frank Bruno" label="Frank Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q152316" start="9964" end="9976" title="Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex" label="Prince Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11859910" start="9978" end="9989" title="Frank Bough" label="Frank Bough"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="9991" end="10006" title="Richard Branson" label="Richard Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494468" start="10008" end="10024" title="Robert Maclennan, Baron Maclennan of Rogart" label="Robert Maclennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185343" start="10026" end="10039" title="Mark Knopfler" label="Mark Knopfler"/>
<link wikidata="Q434142" start="10041" end="10058" title="Caspar Weinberger" label="Caspar Weinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264816" start="10079" end="10093" title="Desmond Wilcox" label="Desmond Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q939790" start="10095" end="10105" title="Ray Cooney" label="Ray Cooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025366" start="10107" end="10125" title="Nicholas Fairbairn" label="Nicholas Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701575" start="10127" end="10139" title="David Gergen" label="David Gergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="10141" end="10154" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q189587" start="10156" end="10168" title="Bobby Robson" label="Bobby Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982116" start="10170" end="10183" title="Ian MacGregor" label="Ian MacGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="10185" end="10196" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="10198" end="10212" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405458" start="10214" end="10232" title="Kieran Prendiville" label="Kieran Prendiville"/>
<link wikidata="Q962173" start="10260" end="10272" title="Squirrel Boy" label="Squirrel Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215773" start="10428" end="10443" title="The Big Knights" label="The Big Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q929589" start="10474" end="10482" title="The Bill" label="The Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801482" start="10513" end="10529" title="The Gentle Touch" label="The Gentle Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736346" start="10555" end="10580" title="The Ghosts of Motley Hall" label="The Ghosts of Motley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859919" start="10615" end="10662" title="The Imaginatively Titled Punt &amp;amp; Dennis Show" label="The Imaginatively Titled Punt &amp;amp; Dennis Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q104849511" start="10676" end="10711" title="The Further Adventures of Lucky Jim" label="The Further Adventures of Lucky Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184274" start="10737" end="10749" title="The Optimist (TV series)" label="The Optimist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766179" start="10778" end="10823" title="The Staggering Stories of Ferdinand de Bargos" label="The Staggering Stories of Ferdinand de Bargos"/>
<link wikidata="Q9197118" start="10845" end="10860" title="The Thundermans" label="The Thundermans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348962" start="10899" end="10919" title="The Wingfeather Saga" label="The Wingfeather Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994122" start="10966" end="11003" title="The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends" label="The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036925" start="11114" end="11125" title="Tractor Tom" label="Tractor Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843781" start="11150" end="11158" title="TripTank" label="TripTank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290267" start="11277" end="11291" title="Virtual Murder (TV series)" label="Virtual Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154224" start="11348" end="11356" title="Ashenden (TV series)" label="Ashenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990988" start="11390" end="11414" title="If You See God, Tell Him" label="If You See God, Tell Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038539" start="11463" end="11478" title="The Beano Video" label="The Beano Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q110231270" start="11620" end="11640" title="The Beano Videostars" label="The Beano Videostars"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11939" end="11961" title="007: Quantum of Solace" label="007: Quantum of Solace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18693102" start="11987" end="11993" title="Adr1ft" label="Adr1ft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704499" start="12060" end="12080" title="Baten Kaitos Origins" label="Baten Kaitos Origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142421" start="12102" end="12113" title="Cold Winter" label="Cold Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q323264" start="12148" end="12158" title="Dishonored" label="Dishonored"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293778" start="12215" end="12221" title="Driver (video game)" label="Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q573760" start="12235" end="12246" title="Epic Mickey" label="Epic Mickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346174" start="12280" end="12288" title="Infamous (video game)" label="Infamous"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12320" end="12349" title="Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning" label="Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q392058" start="12395" end="12404" title="Legendary (video game)" label="Legendary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281078" start="12426" end="12444" title="Meet the Robinsons (video game)" label="Meet the Robinsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178375" start="12458" end="12470" title="Original War" label="Original War"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12504" end="12551" title="Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Chest" label="Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Chest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16168203" start="12623" end="12642" title="SpongeBob Moves In!" label="SpongeBob Moves In!"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12863" end="12903" title="The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian (video game)" label="The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188904" start="12937" end="12961" title="The Elder Scrolls Online" label="The Elder Scrolls Online"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13002" end="13027" title="The Getaway: Black Monday" label="The Getaway: Black Monday"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13061" end="13104" title="The Lord of the Rings: Aragorn&amp;#x27;s Quest" label="The Lord of the Rings: Aragorn&amp;#x27;s Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270292" start="13138" end="13154" title="The Secret World" label="The Secret World"/>
<link wikidata="Q327762" start="13201" end="13217" title="The Weakest Link" label="The Weakest Link"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13258" end="13291" title="Warhammer Online: Wrath of Heroes" label="Warhammer Online: Wrath of Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q664538" start="13317" end="13334" title="World in Conflict" label="World in Conflict"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13368" end="13401" title="World in Conflict: Soviet Assault" label="World in Conflict: Soviet Assault"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266081" wikidata="Q3657243" url="?curid=266081" title="Nursling">
<text>Nursling is a village in the civil parish of Nursling and Rownhams, in the Test Valley district, in Hampshire, England, about north-west of the city of Southampton. Formerly called Nhutscelle (in an 8th-century life of Saint Boniface), then Nutsall, Nutshalling or Nutshullyng until the mid-19th century, it has now been absorbed into the suburbs of Southampton, although it is not part of the district of Southampton (remaining part of the Test Valley borough).

==History==
At &quot;Onna&quot; (Nursling) Romans erected a bridge (probably a wooden one as no trace of stone abutments remains) across the River Test, below which it widens into its estuary, and there are traces of the Roman road from Nursling to Stoney Cross. At Nhutscelle a Benedictine monastery was established in 686, the earliest Benedictine establishment in Wessex according to Bede. It became a major seat of learning, and at the end of the 7th century, Winfrith (subsequently Saint Boniface) studied here under the abbot Winberht, producing the first Latin grammar to be written in England. He left in 710 for Canterbury, returning briefly around 716 before going to Germany as a missionary. The Danes destroyed the monastery in 878 and it was never rebuilt; its exact site has not been identified, though the parish church is dedicated to St. Boniface.

Thirty households lived in Hnutscilling, according to the Domesday Survey, belonging to the Bishop of Winchester.

The church of St. Boniface largely dates from the 14th century with some 13th century possibly Saxon material. It was restored over two years from 1881 and again in 1890.
A rectory was across the road from the church in 1778. It survives as Nursling House.

O. G. S. Crawford, the archeologist, lived in Nursling during World War II, and kept much rare material from the Ordnance Survey office in Southampton in his garage. This foresight saved much important historical material from destruction when the offices were burnt out in an air raid. The cricketer William Henry Harrison was born in Nursling.

In 1931 the civil parish had a population of 727. On 1 April 1932 the parish was abolished to form &quot;Nursling and Rownhams&quot;.

==Present day==
Nursling Industrial Estate, adjacent to the M271, houses several major businesses, such as Tesco, Norbert Dentressangle and Meachers, and is ably served by transport links, the motorway giving easy access to the Southampton container terminal, as well as the motorway links to London and the Midlands.

Nursling is also home to one of the two South Central Ambulance Service stations that serve the Southampton area.

Grove Place is a Grade I listed building in Nursling. Now converted into retirement apartments, the building was originally a country house and was converted into a lunatic asylum, Later it became a private school, the Northcliffe School for boys, then, later, the Atherley girls&#x27; school, before being developed for its present purpose.

==References==
==External links==
*Parish of Nursling and Rownhams
*Nursling and Rownhams History Group Local History in Nursling and Rownhams, Hampshire
*St Boniface Church, Nursling
*Romsey Local History Society Local History in Romsey and its surrounding area
*Nursling, A History of the County of Hampshire: Volume 3. Originally published by Victoria County History, London, 1908.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3657243" start="0" end="8" title="Nursling" label="Nursling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="29" end="41" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45" end="66" title="Nursling and Rownhams" label="Nursling and Rownhams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116338" start="75" end="86" title="Test Valley" label="Test Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="100" end="109" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="152" end="163" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657243" start="181" end="191" title="Nursling" label="Nhutscelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160445" start="219" end="233" title="Saint Boniface" label="Saint Boniface"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657243" start="241" end="248" title="Nursling" label="Nutsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657243" start="250" end="261" title="Nursling" label="Nutshalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657243" start="265" end="276" title="Nursling" label="Nutshullyng"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="339" end="345" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="507" end="513" title="Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677000" start="605" end="615" title="River Test" label="River Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275600" start="713" end="725" title="Stoney Cross" label="Stoney Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="743" end="754" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="831" end="837" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="851" end="855" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q160445" start="951" end="965" title="Saint Boniface" label="Saint Boniface"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1026" end="1031" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="1085" end="1095" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1142" end="1149" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="1155" end="1165" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q160445" start="1315" end="1327" title="Saint Boniface" label="St. Boniface"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1388" end="1403" title="Domesday Survey" label="Domesday Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271558" start="1422" end="1442" title="Bishop of Winchester" label="Bishop of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032565" start="1703" end="1720" title="O. G. S. Crawford" label="O. G. S. Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1726" end="1738" title="Archaeology" label="archeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1765" end="1777" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q548721" start="1816" end="1831" title="Ordnance Survey" label="Ordnance Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="1842" end="1853" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380335" start="1980" end="1988" title="airstrike" label="air raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012026" start="2004" end="2026" title="William Henry Harrison (cricketer)" label="William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464414" start="2245" end="2249" title="M271 motorway" label="M271"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566742" start="2544" end="2575" title="South Central Ambulance Service" label="South Central Ambulance Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="2600" end="2611" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17528555" start="2619" end="2630" title="Grove Place" label="Grove Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="2644" end="2659" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="2745" end="2758" title="country house" label="country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516931" start="2784" end="2798" title="lunatic asylum" label="lunatic asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646036" start="2884" end="2892" title="The Atherley School" label="Atherley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266082" wikidata="Q6890391" url="?curid=266082" title="Mog (TV series)">
<text>Mog was a British television comedy from 1985 to 1986 about a cat burglar living in a psychiatric hospital. It starred Enn Reitel as the title character, who is only faking insanity. It was based on Peter Tinniswood&#x27;s 1970 novel of the same name. It was made for the ITV network by WitzEnd for Central.

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7696995" start="18" end="35" title="television comedy" label="television comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q329425" start="62" end="73" title="cat burglar" label="cat burglar"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="86" end="106" title="psychiatric hospital" label="psychiatric hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054443" start="119" end="129" title="Enn Reitel" label="Enn Reitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177331" start="199" end="222" title="Peter Tinniswood" label="Peter Tinniswood&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="272" end="275" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730845" start="287" end="294" title="WitzEnd Productions" label="WitzEnd"/>
<link wikidata="Q10444865" start="299" end="306" title="ITV Central" label="Central"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266084" wikidata="Q3844833" url="?curid=266084" title="Arnold Rimmer">
<text>Arnold Judas Rimmer is a fictional character in the science fiction sitcom &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;, played by Chris Barrie. Rimmer is characterised as a second-class technician (first-class technician in the novels) and de facto leader of the mining ship &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;. Portrayed as snobbish, pedantic, and self-centred, Rimmer is unpopular with his crewmates and is often the target of insults and general ridicule.

After he is killed by a radiation leak during an ellipsis in the series&#x27; first episode &quot;The End&quot; (1988) Rimmer is present for most of the series as a computer-generated hologram, indicated by the &#x27;H&#x27; symbol on his forehead. From series I-V, Rimmer is intangible as a hologram and unable to interact with his environment, referred to in-universe as &#x27;soft-light&#x27;. Come the series VI episode &quot;Legion&quot; (1993), Rimmer&#x27;s Light Bee is upgraded by the titular character to a &#x27;hard-light&#x27; hologram where he is now able to interact with his surroundings as well as being essentially indestructible, yet still able to feel pain. Following the character&#x27;s departure in the series VII episode &quot;Stoke Me a Clipper&quot; (1997), Rimmer is absent from the show until series VIII, where a flesh and blood version of Rimmer is shown having been resurrected by nanobots with no memory of the hologrammatic Rimmer&#x27;s experiences and only those of Rimmer prior to the radiation leak in the first episode (likely from when he had his personality-disk last updated before his death). Following a ten-year hiatus after series VIII, the character reappeared as the original hologram Rimmer in the miniseries &quot;Back to Earth&quot; (2009) onward. Doug Naylor confirmed in 2020 that the Rimmer from Back To Earth onwards is the original Rimmer having returned from his time being Ace Rimmer. Why he returned or what happened to the resurrected version of Rimmer from series eight has not been revealed yet. For a brief time in the feature-length special &quot;The Promised Land&quot;, Rimmer is temporarily upgraded to Diamond Light, a combination of both soft and hard light.

The creators of the series acknowledge that Rimmer&#x27;s surname comes from a snobby prefect with whom they attended school. They joke that only the boy&#x27;s name was used, and not his personality because that would imply he had one.

== Fictional history ==

=== Television ===

==== 1980s ====

Rimmer first appeared in &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;″s first episode &quot;The End&quot; (1988), where he is characterised as second technician on board the mining ship &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;, ranking above Dave Lister (Craig Charles), the lowest ranked crew member on board the ship with whom he shares quarters, and below all four of the service robots. As a technician, Rimmer does maintenance work on vending machines that not even the robots are assigned to. Rimmer is shown having difficulty revising for his &quot;engineer&#x27;s exam&quot; which he hopes to pass and become an officer after having failed before prior to the episode, and he reveals that he wasn&#x27;t academically educated unlike others who had become officers. After Lister is awakened from stasis, where he was put as punishment for bringing an unquarantined cat on board, the ship&#x27;s computer Holly (Norman Lovett) tells Lister that the ship&#x27;s crew died in a radiation leak from a drive plate Rimmer had improperly repaired and Lister was kept in stasis until the radiation levels returned to normal three million years later. Rimmer is depicted as having been brought back to life as a hologram, having the same drives, feelings and emotions as the living Rimmer, but being unable to touch anything. The only other survivor on board &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; is a creature called &quot;Cat&quot; (Danny John-Jules), a descendant of Lister&#x27;s pregnant cat who was safely sealed in the hold along with her unborn kittens during the radioactive crisis.

By the time of &quot;Future Echoes&quot; (1988), Rimmer claims to have taken the &quot;astronavigation exam&quot; without passing nine times, or ten, if you count the time he had his spasm. He also claims in this episode that his father had said, &quot;Shiny clean boots and a spanking short haircut, and you can cope with anything,&quot; right before &quot;that unfortunate suicide business&quot;.

In &quot;Balance of Power&quot; (1988), Holly reveals that reason Rimmer was brought back as a hologram was because, in Holly&#x27;s judgment, Rimmer was the best person to keep Lister sane because the two had shared fourteen million words between each other, making Rimmer the crew member with which Lister had the most interaction; in Holly&#x27;s judgment, the fact that their interactions were almost entirely antagonistic was irrelevant. Lister later asks Rimmer where the disc which contains Navigation Officer Kristine Kochanski&#x27;s (C P Grogan) hologram has been hidden so that Lister could go on a date with her, but Rimmer refuses to switch his own disc off to bring back Kochanski for an evening due to the risk that Lister might not turn Rimmer&#x27;s hologram on again. Holly has the ability to override Rimmer and switch his disc off but cannot do so because Rimmer outranks Lister and he is programmed to prioritise the former&#x27;s orders over the latter&#x27;s.

In &quot;Confidence and Paranoia&quot; (1988), Lister believes that the only reason that Rimmer became a part of the love celibacy society was because he couldn&#x27;t get a date, and he could never get a date because Rimmer&#x27;s mum bought all of Rimmer&#x27;s casual clothes. Rimmer denies this, pointing out he went to bed with Yvonne McGruder, but Lister says she thought Rimmer was someone else due to her wonky vision from a concussion. Lister, with the help of a solid manifestation of Lister&#x27;s confidence (played by Craig Ferguson), deduces where Kochanski&#x27;s personality disc is hidden as well as a means of how the ship can power two holograms at once. Lister is still unable to go on a date with Kochanski, however, as the disc inside Kochanski&#x27;s box has been swapped with one containing a duplicate of Rimmer.

In &quot;Me²&quot; (1988), Rimmer is shown moving in with his double as better company in the next bunkroom over from Lister. Rimmer&#x27;s double reveals that all of Rimmer&#x27;s brothers, but not Rimmer, were academy educated. Rimmer claims that this was because his father couldn&#x27;t afford it. Rimmer also mentions taking a film course at night school, although he confuses a cartoon showing at the cinema in the episode with &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;. Lister watches a video of Rimmer&#x27;s death, where his last words are &quot;gazpacho soup&quot;. Demonstrating intense, literal self-hatred, the second cruelly insults and berates the first. Believing that Lister is going to wipe his hologram anyway because of the two Rimmers&#x27; constant arguing, Rimmer explained his dying remark as referring to a dinner at the captain&#x27;s table with six officers, during which he made a &quot;faux pas&quot; where he had his gazpacho soup taken away to be brought back hot, not realising that gazpacho soup is meant to be served cold. This caused the officers at the table to laugh at him, and he was never invited back. The incident haunted Rimmer for the rest of his life (and beyond). Gradually, his obsession over the incident caused him to remember it as the most disastrous, imbecilic action of his life, and it undermined his self-esteem out of all proportion. Lister, displaying deep empathy, tried to comfort Rimmer, assuring him that &quot;anybody could make a mistake like that.&quot; His confession complete, Rimmer prepares to be wiped, but Lister wipes the second Rimmer instead; Lister had allowed Rimmer to believe his &quot;death&quot; was imminent because Lister wanted to know what the &quot;gazpacho soup&quot; remark meant, and he knew that Rimmer would never tell him any other circumstances.

Despite &quot;Future Echoes&quot; having previously suggested that Rimmer&#x27;s father killed himself, according to a letter received from Rimmer&#x27;s mother in &quot;Better Than Life&quot; (1988), Rimmer&#x27;s father (played by John Abineri) had died peacefully in his sleep and Rimmer appeared unaware about how his father had died before Lister read out to Rimmer what his letter said. Rimmer&#x27;s backstory in this episode revealed that Rimmer had hated his father, who had fixated on Rimmer and his three brothers to join the Space Corps and become officers when Rimmer&#x27;s father had been rejected for being an inch below regulation height. To this end, he refused to allow them to eat unless they could answer complicated astronavigation questions. This led to Rimmer almost dying of malnutrition. Rimmer&#x27;s father also stretched his sons on a traction machine to make them taller, causing Frank to be 6&#x27;5&quot; by the time he was eleven. Rimmer disliked his parents enough to the point where he divorced them from himself when he was fourteen; Rimmer getting paid maintenance until employment age and access to the family dog every fourth weekend.

According to &quot;Thanks for the Memory&quot; (1988), Rimmer did a maintenance course at Saturn Tech. Rimmer also claims that his sexual liaison with McGruder was the only point in his entire life he had made love.

In &quot;Queeg&quot; (1988), Rimmer mentions how, after being burnt once by a person he considered his best friend, he had considered no-one in his life to be &quot;true friends&quot;, and that friends were only friends when it suits them. He explains that when he was fifteen, he had a &quot;friend&quot;, Porky Roebuck, to whom Rimmer believed that Porky&#x27;s father having an affair with Rimmer&#x27;s mother proved how close he and Porky were. Porky and Rimmer went on a Space Scouts survival course together, where Porky was the ringleader of a plan to eat Rimmer; Rimmer being tied to a stake and having barbecue sauce poured on him before he was almost cooked. Lister believes that Porky was &quot;only&quot; bullying Rimmer.

&quot;Parallel Universe&quot; (1988) shows Holly&#x27;s &quot;Holly Hop Drive&quot; trying to get to Earth within a few seconds. Instead, however, it lands the crew in a female-oriented parallel universe with another version of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;; its crew including a female version of Rimmer called Arlene Rimmer (played by Suzanne Bertish). Regarding Rimmer as little more than a &quot;discardable sex object&quot;, the female Rimmer sexually harasses and gropes Rimmer and tries to hypnotise him even after Rimmer shows no interest.

In &quot;Backwards&quot; (1989), Rimmer facilitates a driving test for the mechanoid Kryten (Robert Llewellyn), where Kryten causes the &quot;Starbug 1&quot; shuttle to fall into a time hole. The ship crash lands on Earth in a reality where time runs backwards, leaving Kryten, Rimmer and Holly (now played by Hattie Hayridge) stranded. Rimmer and Kryten start working as the novelty act &quot;the Sensational Reverse Brothers&quot; and begin to enjoy life in this new reality, but after three weeks, they are fired by a pub manager (Arthur Smith) for a fight that Rimmer and Kryten only become involved in later that night. Lister and the Cat come to rescue Rimmer, Kryten and Holly in another &quot;Starbug&quot; to get back to &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;.

According to backstory in &quot;Marooned&quot; (1989), Rimmer did not lose his virginity to McGruder, but to a girl Rimmer met at cadet school called Sandra in the back of his brother&#x27;s car. However, when adapted in the novel &quot;Better Than Life&quot; (1990), it is revealed Rimmer was lying.

In &quot;Polymorph&quot; (1989), Rimmer considers the relationship he had with his brothers to be &quot;close&quot;. He mentions that he was the butt of the &quot;occasional&quot; practical joke growing up. Despite varying from apple pie beds and black eye telescopes to hiding a small land mine in Rimmer&#x27;s sandpit, Rimmer believes that none of this was &quot;sinister&quot;. Rimmer says that some considered his mother (played by Kalli Greenwood) to be cold and aloof, but himself believes that she had no time for fools. Rimmer believes this to be &quot;tragic&quot;, because they would otherwise have got on &quot;famously&quot;.

In &quot;Timeslides&quot; (1989), Lister is seen travelling back in time by entering a photographic slide with mutated developing fluid, and he tells his seventeen-year-old self (played by Emile Charles) how to gain a successful multi-billion-pound business empire with fifty-eight houses by inventing the &quot;tension sheet&quot; so that he won&#x27;t join the Space Corps and get trapped on &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; in deep space. By becoming the inventor of the tension sheet and never joining the Space Corps, Lister&#x27;s entire timeline is altered, causing Kryten to never be rescued and the Cat race to no longer exist. Rimmer is left on his own with Holly and tries going back further in time to his eight-year-old self&#x27;s (played by Simon Gaffney) days in boarding school so that &quot;he&quot; invents the tension sheet. Rimmer unwittingly sets things how they were before by causing the original inventor of the tension sheet—Thickie Holden (Stephen McKintosh), who is in the same dormroom as Rimmer and overhears Rimmer speaking to his younger self—to become the one who patents the tension sheet, but for reasons unclear to both Holly and Rimmer, Rimmer somehow changes his past so that he is alive back on &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;. His happiness is short-lived, however, as he dies within minutes anyway after hitting a box containing explosives.

Rimmer is seen in the next episode, &quot;The Last Day&quot; (1989), once again as a hologram. According to his backstory, Rimmer&#x27;s parents were &quot;Seventh-day Advent Hoppists&quot; and believed that every Sunday should be spent hopping, because their version of the Bible had a misprint in 1 Corinthians 13 and they had interpreted this passage literally. He mentions that the first time he was French kissed was from his Uncle Frank. He had come into the wrong room and thought Rimmer was his mum.

==== 1990s ====
According to Lister in &quot;Justice&quot; (1991)--and in the novels--before the nuclear accident that killed the crew of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;, Rimmer was in charge of &quot;Z Shift&quot;, and it occupied his every waking moment. Lister said that Z Shift&#x27;s most vital responsibility was making sure the vending machines didn&#x27;t run out of fun size Crunchie bars.

In &quot;Dimension Jump&quot; (1991), an alternate Arnold Rimmer, whose friends call him &quot;Ace&quot;, is shown as a successful and heroic test pilot in the Space Corps and commander who crosses dimensions to meet another Rimmer—the hologrammatic Rimmer living on &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;. Ace&#x27;s interdimensional ship collides with the &quot;Starbug&quot; shuttle, causing it to crash land on an ocean planet. With Lister&#x27;s help, Ace repairs &quot;Starbug&quot;″s starboard engine. After returning to &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;, Ace decides he can&#x27;t stay, as he couldn&#x27;t bear to be near the weaselly Rimmer of this universe. Ace can&#x27;t return home but decides to explore other realities with &quot;a billion other Arnold Rimmers to meet.&quot; Ace explains that the diverging point in their lives where Ace gets his big break and Rimmer doesn&#x27;t is that at the age of seven, Ace went down a year in his class while Rimmer stayed up. Being kept down a year was according to Ace what changed him and made him fight back.

According to &quot;Meltdown&quot; (1991), Rimmer&#x27;s only physical presence is a small &quot;light-bee&quot;; a piece of hardware which buzzes around and projects his holographic image. This has been contradicted on a few occasions by his ability to move completely through solid objects such as walls or by the ability of solid objects or living characters to pass completely through Rimmer. A theory amongst fans is that the &#x27;Light-Bee&#x27; technology had come from the Nova-5, with Kryten. 

In &quot;The Inquisitor&quot; (1992), the crew is targeted by the eponymous Inquisitor, an immensely powerful and immortal android who survived to the end of reality and determined that the only point of existence was to live a worthwhile life, and now roams the timeline erasing the worthless from history. In a rare moment of self-reflection, Rimmer recognises that he has made no contributions to the world and fears being erased. However, when judged by the Inquisitor he claims that he never had the potential to be anything more than he is, admitting that he is &quot;nothing&quot; but that also &quot;from what I started with, nothing was up&quot;. The Inquisitor finds this argument convincing and determines that, by his own meagre standards, Rimmer has justified his existence.

In &quot;Demons and Angels&quot; (1992), &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; is blown up when the beam of a device called the triplicator is put into reverse, putting the engine core into meltdown, while creating a &quot;high&quot; and &quot;low&quot; version of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;, complete with their own versions of Rimmer (both played by Barrie). Before the lifespans of both versions of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; expire after an hour, the crew collect pieces of the triplicator from both &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;s and restore the original &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; by amalgamating the two copies with a rebuilt triplicator. The &quot;high&quot; version of Rimmer has his light-bee crushed by Lister when Lister&#x27;s &quot;low&quot; self controls Lister into doing this by remote control, while the &quot;low&quot; version disappears with his version of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;.

In &quot;Back to Reality&quot; (1992), ink from a &quot;despair squid&quot; causes Lister, Rimmer, the Cat and Kryten to share a hallucination, with the hallucinations attacking things they each consider &quot;quintessential to [their] self-esteem&quot;. In the hallucination, Rimmer believes he is a vagrant with a coat smelling of yak&#x27;s urine called Billy Doyle, with Lister being his more important half-brother, a totalitarian fascist mass murderer called Sebastian. Kryten also explains that because &quot;Billy&quot; has the same upbringing growing up with &quot;Sebastian&quot;, Rimmer couldn&#x27;t blame his own shortcomings on Rimmer&#x27;s parents. The four nearly commit suicide together, but a mood stabiliser saves them at the last second.

In &quot;Psirens&quot; (1993), Kryten explains that &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; was &quot;stolen&quot;, with the crew now based inside &quot;Starbug&quot; chasing after &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; to recover it.

In &quot;Legion&quot; (1993), Rimmer encounters a being known as Legion (Nigel Williams), who upgrades Rimmer&#x27;s projection unit from &quot;soft light&quot; to &quot;hard light&quot;, giving him a physical form and the ability to interact directly with the world, in addition to making him virtually indestructible.

In &quot;&quot; (1993), an emotion-leeching &quot;emohawk&quot; attacks &quot;Starbug&quot; and consumes Rimmer&#x27;s bitterness, turning him into his &quot;Ace Rimmer&quot; persona. The emohawk is captured, and Lister freezes it with liquid dillinium. The crew plan to extract the emohawk&#x27;s DNA strands and re-inject Rimmer with them to return his emotions to normal, but the Cat clumsily freezes everyone else before this can be done.

In &quot;Rimmerworld&quot; (1993), Rimmer steals an escape pod locked on course with the nearest habitable planet. Because of the time dilation caused by the pod going through a wormhole, it takes six hundred years from Rimmer&#x27;s perspective for &quot;Starbug&quot; to catch up with him, even though it&#x27;s only moments from the point of view of &quot;Starbug&quot;. In the meantime, using cloning equipment inside the pod, Rimmer uses his DNA to create a society of thousands of Arnold Rimmers (all played by Barrie), who backstab Rimmer and imprison him before Lister, the Cat and Kryten rescue him centuries later.

In &quot;Out of Time&quot; (1993), Rimmer mentions that all trace of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; has been lost. In the episode, a &quot;Starbug&quot; from fifteen years hence arrives, with Lister, Rimmer, Cat and Kryten&#x27;s future selves intending to copy some components from the present &quot;Starbug&quot;″s time drive so they can fix the fault in their own drive and continue their lives of opulence, socialising with notorious figures of history such as the Habsburgs, the Borgias, Louis XVI, Adolf Hitler and Hermann Göring. Lister tells the future crew to leave, and the future &quot;Starbug&quot; fires upon the present day one, apparently killing the crew and blowing &quot;Starbug&quot; up.

In the following episode, &quot;Tikka to Ride&quot; (1997), Lister mentions in a video log that the future &quot;Starbug&quot; destroying the &quot;Starbug&quot; of the present meant the time drive they had used ceased to exist in both the present and the future, or in other words, killing the present crew of &quot;Starbug&quot; in the present also killed the crew in the future, making it impossible for the future crew from ever going back in time to kill themselves in the present. The Cat later mentions in the episode that time returned to the point before the time drive was discovered. As for Rimmer, he either forgot about his attempt to destroy the time drive at the end of &quot;Out of Time&quot;, or kept his act of selfless heroism a secret, knowing no-one would believe him if he told them.

In &quot;Stoke Me a Clipper&quot; (1997), Rimmer is approached by a dying Ace Rimmer (played by Barrie), who is not the Ace Rimmer which Rimmer had met previously, nor an immediate replacement but a distant successor and a hard light hologram with a damaged light-bee. Ace asks Rimmer to become a defender of the multiverse upon Ace&#x27;s death. Although initially hesitant, Arnold finds himself rising to the challenge and leaves to start his new life. Lister, for a time, desperately misses him, and it takes a therapeutic song by a simulation of Rimmer (played by Barrie), shown in &quot;Blue&quot; (1997), to remind him what a horrible presence he could be.

When &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; is restored by Kryten&#x27;s nanobots at the end of the episode &quot;Nanarchy&quot; (1997), the entire crew is restored to life as well by a new set of nanobots created by Holly (again played by Norman Lovett) after Kryten&#x27;s had gone missing, including Rimmer, as shown in &quot;Back in the Red&quot; (1999). Because he is resurrected as he was at the time of the accident, he lacks any of the growth that the &quot;other&quot; Rimmer has gone through since the series began, reverting him back to his original persona. In &quot;Back in the Red&quot;, Lister, Rimmer, Kryten, Cat and Kochanski (now played by Chloë Annett) are sentenced to two years in the ship&#x27;s brig for misuse of confidential information. In &quot;Cassandra&quot; (1999), the five of them get signed up by Lister to the convict army the Canaries after Holly lies to Lister that they&#x27;re a singing troupe.

In &quot;Only the Good...&quot; (1999), when a corrosive micro-organism is shown destroying &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; and everyone else evacuates to a mirror universe, Rimmer is trapped on the disintegrating ship. At the end of the episode, he encounters the Grim Reaper, who announces that Rimmer is dead and then tells him that they&#x27;ll travel to the River Styx. Rimmer interrupts him, saying &quot;Not today, matey!&quot;, knees him in the groin, says &quot;Remember, only the good die young!&quot;, and flees.

==== 2000s ====
In &quot;Red Dwarf: Back to Earth&quot; (2009), set nine years later, &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; is intact; the human race is apparently &quot;virtually extinct&quot; in the universe apart from Lister again; Lister, Rimmer, the Cat and Kryten are the only people on board the ship; and Rimmer is shown to be the original hard light hologram version and the most senior officer on board again; how these have come about and what happened to the micro-organism and the Nano version of Rimmer is not explained onscreen, but later, in 2020, Doug Naylor confirmed that the Rimmer from &quot;Back To Earth&quot; onwards is the original Rimmer having returned from his time being Ace Rimmer (why he returned, or what happened to the resurrected version of Rimmer from series eight, has not been revealed yet). In this special, a female &quot;despair squid&quot;, whose ink causes joy and elation instead of despair to defend herself, causes Lister, Rimmer, the Cat and Kryten to share a hallucination where they believe they are fictional characters from a TV series called &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;, and their dimension is &quot;invalid&quot;. This leads them to be shown being pulled into the nearest &quot;valid&quot; reality. They confront the &quot;Creator&quot; of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; (Richard O&#x27;Callaghan) on a version of 21st century Earth who is ready to kill off the characters, and Lister accidentally kills him. The four subconsciously realise that they&#x27;re hallucinating, and they wake up on board &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;. Kryten and Rimmer speculate that they were able to choose whether or not they wanted to wake up because of the strengthened antibodies of the four from the previous encounter with the despair squid.

==== 2010s ====
In &quot;Trojan&quot; (2012), Rimmer discovers that one of his brothers, Howard (Mark Dexter), serves as a hard light hologram on a Space Corps vessel. Rimmer lies to his brother, telling him that he is the captain of the abandoned space vessel &quot;Trojan&quot;. To his surprise, he finds that Howard is, like him, a vending machine repairman who became the superior officer on his ship. In Howard&#x27;s case this followed an attack by Simulants. Howard is mortally wounded during a skirmish with the rogue Simulant who killed the crew, Sim. Crawford (Susan Earl), and Rimmer takes the opportunity to further lie to Howard on his deathbed about his lifestyle.

According to Rimmer&#x27;s backstory in &quot;Lemons&quot; (2012), Rimmer was given the middle name &quot;Judas&quot; because Judas, as characterised by the religious denomination that Rimmer&#x27;s mother belonged to, the Church of Judas, embodied all of the traits Rimmer&#x27;s mum wanted him to have. According to the Church of Judas, Jesus asked Judas, whom the Church believed was Jesus&#x27; twin brother, to swap places with him; Judas sacrificing himself and his reputation so that Jesus would appear to have been resurrected after showing up following the crucifixion of Judas-as-Jesus.

In a flashback depicted in &quot;The Beginning&quot; (2012), Rimmer is shown during his youth (played by Philip Labey) attending Io Polytechnic on Io, where one of his lecturers covering psychological profiling is the man he believes is his father, Lecturer Rimmer (now played by Simon Treves). After Rimmer is late for a lecture, Lecturer Rimmer uses Rimmer as a test subject in a social experiment regarding peer pressure. Three million years later, the hologrammatic Rimmer is seen on board &quot;Blue Midget&quot; being given the task of planning out a defensive strategy against a Simulant attack fleet; after failing to come up with one, Rimmer plays a recorded message from Lecturer Rimmer in an attempt to escape his feeling of being weighed down by his father&#x27;s expectations. In the message Lecturer Rimmer, thinking that by now Arnold has achieved enough, reveals that Arnold is not his son, but that his real father was the family gardener Dungo. This revelation liberates Rimmer from the spectre of his lineage on the grounds that he has accomplished a great deal by the standards set by his biological father, and he is able to formulate a successful plan of attack that destroys the Simulant vessels before returning to &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;.

It is strongly implied in this episode that this version of Rimmer remembers dying from the radiation leak but also remembers saving the ship from the corrosive micro-organism that was devouring it in the episode &quot;Only the Good...&quot;. This is a combination of the respective memories of the hologram Rimmer, who later became Ace, and the resurrected Rimmer who faced Death in the Series VIII cliffhanger. However, attempts by Rimmer and Kryten to explain how he saved the ship at the end of that series are interrupted.

In &quot;Officer Rimmer&quot; (2016), Rimmer is promoted to first lieutenant by a bio-printed copy of Captain Herring (Stephen Critchlow), when Rimmer saves Herring&#x27;s ship the &quot;Nautilus&quot; by a fluke. He separates &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; by instigating a class system, and he sets up an officers&#x27; club featuring copies of himself (played by Barrie). Rimmer accidentally creates a monstrous amalgamation of Rimmers (also played by Barrie) that absorbs all the other Rimmers apart from the original. Rimmer resigns his rank, again becoming second technician, so he can leave the officers&#x27; corridor and get to safety. Lister, Cat and Kryten subsequently kill the monster.

According to backstory in &quot;Timewave&quot; (2017), when Rimmer was six, his parents sent him to a different prep school, St Tremble&#x27;s, so he could get his confidence back after being ridiculed every day and wedgied every night. According to Rimmer, games were not competitive there, and everyone won a &quot;you&#x27;re really special&quot; trophy on sports day. He said that his sex life had been a &quot;shambles&quot; ever since one of Rimmer&#x27;s brothers told him sex advice at school that the most important thing was the clitoris; Rimmer misheard it as &quot;to spit on her wrist&quot;.

In &quot;Mechocracy&quot; (2017), Kryten is elected president of the machines on &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; after running against Rimmer.

In &quot;Skipper&quot; (2017), Rimmer, in search of a fresh start, decides to leave his universe using a quantum skipper that can skip to other universes where he feels less of a loser. In his first jump to a new universe it is the moment just before he causes the radiation leak but, for an unexplained reason, he is a hologram with his old letter &#x27;H&#x27; on his forehead when this happened. After multiple attempts at finding a suitable universe, Rimmer arrives in a universe where he is alive, married and a navigation officer. However, upon discovering Lister is more successful and rich than he is, Rimmer returns to his original universe and breaks the quantum skipper, finding the pain of living in that universe &quot;too much&quot;.

==== 2020s ====

In &quot;The Promised Land&quot; (2020), Rimmer is disgusted by Lister&#x27;s new hoarding habits, which have completely filled their former bunkroom to the brim with useless junk, so much so he refuses to go in there. After receiving a distress signal, Rimmer refuses to respond, deciding they&#x27;re too old to be embarking on new adventures, ordering Kryten to erase the memory of receiving it from his memory. After being banished off &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; by the newly rebooted Holly (void of his old memories and computer-senilic personality), the crew eventually come across a ship possessing new and powerful technology, specifically related to holograms. Against Kryten&#x27;s initial warnings, Rimmer is upgraded to &#x27;Diamond Light&#x27;, which grants his superpowers; however, Rimmer is quickly depleted of power and returns to his old form, his Light-Bee&#x27;s battery now burnt-out, he is forced to be &quot;plugged-in&quot; to several power leads to stay online. After encountering three cat clerics, fleeing from their fellow &quot;felis sapiens&quot; under the command of cat-warlord, Rodon, who board the station. Rimmer alongside the crew are taken hostage briefly until Rodon, now at a distance, fires on the ship and allows the crew to escape.

Crashing on a desert moon, Rimmer is forced to power down further as he&#x27;s considered a nonessential resource, going into a black-and-white state. Whilst the crew are chased by Rodon&#x27;s battlecruiser, Cat angrily insists Rimmer is a simple machine. Rimmer rejects this initially, quoting &quot;I think, therefore, I am&quot;, however quickly loses confidence in this and enters an existential crisis. After the crew successfully escape into a sandstorm, Rimmer is comforted by Lister, who compares their dynamic to the sun and moon, producing moonlight even though the moon cannot initially generate it itself. By morning, the crew discover they are buried under the sand, however Rimmer formulates a plan to contact the rebooted Holly, which Kryten manages using an antenna extension from his hand. Rimmer tricks the rebooted Holly into downloading his former incarnation&#x27;s memories, with the rebooted Holly believing he&#x27;ll inherit his &quot;wisdom&quot; from all the years he was alive. After doing so, the restored Holly rescues the crew and they manage to return to &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;. However, the felis sapiens under Rodon are waiting for them, and Rodon orders their deaths by planting a bomb on &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;. Using the acquired Anubis Stone attained from the cat clerics, they once again transform Rimmer into his former &quot;Diamond Light&quot; incarnation, who uses his powers to dispose of the bomb off &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; and subsequently helps bring down Rodon&#x27;s main battlecruiser in the following confrontation.

Kryten, in a state of disrepair since the beginning of the story, is now on his last legs. After some convincing of a very hesitant &quot;Diamond Light&quot; Rimmer, he decides to use his Anubis Stone on Kryten to save his life, though stripping him of his superpowers. However, Rimmer is given a final boost when the felis sapiens, freed of Rodon&#x27;s rule, decide to worship him, having their armada manifest into a large &#x27;H&#x27;.

=== Novels ===
In &quot;Red Dwarf: Infinity Welcomes Careful Drivers&quot; (1989), Rimmer is a First Technician. Rimmer first meets Lister while &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; is docked at Mimas, a moon of Saturn. There, Rimmer is under the persona of &quot;Officer Christopher Todhunter&quot; and dons a phony admiral uniform and false mustache. He encounters Lister, who has stolen the Mimas-equivalent of a taxi known as a &#x27;Hopper&#x27; to earn money, and pays him to take him to the red-light district of the city where Rimmer plans to frequent a droid brothel, while lying and saying he intends to eat at a restaurant.

Unlike in the television series, Rimmer&#x27;s incompetence does not cause the radiation leak that kills the crew. Instead the radiation leak is an entirely unrelated event caused by the negligence of a navigation officer.

In &quot;Better Than Life&quot; (1990), similar to the episode of the same name, the crew play Better Than Life, an extremely addictive virtual reality video game that slowly kills the user through tantalizing their yearnings by utilizing the user&#x27;s subconscious desires. The crew slowly become engrossed in their individual fantasies, with Rimmer imagining himself as gaining enormous fame and adoration upon the crew&#x27;s return to Earth and earning billions from memoirs and other deals. However, Rimmer&#x27;s subconscious, unable to cope with good things happening to him, corrupts the game to make Rimmer&#x27;s fantasy and later the other crew&#x27;s fantasies go terribly wrong and make them want to leave the game. After Lister is trapped on another planet for over thirty years while the rest of the crew are trapped in the time dilation of a black hole, the now-sixty-year-old Lister has a heart attack while confronting a Polymorph, but Holly gives Rimmer instructions on how they can bring Lister back to life by taking him to a universe where time flows backwards.

The two novels follow divergent paths after the crew retrieve Lister from the backwards reality.

In &quot;Last Human&quot; (1995), Rimmer&#x27;s one-night stand with Yvonne McGruder led to the birth of a son. Unbeknownst to either, there truly was mutual attraction, but both decided to wait for the other to make the first move after that one night—Rimmer to prove a point and McGruder because she was delusional due to her concussion—leading to their going separate ways. Yvonne transferred off &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; where she had Michael McGruder, who was born prior to the radiation leak that killed Rimmer and most of the crew on board &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;. She told him false stories of his father&#x27;s courageous acts of valour and through these fictitious tales McGruder was inspired to become a Space Corps Marine and sign-up for a dangerous mission on board the &quot;Mayflower&quot;, a large spaceship with terraformation capabilities, with the potential prospect of meeting his father, who via the black box of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; he learned was resurrected as a hologram to keep the sole survivor, Lister, sane.

Following a series of events, Lister had spent a period of time alongside McGruder and a handful of survivors from the &quot;Mayflower&quot;, separate from the main crew of Rimmer, Kochanski, Cat, and Kryten. Upon their reunion with Lister, Rimmer was introduced to McGruder by Lister, who fainted at first glimpse of Rimmer, who also fainted when told who McGruder was. Later, encouraged by Lister, Rimmer confessed he was not the hero McGruder was told he was by his mother and that he should look up to her instead. However, McGruder was distraught by this and left, later being held hostage by Lister&#x27;s Other Self, an evil doppelganger of the real Lister. When given the opportunity to incapacitate Lister&#x27;s Other Self, Rimmer choked and was also taken hostage, further disappointing McGruder.

Imprisoned, Rimmer, with the help of Kryten, escapes and equips himself with a weapon he uses to defend the crew from Lister&#x27;s Other Self, gaining the respect of Lister, Kochanski, and McGruder, but is shot through the light-bee and critically injured in the process. The crew manage to dispatch of Lister&#x27;s Other Self but are quickly confronted by the Rage, a gestalt manifestation of pure anger, which threatens to destroy everything in its path, including the crew. Rimmer, via his light-bee, volunteers to deliver the Oblivion Virus, the antidote able to eliminate the Rage. Kryten uploads in onto Rimmer&#x27;s light-bee and as the crew take refuge in nearby caves Rimmer flings himself into the gestalt, killing it. Following this, the crew set up a search-party, headed by McGruder, to retrieve Rimmer&#x27;s light-bee and hopefully bring him back.

In &quot;Backwards&quot; (1996), after the crew spend a decade trapped on the backwards Earth, they return to their universe to find that &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; has been stolen and Holly basically destroyed by the Agonoids, a race of misanthropic robots. The crew gain a brief ally in the form of Ace Rimmer, an alternate and dynamic version of Rimmer who arrived in their world in a dimension-hopping prototype ship, but Ace subsequently sacrifices himself to save Lister from an Agonoid. When one Agonoid kills the rest of his race so that he can be the one to torture Lister, the crew are able to expel him into deep space, but the agonoid is able to infect &quot;Starbug&quot; with the Armageddon Virus before they can return to &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;. In an attempt to fight it, Kryten purposely contracts it himself and, in a simulation of the American wild west, is the sheriff of a small town in a battle against the Apocalypse Boys, the simulated manifestation of the Armageddon Virus. Rimmer, alongside Lister and Cat, enter the simulation to help Kryten. However, the Apocalypse Boys prove stronger than anticipated and end up melting Rimmer&#x27;s light-bee and destroying Kryten, as well as rending &quot;Starbug&quot; inoperable. With nothing left to keep them in this reality, Lister and the Cat use Ace&#x27;s ship to travel to another reality where their counterparts died while playing &quot;Better Than Life&quot; but Rimmer and Kryten are still alive.

In the abridged audiobook, as read by author Rob Grant, the wild west simulation section is cut and instead Rimmer&#x27;s light-bee is sucked into deep space following a hostage crisis with the Agonoid, Djuhn&#x27;Keep, onboard &quot;Starbug&quot;.

==Personality==
Rimmer&#x27;s primary character traits include anal-retentiveness, over-adherence to protocol, cowardice, bitterness and a severely inflated ego which is likely a coping mechanism to counteract for his deep-seated sense of self-loathing, which he tries but sometimes fails to hide from others. As the highest ranking survivor aboard the ship (despite being a hologram), Rimmer often deludes himself into believing that he is in charge and that he has somehow been moulding &quot;his&quot; crew into an effective spacegoing unit, despite the fact that the others tend to take suggestions from Lister or Kryten in a crisis. In &quot;Blue&quot; (1997), it is revealed that Rimmer keeps a &quot;war journal&quot; in which he twists events to depict himself as a hero who is braver than Lister, smarter than Kryten and cooler than the Cat.

Rimmer&#x27;s poor repair work on the drive plate was responsible for the radiation leak that killed the crew, and Rimmer bore the guilt of this (although he also partly blamed Lister for the accident, as he was unable to help repair the drive plate due to being in stasis at the time). However, in &quot;Justice&quot; (1991), after Rimmer is sentenced for over 9000 years for the accident, Kryten successfully argues at his appeal that Rimmer&#x27;s guilt is misplaced – as a second technician (and one who &quot;couldn&#x27;t outwit a used teabag&quot;), he could not possibly have been responsible for (and indeed would not have been trusted with) work that might endanger the crew if not performed correctly. Kryten further argues that Rimmer only felt guilty for causing the accident because of his delusions about his importance to the mission, comparing him to a front-gate security guard who considers himself corporate head. Kryten then went on to state that Rimmer&#x27;s only crime is that of being Arnold J. Rimmer, which should also serve as a punishment. In keeping with his defective personality, Rimmer continually objects to his own defense (despite its effectiveness) on the grounds that he believes he is being portrayed unfairly.

Rimmer was finally able to live his fantasy of commanding an army in the episode &quot;Meltdown&quot; (1991), leading an army of &quot;good&quot; wax-droids against a much larger force of &quot;evil&quot; wax-droids. Although Rimmer ultimately succeeds in destroying the opposing army, his forces are completely wiped out when he uses most of them as a diversion and then has Kryten turn up the heating to melt all the droids. In addition to his fondness for militarism, elitism and Hammond organ music, Rimmer also enjoys Morris dancing and is an authority on 20th century telegraph poles, especially those observed while trainspotting. Rimmer has also been attempting to learn Esperanto for eight years, but has failed miserably. In &quot;Marooned&quot; (1989), he reveals he used to play golf and hated people (like Lister) who abused the facilities.

Many episodes of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; focus on the conflict between Rimmer&#x27;s ego and his neuroses. In &quot;Confidence and Paranoia&quot; (1988), Rimmer manages to trick Lister into generating a hologram duplicate in order to provide him with a companion; however, as a consequence of Rimmer&#x27;s self-loathing, in the follow-up episode &quot;Me²&quot; (1988), the two Rimmers are incapable of getting along, and their interaction becomes so bitter and hate-filled that the duplicate must be turned off. In &quot;Better Than Life&quot; (1988), Rimmer enters a simulated reality designed to fulfil all his desires. However the game instead tortures him, as Rimmer&#x27;s self hatred is so great that his deepest desire is to make himself suffer. In &quot;Terrorform&quot; (1992), a &quot;psi-moon&quot; sculpted to reflect Rimmer&#x27;s psychological make-up becomes a desolate, swampy hell-hole dominated by Rimmer&#x27;s Self-Loathing, personified as a sadistic beast, with a metaphysical graveyard marking the &quot;demise&quot; of his various virtuous qualities. Despite his cowardice, and tendency to run from any kind of danger or fight, Rimmer is the member of the crew most willing to kill, preferably in the safest and most cowardly way possible, although, due to a mixture of cowardice, and the fact that for much of the series he cannot physically harm anyone, he seldom manages to. He attempts to coerce Lister to shoot a dangerous Simulant (Nicholas Ball) in the back (bemoaning the fact that said Simulant was currently awake), suggests shooting Kryten and Lister into space when they appeared on the ship in a timeline where they had been erased from history, suggests that he and Kryten eject Lister and Cat from &quot;Starbug&quot; when it is revealed that the ship lacks fuel to reach the nearest planet – although this is also prompted by the discovery that the ship only had air for seven minutes and was ended when Rimmer learned that his projection unit only had enough power for four minutes — and in a despair squid-induced hallucination of 21st century Earth, casually pushes a fellow hologram (Sophie Winkleman) into traffic after she repeatedly threatens to have him &quot;erased&quot; and claims that hologram-killing is &quot;morally, ethically [...] fine&quot;. In &quot;Officer Rimmer&quot; (2016), Rimmer deems it better to sacrifice others for the safety of the crew.

Rimmer&#x27;s personality flaws are in fact almost completely a result of his hang-ups. An alternative version of Rimmer, Ace Rimmer, who was kept back a year in school, learned humility and inner strength, and grew up to become a charming and well liked Space Corps test pilot, interstellar hero, and sexual seducer.

Surprisingly, however, Rimmer is still capable of nobility, honour and love. When &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; encounters a holoship with an all-hologram crew composed of the &quot;best and brightest&quot; in the episode &quot;Holoship&quot; (1991), Rimmer desperately wants to join. A female officer aboard the ship, Nirvanah Crane, played by Jane Horrocks, falls in love with him and sacrifices her place on the ship for Rimmer, only for Rimmer to do the same in return for her. This act of nobility surprises even Rimmer himself. In &quot;Out of Time&quot; (1993), Rimmer is disgusted by his corrupt future self to the point where he&#x27;d rather do battle with him than surrender (&quot;Better dead than smeg!&quot;), Rimmer later frantically risking his life to save the others after their future selves kill them. In &quot;The Beginning&quot; (2012), Rimmer is also able to formulate a plan to save the crew from the Simulant Generals. Rimmer has also showed the capacity to respect other viewpoints in conflict with his own; in &quot;The Last Day&quot; (1989), he tries to convince Lister that he should respect Kryten&#x27;s right to believe in Silicon Heaven in spite of it conflicting with Lister&#x27;s own beliefs, &quot;Lemons&quot; (2012) sees Rimmer eager to meet Jesus despite being an atheist, and in &quot;Samsara&quot; he presents a well-reasoned argument about the flaws in the concept of the Karma Drive. In &quot;Polymorph&quot; (1989), Rimmer leads Kryten and Cat in the hunt for the intruder and in &quot;Bodyswap&quot; (1989), he takes charge of the hunt for &quot;Red Dwarf&#x27;s&quot; self-destruct mechanism. Once Rimmer is sapped of his anger by the Polymorph, he is a conciliatory pacifist wishing to promote peace between the creature and various members of the crew and keen to not hurt anybody&#x27;s feelings during their discussions. In &quot;Backwards&quot; (1989), he revels in his success as a showbiz performer and extols the virtues of a world without war, famine, crime or death. In &quot;Tikka to Ride&quot; (1997), Rimmer protests against abusing the Time Drive - the very thing he tried to destroy at the end of the previous episode- and chastises Lister for doing so.

==Appearance==
Rimmer&#x27;s status as a hologram in most episodes of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; is shown by the &#x27;H&#x27; on the centre of his forehead, leading to nicknames from the Cat, such as &quot;alphabet head&quot; and &quot;goalpost head&quot;. Rimmer keeps his unmanageable hair relatively short, deciding that it makes him feel like more of a man. When Lister and the Cat respond to a drill too slowly, Rimmer argues for increased discipline and sensible haircuts, believing that &quot;every major battle in history has been won by the side with the shortest haircuts&quot; (resulting in the Cat insulting his hair-do by saying that he has hair like his, just not on his head).

Rimmer&#x27;s Space Corps uniform changes several times during the course of the show. In the first two series it is a grey-and-beige shirt-and-tie ensemble; in Series III and IV this becomes a green suit with a shiny high-collared jacket, which is changed to red in Series V; in Series VI and VII, Rimmer&#x27;s jacket becomes quilted and is red when he is in soft-light form and blue for hard-light (with a belt with his &#x27;Light-Bee&#x27; remote attached); the alive Rimmer in Series VIII wears an all-beige uniform similar in design to the original, and a purple jumpsuit when he&#x27;s imprisoned in &quot;The Tank&quot;. In the 2009 three-part special &quot;Back to Earth&quot;, Rimmer wears a blue suit similar to his Series III and VI green suit but with the addition of a plain waist-high belt worn over the jacket and a quilted collar. From Series X onward, Rimmer sports a dark blue tunic; lacking the belt and light blue boots of the &quot;Back to Earth&quot; outfit.

The &#x27;H&#x27; on his forehead also changes from series to series: it starts as a grey colour and a blocky shape; in Series III, it becomes bright blue and reflective; in Series V, it&#x27;s changed to a thinner and more stylised font. His &#x27;H&#x27; also briefly changes to a reflective red colour set inside a circle when he temporarily joins the holoship SS &quot;Enlightenment&quot;.

==Casting==
Among the actors who auditioned for Rimmer were Norman Lovett (cast as Holly instead), David Baddiel, Hugh Laurie, and Alfred Molina. Initially Molina was cast as Rimmer, however, the role was recast and filled by Chris Barrie, a professional voice-actor and impressionist. Barrie, who had originally auditioned for Lister, was familiar with Rob Grant and Doug Naylor having worked together on &quot;Son of Cliché&quot; and &quot;Spitting Image&quot; and with the producers on &quot;Happy Families&quot; and various Jasper Carrott productions. He has appeared in all but four episodes of the show, which he missed in series VII due to scheduling conflicts.

Rimmer was played by Chris Eigeman in the first American pilot and then by Anthony Fusco in the second pilot. The character&#x27;s distinctive &#x27;H&#x27; was replaced with a marble-shaped object in the first pilot, but the &#x27;H&#x27; returned in the second one. Chris Barrie was given an offer to reprise his role, but turned it down for fear of being tied into a restrictive, long-term contract, which is common in American television production.

The female Rimmer, &quot;Arlene &#x27;Arnie&#x27; Rimmer&quot;, in the Series II episode &quot;Parallel Universe&quot; was played by Suzanne Bertish, an actress primarily known for her classical stage work. She had been asked by director Ed Bye to play the part. &quot;Young Rimmer&quot;, who had minor speaking roles in three episodes in Series III and IV, was played by child actor Simon Gaffney. Series X episode &quot;The Beginning&quot; features another &quot;Young Rimmer&quot;, this time at college on Io, who was played by Philip Labey.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Arnold Rimmer&#x27;s Character Profile at Dave.uktv.co.uk</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3844833" start="0" end="19" title="Arnold Rimmer" label="Arnold Judas Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="52" end="67" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="68" end="74" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902" start="81" end="90" title="Red Dwarf" label="Red Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740822" start="108" end="120" title="Chris Barrie" label="Chris Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051510" start="473" end="481" title="ellipsis (narrative device)" label="ellipsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732049" start="522" end="529" title="The End (Red Dwarf)" label="The End"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="608" end="616" title="Holography" label="hologram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518104" start="854" end="860" title="Legion (Red Dwarf)" label="Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618470" start="1175" end="1193" title="Stoke Me a Clipper" label="Stoke Me a Clipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q587024" start="1336" end="1343" title="nanobot" label="nanobot"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1687" end="1700" title="Red Dwarf: Back to Earth" label="Back to Earth"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2034" end="2051" title="Red Dwarf: The Promised Land" label="The Promised Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543194" start="2156" end="2164" title="Grant Naylor" label="creators"/>
<link wikidata="Q101352" start="2210" end="2217" title="surname" label="surname"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2238" end="2245" title="Prefect#Academic" label="prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732049" start="2521" end="2528" title="The End (Red Dwarf)" label="The End"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489077" start="2652" end="2663" title="Dave Lister" label="Dave Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395392" start="2665" end="2678" title="Craig Charles" label="Craig Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="2850" end="2865" title="vending machine" label="vending machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967741" start="3213" end="3219" title="Stasis (fiction)" label="stasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881887" start="3321" end="3326" title="Holly (Red Dwarf)" label="Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488256" start="3328" end="3341" title="Norman Lovett" label="Norman Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="3620" end="3628" title="hologram" label="hologram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050998" start="3816" end="3819" title="Cat (Red Dwarf)" label="Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701386" start="3827" end="3843" title="Danny John-Jules" label="Danny John-Jules"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510650" start="4006" end="4019" title="Future Echoes" label="Future Echoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="4360" end="4367" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849967" start="4394" end="4410" title="Balance of Power (Red Dwarf)" label="Balance of Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438311" start="4902" end="4920" title="Kristine Kochanski" label="Kristine Kochanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095301" start="4929" end="4939" title="Clare Grogan" label="C P Grogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160086" start="5378" end="5401" title="Confidence and Paranoia" label="Confidence and Paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="5802" end="5812" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q72867" start="5900" end="5914" title="Craig Ferguson" label="Craig Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826736" start="6217" end="6220" title="Me²" label="Me²"/>
<link wikidata="Q319004" start="6555" end="6567" title="night school" label="night school"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="6648" end="6660" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q202677" start="6746" end="6759" title="gazpacho soup" label="gazpacho soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11984849" start="6798" end="6809" title="self-hatred" label="self-hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898539" start="8199" end="8215" title="Better Than Life (Red Dwarf)" label="Better Than Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q435169" start="8262" end="8274" title="John Abineri" label="John Abineri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="8829" end="8841" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385001" start="8893" end="8901" title="Traction (orthopedics)" label="traction"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="9050" end="9057" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q368305" start="9119" end="9130" title="Alimony" label="maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862874" start="9223" end="9244" title="Thanks for the Memory (Red Dwarf)" label="Thanks for the Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269915" start="9430" end="9435" title="Queeg (Red Dwarf)" label="Queeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q807791" start="10033" end="10047" title="barbecue sauce" label="barbecue sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206021" start="10163" end="10180" title="Parallel Universe (Red Dwarf)" label="Parallel Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="10258" end="10263" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="10343" end="10360" title="Parallel universe (fiction)" label="parallel universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650771" start="10486" end="10501" title="Suzanne Bertish" label="Suzanne Bertish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="10646" end="10655" title="Hypnosis" label="hypnotise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839823" start="10707" end="10716" title="Backwards (Red Dwarf episode)" label="Backwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6439846" start="10783" end="10789" title="Kryten" label="Kryten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998648" start="10791" end="10807" title="Robert Llewellyn" label="Robert Llewellyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498512" start="11008" end="11023" title="Hattie Hayridge" label="Hattie Hayridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800311" start="11232" end="11244" title="Arthur Smith (comedian)" label="Arthur Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772369" start="11484" end="11492" title="Marooned (Red Dwarf)" label="Marooned"/>
<link wikidata="Q170538" start="11531" end="11540" title="virginity" label="virginity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898538" start="11689" end="11705" title="Better Than Life" label="Better Than Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226595" start="11763" end="11772" title="Polymorph (Red Dwarf episode)" label="Polymorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q213454" start="12067" end="12074" title="sandpit" label="sandpit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12191" end="12206" title="Kalli Greenwood" label="Kalli Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744204" start="12403" end="12413" title="Timeslides" label="Timeslides"/>
<link wikidata="Q166816" start="12481" end="12499" title="Reversal film" label="photographic slide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12583" end="12596" title="Emile Charles" label="Emile Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="12637" end="12642" title="Pound sterling" label="pound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13139" end="13152" title="Simon Gaffney" label="Simon Gaffney"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="13162" end="13177" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13350" end="13367" title="Stephen McKintosh" label="Stephen McKintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745654" start="13798" end="13810" title="The Last Day (Red Dwarf)" label="The Last Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="14031" end="14036" title="Christian biblical canons" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="14055" end="14071" title="1 Corinthians 13" label="1 Corinthians 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q856690" start="14085" end="14119" title="Biblical literalism" label="interpreted this passage literally"/>
<link wikidata="Q842392" start="14160" end="14171" title="French kiss" label="French kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316850" start="14310" end="14317" title="Justice (Red Dwarf)" label="Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190099" start="14639" end="14647" title="Crunchie" label="Crunchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304748" start="14664" end="14678" title="Dimension Jump (Red Dwarf episode)" label="Dimension Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813745" start="15717" end="15725" title="Meltdown (Red Dwarf)" label="Meltdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742136" start="16211" end="16225" title="The Inquisitor (Red Dwarf)" label="The Inquisitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256295" start="17000" end="17017" title="Demons &amp;amp; Angels (Red Dwarf)" label="Demons and Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839443" start="17862" end="17877" title="Back to Reality (Red Dwarf)" label="Back to Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256086" start="18622" end="18629" title="Psirens" label="Psirens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518104" start="18823" end="18829" title="Legion (Red Dwarf)" label="Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334483" start="19588" end="19599" title="Rimmerworld" label="Rimmerworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q185918" start="19709" end="19722" title="time dilation" label="time dilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544" start="19757" end="19765" title="wormhole" label="wormhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111653" start="20214" end="20225" title="Out of Time (Red Dwarf)" label="Out of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="20665" end="20674" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q237599" start="20680" end="20687" title="House of Borgia" label="Borgias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="20689" end="20698" title="Louis XVI of France" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="20700" end="20712" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="20717" end="20731" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801949" start="20936" end="20949" title="Tikka to Ride" label="Tikka to Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618470" start="21720" end="21738" title="Stoke Me a Clipper" label="Stoke Me a Clipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928800" start="22303" end="22307" title="Blue (Red Dwarf)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q587024" start="22431" end="22438" title="nanobot" label="nanobot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12040373" start="22472" end="22480" title="Nanarchy" label="Nanarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839306" start="22687" end="22702" title="Back in the Red" label="Back in the Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103247" start="23017" end="23029" title="Chloë Annett" label="Chloë Annett"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23077" end="23081" title="Military prison#Brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049222" start="23131" end="23140" title="Cassandra (Red Dwarf)" label="Cassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094334" start="23302" end="23318" title="Only the Good..." label="Only the Good..."/>
<link wikidata="Q161936" start="23548" end="23559" title="Personifications of death" label="Grim Reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q542758" start="23646" end="23656" title="Styx" label="River Styx"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23833" end="23857" title="Red Dwarf: Back to Earth" label="Red Dwarf: Back to Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431074" start="25102" end="25126" title="Richard O&amp;#x27;Callaghan" label="Richard O&amp;#x27;Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845098" start="25578" end="25584" title="Trojan (Red Dwarf)" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767365" start="25650" end="25661" title="Mark Dexter" label="Mark Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26124" end="26134" title="Susan Earl" label="Susan Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521414" start="26279" end="26285" title="Lemons (Red Dwarf)" label="Lemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="26359" end="26364" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="26572" end="26577" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="26724" end="26767" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="Jesus would appear to have been resurrected"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="26795" end="26828" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="the crucifixion of Judas-as-Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716329" start="26864" end="26877" title="The Beginning (Red Dwarf)" label="The Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26936" end="26948" title="Philip Labey" label="Philip Labey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371037" start="26963" end="26974" title="Institute of technology" label="Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123" start="26978" end="26980" title="Io (moon)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191309" start="27018" end="27041" title="psychological profiling" label="psychological profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519924" start="27111" end="27123" title="Simon Treves" label="Simon Treves"/>
<link wikidata="Q784843" start="27241" end="27254" title="peer pressure" label="peer pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803657" start="28632" end="28646" title="Officer Rimmer" label="Officer Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203452" start="28742" end="28759" title="Stephen Critchlow" label="Stephen Critchlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q55093131" start="29346" end="29354" title="Timewave (Red Dwarf)" label="Timewave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526158" start="29530" end="29536" title="wedgie" label="wedgie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133616" start="29674" end="29684" title="sports day" label="sports day"/>
<link wikidata="Q55093137" start="29929" end="29939" title="Mechocracy" label="Mechocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55093147" start="30063" end="30070" title="Skipper (Red Dwarf)" label="Skipper"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30829" end="30846" title="Red Dwarf: The Promised Land" label="The Promised Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343347" start="30902" end="30910" title="hoarding" label="hoarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q838368" start="32219" end="32234" title="black-and-white" label="black-and-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q192325" start="32393" end="32417" title="cogito, ergo sum" label="I think, therefore, I am"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34123" end="34167" title="Red Dwarf: Infinity Welcomes Careful Drivers" label="Red Dwarf: Infinity Welcomes Careful Drivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15034" start="34279" end="34284" title="Mimas (moon)" label="Mimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="34296" end="34302" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431487" start="34421" end="34435" title="fake mustache" label="false mustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="34500" end="34504" title="taxi" label="taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q272888" start="34582" end="34600" title="red-light district" label="red-light district"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="34652" end="34659" title="brothel" label="brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898538" start="34953" end="34969" title="Better Than Life" label="Better Than Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898539" start="34999" end="35023" title="Better Than Life (Red Dwarf episode)" label="episode of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="35080" end="35095" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q848369" start="35199" end="35211" title="subconscious" label="subconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494423" start="36138" end="36148" title="Last Human" label="Last Human"/>
<link wikidata="Q204520" start="36953" end="36967" title="terraformation" label="terraformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29256" start="37045" end="37054" title="black box" label="black box"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="38343" end="38350" title="holism" label="gestalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839827" start="38848" end="38857" title="Backwards (novel)" label="Backwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="39072" end="39084" title="misanthropic" label="misanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="39687" end="39705" title="American frontier" label="American wild west"/>
<link wikidata="Q58155" start="39762" end="39777" title="Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse" label="Apocalypse Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340163" start="40355" end="40364" title="Rob Grant" label="Rob Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244134" start="40623" end="40641" title="anal retentive" label="anal-retentiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401607" start="40671" end="40680" title="cowardice" label="cowardice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11984849" start="40799" end="40812" title="self-loathing" label="self-loathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928800" start="41207" end="41211" title="Blue (Red Dwarf)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316850" start="41717" end="41724" title="Justice (Red Dwarf)" label="Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813745" start="42750" end="42758" title="Meltdown (Red Dwarf)" label="Meltdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="43134" end="43141" title="elitism" label="elitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="43146" end="43159" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900271" start="43186" end="43200" title="Morris dancing" label="Morris dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144084" start="43224" end="43252" title="utility pole" label="20th century telegraph poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q21821294" start="43286" end="43299" title="Trainspotters in the United Kingdom" label="trainspotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="43342" end="43351" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772369" start="43404" end="43412" title="Marooned (Red Dwarf)" label="Marooned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160086" start="43632" end="43655" title="Confidence and Paranoia" label="Confidence and Paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826736" start="43869" end="43872" title="Me²" label="Me²"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898538" start="44039" end="44055" title="Better Than Life" label="Better Than Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="44086" end="44103" title="simulated reality" label="simulated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703901" start="44280" end="44290" title="Terrorform" label="Terrorform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025012" start="44979" end="44992" title="Nicholas Ball (actor)" label="Nicholas Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631078" start="45645" end="45661" title="Sophie Winkleman" label="Sophie Winkleman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45826" end="45840" title="List of Red Dwarf episodes#Red Dwarf XI .282016.29" label="Officer Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46049" end="46059" title="Red Dwarf characters#Ace Rimmer" label="Ace Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186677" start="46105" end="46113" title="humility" label="humility"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="46194" end="46204" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="46219" end="46223" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884325" start="46466" end="46474" title="Holoship" label="Holoship"/>
<link wikidata="Q237178" start="46583" end="46596" title="Jane Horrocks" label="Jane Horrocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111653" start="46781" end="46792" title="Out of Time (Red Dwarf)" label="Out of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716329" start="47069" end="47082" title="The Beginning (Red Dwarf)" label="The Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745654" start="47281" end="47293" title="The Last Day (Red Dwarf)" label="The Last Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902" start="47393" end="47407" title="Silicon Heaven" label="Silicon Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521414" start="47473" end="47479" title="Lemons (Red Dwarf)" label="Lemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="47519" end="47524" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="47542" end="47549" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q27869537" start="47564" end="47571" title="Samsara (Red Dwarf)" label="Samsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226595" start="47675" end="47684" title="Polymorph (Red Dwarf)" label="Polymorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936971" start="47769" end="47777" title="Bodyswap" label="Bodyswap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839823" start="48119" end="48128" title="Backwards (Red Dwarf)" label="Backwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801949" start="48271" end="48284" title="Tikka to Ride" label="Tikka to Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050998" start="48638" end="48641" title="Cat (Red Dwarf)" label="Cat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48687" end="48695" title="Goal (sport)#Rugby football" label="goalpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304082" start="49998" end="50006" title="Red Dwarf X" label="Series X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488256" start="50583" end="50596" title="Norman Lovett" label="Norman Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881887" start="50606" end="50611" title="Holly (Red Dwarf)" label="Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q526242" start="50622" end="50635" title="David Baddiel" label="David Baddiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49017" start="50637" end="50648" title="Hugh Laurie" label="Hugh Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q296028" start="50654" end="50667" title="Alfred Molina" label="Alfred Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740822" start="50749" end="50761" title="Chris Barrie" label="Chris Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340163" start="50877" end="50886" title="Rob Grant" label="Rob Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300774" start="50891" end="50902" title="Doug Naylor" label="Doug Naylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560628" start="50935" end="50948" title="Son of Cliché" label="Son of Cliché"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="50965" end="50979" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q746044" start="51018" end="51032" title="Happy Families (1985 TV series)" label="Happy Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597366" start="51051" end="51065" title="Jasper Carrott" label="Jasper Carrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q251067" start="51214" end="51227" title="Chris Eigeman" label="Chris Eigeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650771" start="51781" end="51796" title="Suzanne Bertish" label="Suzanne Bertish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334615" start="51886" end="51892" title="Ed Bye" label="Ed Bye"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266087" wikidata="Q597409" url="?curid=266087" title="Gore, New Zealand">
<text>Gore () is a town and district in the Southland region of the South Island of New Zealand. It has a resident population of as of Gore is known for its country music scene and hosts an annual country music festival. The town is also surrounded by farmland and is an important centre for agriculture in the region.

==Geography==
The town of Gore is located on State Highway 1, 64 kilometres northeast of Invercargill and 70 km west of Balclutha – Dunedin and Invercargill are the nearest cities. The Gore District has a resident population of The urban area estimated resident population in was , the second largest in Southland. Gore is a service town for the surrounding farm communities. It is divided by the Mataura River into Gore and East Gore, the majority of the town being situated on the western banks of the river. The town is situated on the eastern edge of the Hokonui Hills, and many of its surrounding farmlands are located within foothills.

The Main South Line railway from Christchurch to Invercargill runs through the town, though passenger services ceased in 2002 with the cancellation of the Southerner. Gore was once a busy railway junction; the Waimea Plains Railway ran west to connect with the Kingston Branch in Lumsden, while the Waikaka Branch connected with the Main South Line nearby in McNab. The original Kingston Flyer ran between Gore, on the main Dunedin-Invercargill line, and Kingston, from where lake steamers provided a connection with Queenstown. It was withdrawn in 1937, although specials continued into the 1950s. The 1970s revival of the Flyer did not include Gore.

==History==
Before the arrival of Europeans the current site of Gore was a part of or near the routes used by Māori travellers. Tuturau, near modern Mataura, was the nearest Māori settlement. In 1836 southern Māori repelled a raid from the north, which provided sufficient security for Europeans to purchase land and settle in the area. By the mid-1850s large tracts nearby had been converted into sheep runs.

As crossing the Mataura River involved a long fording, the locality became known as &quot;the Long Ford&quot;, or Longford. In 1862 a few town sections were surveyed on the west bank of the river and Longford was named Gore as a compliment to Sir Thomas Gore Browne, an early Governor of New Zealand. One of the first buildings was Long Ford House an accommodation house opened by local sawmill owner Daniel Morton.

A village named Gordon after Governor Sir Arthur Gordon became established on the opposite bank of the Mataura. By 1864 a road from Balclutha through Gore to Invercargill had been opened for wheeled traffic which allowed the establishment of a regular coach service between Invercargill and Dunedin.

===Establishment===
By 1877, there were enough business opportunities in the area for the Bank of New Zealand to establish a branch in Gore. Within three years both the Bank of Australasia and the Colonial Bank of New Zealand had also opened branches. In 1899 the Bank of New South Wales followed suit.
After its construction began in the early 1870s, a railway line between Invercargill and Gore was opened on 30 August 1875. By 22 January 1879 the railway had been extended to Balclutha where it linked with an existing line to Dunedin. A private Waimea Plains railway from Gore to Lumsden was opened on 31 July 1880. This was subsequently purchased by the Government in 1886. It connected Gore with the Invercargill-Kingston branch line. By 1908 another branch had been completed via McNab to Waikaka. The extension of the railways established Gore as an important hub and had a significant effect on its development.

By 1879, &quot;The Ensign&quot; newspaper was being published in the town, followed in 1887 by the rival &quot;Standard&quot;.

===Borough===
In 1885, Gore was constituted a borough and in 1890 Gordon, by now commonly known as East Gore, amalgamated with Gore. Gore acquired a nickname of &quot;Chicago of the South&quot;.

By 1905, the population had increased to 2,354, compared with 1,618 in 1891.

The establishment of the Gore Electric Light &amp; Power Syndicate led in 1894 to Gore becoming the third town in New Zealand to install a generator and provide a public electricity supply.

From the end of the Second World War until 1976, Gore enjoyed prosperity driven by record prices for agricultural produce which saw the town&#x27;s population rise from 5,000 in 1945 to 9,000 in 1976. By the late 1960s, it was reputed to have the highest per-capita retail turnover of any New Zealand town.

===Decline===
The farm sector went into decline after 1976 which led to a corresponding decline in the population. Related businesses also closed, including the town&#x27;s iconic cereal mill, which had processed oats and other grains since 1877. Since 2000 prosperity has returned as large numbers of farms in the surrounding area were converted to dairy farms to take advantage of high prices for dairy produce. This growth has led to low unemployment in the town.

===Marae===

O Te Ika Rama Marae is in Gore. It is a marae (meeting ground) of the Hokonui Rūnanga branch of Ngāi Tahu, and includes O Te Ika Rama wharenui (meeting house).

In October 2020, the government committed $424,567 from the Provincial Growth Fund to upgrade the marae, creating eight jobs.

==Demographics==
Gore covers and had an estimated population of as of with a population density of people per km2.
Gore had a population of 7,911 at the 2018 New Zealand census, an increase of 219 people (2.8%) since the 2013 census, and an increase of 156 people (2.0%) since the 2006 census. There were 3,360 households, comprising 3,807 males and 4,107 females, giving a sex ratio of 0.93 males per female, with 1,389 people (17.6%) aged under 15 years, 1,314 (16.6%) aged 15 to 29, 3,324 (42.0%) aged 30 to 64, and 1,884 (23.8%) aged 65 or older.

Ethnicities were 90.4% European/Pākehā, 11.7% Māori, 0.9% Pasifika, 2.6% Asian, and 1.5% other ethnicities. People may identify with more than one ethnicity.

The percentage of people born overseas was 8.8, compared with 27.1% nationally.

Although some people chose not to answer the census&#x27;s question about religious affiliation, 47.7% had no religion, 43.1% were Christian, 0.6% had Māori religious beliefs, 0.3% were Hindu, 0.3% were Muslim, 0.2% were Buddhist and 0.8% had other religions.

Of those at least 15 years old, 612 (9.4%) people had a bachelor&#x27;s or higher degree, and 1,938 (29.7%) people had no formal qualifications. 702 people (10.8%) earned over $70,000 compared to 17.2% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 3,075 (47.1%) people were employed full-time, 960 (14.7%) were part-time, and 183 (2.8%) were unemployed.

==Climate==
In Köppen-Geiger climate classification system, it has an oceanic climate.

==Media==
The FM Hokonui radio station broadcasts from Gore to listeners in Southland and South Otago.

The smaller, locally owned radio station Cave FM broadcasts in Gore and online.

==Education==

Gore has primary, intermediate and high schools.

The two secondary schools in Gore are: 
*Gore High School is the largest school in Gore, and caters for years 9 to 13. It has a roll of students. It opened in 1908.
*St Peter&#x27;s College is a state-integrated Roman Catholic school for years 7 to 13 with a roll of . It opened in 1969 as a private school, and became state-integrated in 1982.

The only intermediate school in Gore is 
*Longford Intermediate School, for years 7 to 8 with a roll of . It opened in 1972.

There are four primary schools in Gore, each serving years 1 to 6. 
*East Gore School with students. The school opened in 1886 as Gordon School, and took its current name in 1907.
*Gore Main School with students. It opened on 4 October 1878 with 40 pupils, but was destroyed by fire on 3 July 1896. It was destroyed by fire again on 7 May 1920 and a replacement opened in February 1922. With the existing structure reaching the end of its useful life, the school was rebuilt again on 7 December 1984.
*St Marys School, a state-integrated Catholic school with students. It opened in 1890. 
*West Gore School with students. It opened in 1953.

All these schools are coeducational. Rolls are as of 

==Culture and arts==

Gore is well known for its connection with Country and Western music, with the annual New Zealand country music awards having been held in the town for 36 years. It has a sister city relationship with Tamworth, New South Wales, the &quot;Country Music Capital of Australia&quot;.

Recently Gore has also gained a reputation as a centre for the visual arts in the southern South Island. A major bequest to the town&#x27;s Eastern Southland Art Gallery by Dr. John Money has left the institution with one of the country&#x27;s best collections of ethnological art. This is partnered by an impressive collection of modern New Zealand work, including several notable pieces by Ralph Hotere.

==Landmarks and notable features==
The Flemings &quot;Creamoata Mill&quot; is an iconic local building, with Flemings &quot;Creamoata&quot; brand of porridge once promoted by Flemings as the National Breakfast, and the mill itself considered one of the most modern cereal mills in the southern hemisphere. Production of all products was moved to Australia in 2001, and Creamoata was discontinued in 2008 after declining sales. Goodman Fielder claimed that the plant was no longer viable as it was operating at less than one third of its capacity. The building&#x27;s famous &quot;Sgt Dan&quot; remains because rights to it have been purchased by the buildings current owner &quot;Sgt Dan Stockfoods Ltd&quot;. The building has a Category I listing with Heritage New Zealand.

The former East Gore Presbyterian Church of Aotearoa New Zealand is one of the two remaining wooden Gothic churches designed by the eminent architect R.A. Lawson.
Built in 1880 and registered as a category 2 historic place by Heritage New Zealand, No longer used as a place of worship the building is currently being converted into an art centre, with a studio and flat for visiting artists. The latter houses the bedroom furniture from the Royal Suite commissioned for the Queen&#x27;s Royal Tour to Southland in 1954.

The Hokonui Moonshine Museum in the heritage precinct celebrates Gore&#x27;s part in the &quot;...colourful history of illicit whiskey making and consumption...&quot;, with illicit whiskey being produced in the Hokonui Hills to the west of the town up until the 1930s.

The St James Theatre on Irk Street is a theatre and cinema, with a main auditorium seating 450 people and a smaller room for 78. It announced in June 2021 that it was in danger of closing if it could not raise money for earthquake strengthening and other renovations.

==Notable residents==

*Ronald Bannerman, a flying ace during World War I. Bannerman Park in north Gore is named after him.
*Jimmy Cowan, international rugby player
*James Hargest, politician and military leader
*Amanda Hooper (Christie), International Women&#x27;s Hockey
*Luke Hurley, musician
*Hadyn Jones, television journalist
*Roy Kerr, mathematical physicist
*Justin Marshall, international rugby player
*Shona McFarlane, artist and broadcaster
*Hugh McIntyre (1888–1982), chairman of the Alliance Freezing Company (Southland)
*Brian McKechnie (born 1953), international cricket and rugby player
*Chris McLennan, travel photographer
*Mike Puru, radio host
*Geoff Rabone, international cricketer
*Eric Roy, politician
*Jenny Shipley, former Prime Minister of New Zealand
*Barry Soper, political journalist
*Stu Wilson, international rugby player
*Ethan de Groot, international rugby player

==See also==
* Gore Aerodrome

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
*
* A history of the Presbyterian Church in Gore.
*
*
*
*Gore Heritage Trail Brochure.

==External links==

* Gore District Council
* The Golden Guitar Awards site
* Hocken Collection Bulletin 38 - New Zealand’s ‘Little Lichfield’ - The literature of Eastern Southland </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q597409" start="0" end="4" title="Gore, New Zealand" label="Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189360" start="22" end="30" title="Gore District, New Zealand" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q864971" start="38" end="47" title="Southland Region" label="Southland"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="62" end="74" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="151" end="164" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694064" start="286" end="297" title="agriculture in New Zealand" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547145" start="359" end="374" title="State Highway 1 (New Zealand)" label="State Highway 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q31805" start="403" end="415" title="Invercargill" label="Invercargill"/>
<link wikidata="Q804717" start="434" end="443" title="Balclutha, New Zealand" label="Balclutha"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="446" end="453" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189360" start="499" end="512" title="Gore District, New Zealand" label="Gore District"/>
<link wikidata="Q609560" start="711" end="724" title="Mataura River" label="Mataura River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878232" start="873" end="886" title="Hokonui Hills" label="Hokonui Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350718" start="961" end="976" title="Main South Line" label="Main South Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="990" end="1002" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960126" start="1167" end="1188" title="Waimea Plains Railway" label="Waimea Plains Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413469" start="1218" end="1233" title="Kingston Branch" label="Kingston Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877305" start="1237" end="1244" title="Lumsden, New Zealand" label="Lumsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927273" start="1256" end="1270" title="Waikaka Branch" label="Waikaka Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q266101" start="1336" end="1350" title="Kingston Flyer" label="Kingston Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q609560" start="2037" end="2050" title="Mataura River" label="Mataura River"/>
<link wikidata="Q201282" start="2268" end="2286" title="Thomas Gore Browne" label="Thomas Gore Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q806672" start="2908" end="2927" title="Bank of Australasia" label="Bank of Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753375" start="2936" end="2964" title="Colonial Bank of New Zealand" label="Colonial Bank of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q98234691" start="3676" end="3686" title="The Ensign (newspaper)" label="The Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4274" end="4290" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q186685" start="5083" end="5088" title="marae" label="marae"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="5139" end="5148" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Ngāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990652" start="5177" end="5185" title="wharenui" label="wharenui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488117" start="5264" end="5286" title="Provincial Growth Fund" label="Provincial Growth Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="5484" end="5507" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189861" start="5552" end="5563" title="2013 New Zealand census" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015254" start="5612" end="5623" title="2006 New Zealand census" label="2006 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="5915" end="5921" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="5929" end="5934" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951548" start="5941" end="5949" title="Pasifika New Zealanders" label="Pasifika"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="5956" end="5961" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116486" start="6254" end="6263" title="Christianity in New Zealand" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950631" start="6274" end="6297" title="Religion of Māori people" label="Māori religious beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821145" start="6309" end="6314" title="Hinduism in New Zealand" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q152997" start="6326" end="6332" title="Islam in New Zealand" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174275" start="6344" end="6352" title="Buddhism in New Zealand" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="6772" end="6815" title="Köppen-Geiger climate classification system" label="Köppen-Geiger climate classification system"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="6827" end="6842" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051363" start="6862" end="6869" title="Hokonui (radio station)" label="Hokonui"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221882" start="7136" end="7152" title="Gore High School" label="Gore High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595312" start="7261" end="7284" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s College, Gore" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="7307" end="7328" title="Roman Catholic school" label="Roman Catholic school"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="8329" end="8354" title="Country and Western music" label="Country and Western music"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="8457" end="8468" title="sister city" label="sister city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434796" start="8487" end="8512" title="Tamworth, New South Wales" label="Tamworth, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="8549" end="8558" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330480" start="8707" end="8736" title="Eastern Southland Art Gallery" label="Eastern Southland Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q625794" start="8744" end="8754" title="John Money" label="John Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568400" start="8959" end="8971" title="Ralph Hotere" label="Ralph Hotere"/>
<link wikidata="Q277375" start="9727" end="9747" title="Heritage New Zealand" label="Heritage New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q106180328" start="9761" end="9790" title="East Gore Presbyterian Church" label="East Gore Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="9850" end="9856" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q727197" start="9900" end="9911" title="Robert Lawson (architect)" label="R.A. Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q277375" start="9976" end="9996" title="Heritage New Zealand" label="Heritage New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="10224" end="10236" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878232" start="10482" end="10495" title="Hokonui Hills" label="Hokonui Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364664" start="10834" end="10850" title="Ronald Bannerman" label="Ronald Bannerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="10854" end="10864" title="flying ace" label="flying ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q194026" start="10935" end="10946" title="Jimmy Cowan" label="Jimmy Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135563" start="10976" end="10989" title="James Hargest" label="James Hargest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511635" start="11023" end="11036" title="Amanda Hooper" label="Amanda Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702053" start="11084" end="11095" title="Luke Hurley" label="Luke Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11107" end="11118" title="Hadyn Jones" label="Hadyn Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q959840" start="11143" end="11151" title="Roy Kerr" label="Roy Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q723260" start="11177" end="11192" title="Justin Marshall" label="Justin Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500339" start="11222" end="11237" title="Shona McFarlane" label="Shona McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932262" start="11263" end="11276" title="Hugh McIntyre (farmer)" label="Hugh McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924954" start="11345" end="11360" title="Brian McKechnie" label="Brian McKechnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q18062280" start="11414" end="11428" title="Chris McLennan" label="Chris McLennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848474" start="11451" end="11460" title="Mike Puru" label="Mike Puru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101058" start="11474" end="11486" title="Geoff Rabone" label="Geoff Rabone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387408" start="11513" end="11521" title="Eric Roy (politician)" label="Eric Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q235996" start="11535" end="11548" title="Jenny Shipley" label="Jenny Shipley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864767" start="11588" end="11599" title="Barry Soper" label="Barry Soper"/>
<link wikidata="Q540685" start="11623" end="11633" title="Stu Wilson" label="Stu Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q74698729" start="11663" end="11677" title="Ethan de Groot" label="Ethan de Groot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586090" start="11722" end="11736" title="Gore Aerodrome" label="Gore Aerodrome"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266088" wikidata="Q45090" url="?curid=266088" title="Jesse (biblical figure)">
<text>Jesse ( ) or Yishai ( – &quot;Yīšay&quot;, in pausa – &quot;Yīšāy&quot;, meaning &quot;King&quot; or &quot;God&#x27;s gift&quot;; – &quot;Eshai&quot;; – &quot;Iessaí&quot;; ); () is a figure described in the Hebrew Bible as the father of David, who became the king of the Israelites. His son David is sometimes called simply &quot;Son of Jesse&quot; (&quot;Ben Yishai&quot;). The role as both father of King David and ancestor of Jesus has been used in various depictions in art, poetry and music e.g. as the Tree of Jesse or in hymns like &quot;Lo, how a rose e&#x27;er blooming.&quot;

== Biblical background ==
===Narrative===
According to the Bible, Jesse was the son of Obed and the grandson of Ruth and of Boaz. He lived in Bethlehem, in Judah, and was of the Tribe of Judah, he was a farmer, breeder and owner of sheep. He was a prominent resident of the town of Bethlehem. Jesse is important in Judaism because he was the father of the most famous King of Israel. He is important in Christianity, in part because he is in the Old Testament and mentioned in the genealogy of Jesus. Later rabbinic traditions name him as one of four ancient Israelites who died without sin, the other three being Benjamin, Chileab and Amram.

The Book of Samuel states that Jesse had eight sons, naming the first three as Eliab, Abinadab and Shammah, and David as the youngest. The Book of Chronicles oddly only names seven sons of Jesse—Eliab, Abinadab, Shimea, Nethanel, Raddai, Ozem and David—as well as two daughters, Zeruiah and Abigail. Among his grandchildren were the three sons of Zeruiah: Abishai, Joab and Asahel; and Amasa, the son of Abigail.

One day the prophet Samuel came to Bethlehem sent by God, to anoint the next king of Israel. Ostensibly, his visit to Bethlehem was to offer a sacrifice to God. He used that excuse because he was afraid that King Saul might kill him if he suspected the true reason for his arrival in Bethlehem. Samuel offered a sacrifice with Jesse and then went to his house, where he sanctified him and his family. The prophet asked Jesse to present his sons. When Samuel saw Eliab, Jesse&#x27;s eldest son, he was impressed by his stature and convinced that he must be God&#x27;s anointed king, however, God said to Samuel, &quot;Do not consider his appearance or his height, for I have rejected him. The Lord does not look at the things man looks at. Man look at the outward appearance, but the Lord looks at the heart&quot; (1 Samuel 16:7 NIV). When Jesse presented his second son, Abinadab, God told Samuel, &quot;The Lord has not chosen this one either&quot; (1 Samuel 16:8 NIV). This happened again with his third son, Shammah, then his fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh sons. Finally, Samuel inquired of Jesse if he had any other sons. Jesse told him that David the youngest was tending the flock. The prophet then asked for him to be brought in from tending the sheep. Samuel waited, and when he arrived God asked the prophet to anoint David as king over Israel (1 Samuel 16:13).

Some time later, Saul, suffering from depression and melancholy, asked Jesse for his son David to play the harp for him, since he had heard that David played the harp beautifully. Jesse sent his son along with some gifts for the King. The King was so taken with David&#x27;s harp playing that he asked Jesse to keep him in his court to play for him whenever he was depressed. Later on Jesse sent his son David with gifts to be given to his older brothers who were to fight in the war against the Philistines in Saul&#x27;s army. Years later David fled to the desert away from Saul, who sought to kill David in order for him to stay in power and not have his throne be taken away from him. David, worried about the safety of his parents, went to Mizpah in Moab, to ask permission from the King to allow his father Jesse and his mother to stay under the royal protection of the King. They stayed there until David&#x27;s fortunes took a turn for the better.

===In prophecy===

The name &quot;Jesse&quot; is referenced in the Old Testament, and in particular the passages of the Book of Isaiah, Chapter 11, Verses 1–3:

Also Chapter 11, Verse 10: 

These are two of the verses regarded by Christians as prophecy of the advent of Jesus, whom they consider to be the Christ and Messiah. These two prophecies are regarded by Bahá&#x27;ís as referring to Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh, alleged to also have arisen from &quot;the stump of Jesse&quot;. These prophecies are also regarded in Latter-Day Saint Movement about the coming Root of Jesse, an ensign who holds special priesthood keys and a gathering of the Lord&#x27;s people.

== Tomb of Jesse ==
The Tomb of Ruth and Jesse is an old stone structure on a hilltop in Hebron which today serves as a synagogue. It receives numerous visitors every year, especially on the Jewish holiday of Shavuot when the Book of Ruth is read. The 1537 book &quot;Yihus HaAvos V&#x27;Neviim (Lineage of the Patriarch and the Prophets)&quot; describes the tomb as &quot;a handsome building up on the mount, where Jesse, the King David&#x27;s father is buried.&quot; It includes a drawing of the site, and notes an &quot;ancient Israelite burial ground&quot; nearby and Crusader courtyard. Rabbi Moshe Basola wrote in his travel journal that the site houses a cave which connects to the Tomb of Machpela, an assertion postulated by many over the years. The site was refurbished in 2009.

==See also==

* List of people named Jesse
* Nitzevet

==Note==
==References==
===Works cited===
* 

==External links==

* Tree of Jesse Directory 
* &quot;Jesse&quot; at behindthename.com
* Jesse the Patriarch at the Christian Iconography web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45090" start="0" end="5" title="Jesse (biblical figure)" label="Jesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q45090" start="13" end="19" title="Jesse (biblical figure)" label="Yishai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115257" start="46" end="51" title="pausa" label="pausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="208" end="220" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="238" end="243" title="David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="272" end="282" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="430" end="435" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140484" start="509" end="522" title="Tree of Jesse" label="Tree of Jesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q763041" start="546" end="579" title="Es ist ein Ros entsprungen" label="Lo, how a rose e&amp;#x27;er blooming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135791" start="675" end="679" title="Obed (Biblical figure)" label="Obed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774982" start="700" end="704" title="Ruth (biblical figure)" label="Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q212253" start="712" end="716" title="Boaz" label="Boaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="730" end="739" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q913564" start="766" end="780" title="Tribe of Judah" label="Tribe of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q131512" start="791" end="797" title="farmer" label="farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368409" start="799" end="806" title="breeder" label="breeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="903" end="910" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="991" end="1003" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="1034" end="1047" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q51630" start="1069" end="1087" title="genealogy of Jesus" label="genealogy of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q460763" start="1202" end="1210" title="Benjamin" label="Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418113" start="1212" end="1219" title="Chileab" label="Chileab"/>
<link wikidata="Q477527" start="1224" end="1229" title="Amram" label="Amram"/>
<link wikidata="Q181620" start="1236" end="1250" title="Book of Samuel" label="Book of Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q161953" start="1371" end="1389" title="Book of Chronicles" label="Book of Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q196771" start="1511" end="1518" title="Zeruiah" label="Zeruiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603697" start="1523" end="1530" title="Abigail (mother of Amasa)" label="Abigail"/>
<link wikidata="Q196771" start="1579" end="1586" title="Zeruiah" label="Zeruiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154317" start="1588" end="1595" title="Abishai (Bible)" label="Abishai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141064" start="1597" end="1601" title="Joab" label="Joab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915076" start="1606" end="1612" title="Asahel" label="Asahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689456" start="1618" end="1623" title="Amasa" label="Amasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577515" start="1666" end="1672" title="Samuel" label="Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28730" start="1854" end="1863" title="King Saul" label="King Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="2051" end="2058" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="2943" end="2946" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2994" end="3000" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193776" start="3516" end="3527" title="Philistines" label="Philistines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16943736" start="3765" end="3771" title="Mizpah (Moab)" label="Mizpah"/>
<link wikidata="Q326304" start="3775" end="3779" title="Moab" label="Moab"/>
<link wikidata="Q131458" start="4097" end="4111" title="Book of Isaiah" label="Book of Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q83012" start="4237" end="4243" title="advent" label="advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="4283" end="4289" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="4294" end="4301" title="Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="4369" end="4390" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140484" start="4538" end="4551" title="Root of Jesse" label="Root of Jesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="4730" end="4736" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q204200" start="5330" end="5346" title="Cave of the Patriarchs" label="Tomb of Machpela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227398" start="5447" end="5473" title="Jesse (given name)" label="List of people named Jesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041639" start="5476" end="5484" title="Nitzevet" label="Nitzevet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266089" wikidata="Q21489005" url="?curid=266089" title="Rimmer">
<text>Rimmer is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

* Anne Rimmer (born 1947), New Zealand conservationist and writer 
* Douglas Rimmer (1927-2004), political economist and Africanist
* Eve Rimmer (1937–1996), New Zealand athlete
* Jimmy Rimmer, English footballer
* Jodie Rimmer (born 1974), New Zealand voice and performer actress
* John Rimmer (1878–1962), British athlete
* Lasse Rimmer (born 1972), Danish entertainer
* Marie Rimmer, British Labour Party politician, Member of Parliament (MP) for St Helens South and Whiston May 2015
* Michael Rimmer (born 1986), English middle distance runner
* Robert Rimmer, author of &quot;The Harrad Experiment&quot;
* Simon Rimmer (born 1962), English Celebrity chef and television presenter
* Shane Rimmer (1929–2019), Canadian actor
* William Rimmer, English-born American artist
* William Rimmer (music), English composer of brass band music

Fictional characters:
* Arnold Rimmer, a fictional character in the BBC sitcom &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;
* Michael Rimmer, fictional anti-hero of the film &quot;The Rise and Rise of Michael Rimmer&quot;

==See also==
* Glass rimmer, a bar accessory
* Rimer (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21489005" start="0" end="6" title="Rimmer" label="Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q112644836" start="65" end="76" title="Anne Rimmer" label="Anne Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q59529052" start="132" end="146" title="Douglas Rimmer" label="Douglas Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416194" start="197" end="207" title="Eve Rimmer" label="Eve Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370782" start="243" end="255" title="Jimmy Rimmer" label="Jimmy Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691283" start="278" end="290" title="Jodie Rimmer" label="Jodie Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q708422" start="346" end="357" title="John Rimmer (athlete)" label="John Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493935" start="389" end="401" title="Lasse Rimmer" label="Lasse Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648527" start="436" end="448" title="Marie Rimmer" label="Marie Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360780" start="552" end="566" title="Michael Rimmer" label="Michael Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349295" start="613" end="626" title="Robert Rimmer" label="Robert Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519649" start="674" end="686" title="Simon Rimmer" label="Simon Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q674451" start="750" end="762" title="Shane Rimmer" label="Shane Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637109" start="793" end="807" title="William Rimmer" label="William Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624799" start="840" end="862" title="William Rimmer (music)" label="William Rimmer (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21489005" start="902" end="923" title="Rimmer" label="Fictional characters:"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844833" start="926" end="939" title="Arnold Rimmer" label="Arnold Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760880" start="1059" end="1094" title="The Rise and Rise of Michael Rimmer" label="The Rise and Rise of Michael Rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567129" start="1117" end="1129" title="Glass rimmer" label="Glass rimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153238" start="1149" end="1171" title="Rimer (disambiguation)" label="Rimer (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266098" wikidata="Q5700" url="?curid=266098" title="Lapland (Finland)">
<text>Lapland is the largest and northernmost region of Finland. The 21 municipalities in the region cooperate in a Regional Council. Lapland borders the Finnish region of North Ostrobothnia in the south. It also borders the Gulf of Bothnia, Norrbotten County in Sweden, Finnmark County and Troms County in Norway, and Murmansk Oblast and the Republic of Karelia in Russia. The topography of Lapland varies from vast mires and forests in the south to fells in the north. The Arctic Circle crosses Lapland, so polar phenomena such as the midnight sun and polar night can be viewed in this region.

Lapland&#x27;s cold and wintry climate, coupled with its relative abundance of conifer trees such as pines and spruces, means that it has become associated with Christmas in some countries, most notably the United Kingdom, and holidays to Lapland are common towards the end of the year. However, the Lapland region has developed its infrastructure for year-round tourism. For example, in 2019, tourism during the snow-free period grew more than in the winter season. In recent years, Lapland has also become a major tourist destination for celebrities as well as royalty.

Rovaniemi is the main regional centre of Lapland, and the Rovaniemi Airport is the second busiest airport in Finland. Besides tourism, other important sectors are trade, manufacturing and construction. Like Rovaniemi, Inari is also one of the most important tourist destinations in Lapland for foreign tourism.

Lapland has been connected with the legendary &quot;North Pole&quot; home of Santa Claus (Father Christmas or Saint Nicholas) since 1927, when Finnish radio host Markus Rautio said that Santa Claus lived on Korvatunturi, a fell in the region. Later, Rovaniemi staked a claim as Santa&#x27;s &quot;official hometown&quot; and developed the Santa Claus Village attraction to encourage tourism. However, this has brought overtourism as a mild phenomenon.

==Geography==
The area of the Lapland region is 100,367 km², which consists of 92,667 km² of dry land, 6,316 km² fresh water and 1,383 km² of seawater. In the south it borders the Northern Ostrobothnia region, in the west, Sweden, in the north and west Norway, and in the east, Russia. Its borders follow three rivers: the Tana, Muonio and Torne. The largest lake is Lake Inari, 1,102 km². The region&#x27;s highest point is on Halti, which reaches 1,324 m (4,344 ft) on the Finnish side of the border and is the highest point in Finland.

The areas of Enontekiö and Utsjoki in northern Lapland are known as Fell-Lapland. The bulk and remaining Lapland is known as Forest-Lapland. Lake Inari, the many fens of the region and the Salla-Saariselkä mountains are all part of Forest-Lapland. Fell-Lapland lies in the fells of the Scandinavian Mountains. It is not made up of barren ground like blockfields but instead has the vegetation of birch forests, willow thickets or heath. Common soil types in Forest-Lapland are till and sand with conifer forests growing on top. These forests show little variation across Lapland. Compared to southern Finland forest tree species grow slower. The understory typically consists of blueberries, lichens, crowberries and lings.

The landscape of large parts of Lapland is an inselberg plain. It has been suggested the inselberg plains were formed in the Late Cretaceous or Paleogene period by pediplanation or etchplanation. Relative to southern Finland Lapland stands out for its thick till cover. The hills and mountains are typically made up of resistant rocks like granite, gneiss, quartzite and amphibolite. The ice sheet that covered Finland intermittently during the Quaternary grew out from the Scandinavian Mountains. The central parts of the Fennoscandian ice sheet had cold-based conditions during times of maximum extent. This means that in areas like northeast Sweden and northern Finland, pre-existing landforms and deposits escaped glacier erosion and are particularly well preserved at present. Northwest to the southeast movement of the ice has left a field of aligned drumlins in central Lapland. Ribbed moraines found in the same area reflects a later west-to-east change in the movement of the ice. During the last deglaciation ice in Lapland retreated from the north-east, east and southeast so that the lower course of the Tornio was the last part of Finland to be deglaciated 10,100 years ago. Present-day periglacial conditions in Lapland are reflected in the existence of numerous palsas, permafrost landforms developed on peat.

The bedrock of Lapland belongs to the Karelian Domain occupying the bulk of the region, the Kola Domain in the northeast around Lake Inari and the Scandinavian Caledonides in the tip of Lapland&#x27;s northwestern arm. With few exceptions rocks are of Archean and Proterozoic age. Granites, gneiss, metasediments and metavolcanics are common rocks while greenstone belts are recurring features. More rare rock associations include mafic and ultramafic layered intrusions and one of the world&#x27;s oldest ophiolites. The region hosts valuable deposits of gold, chromium, iron and phosphate.

===Climate===
The first snowflakes fall to the ground in late August or early September over the higher peaks. The first ground-covering snow arrives on average in October or late September. Permanent snow cover comes between mid-October and the end of November, significantly earlier than in southern Finland. The winter is long, approximately seven months. The snow cover is usually thickest in early April. Soon after that the snow cover starts to melt fast. The thickest snow cover ever was measured in Kilpisjärvi on 19 April 1997 and it was 190 cm. The annual mean temperature varies from a couple of degrees below zero in the northwest to a couple of degrees above zero in the southwest (Kemi-Tornio area). Lapland exhibits a trend of increasing precipitation towards the south, with the driest parts being located at the two arms.

In summer months, the average temperature is consistently over 10 °C. Heat waves with daily temperatures exceeding 25 °C occur on an average of 5–10 days per summer in northern Finland.

==History==

The area of Lapland was split between two counties of the Swedish Realm from 1634 to 1809. The northern and western areas were part of Västerbotten County, while the southern areas (so-called Peräpohjola) were part of Ostrobothnia County (after 1755 Oulu County). The northern and western areas were transferred in 1809 to Oulu County, which became Oulu Province. Under the royalist constitution of Finland during the first half of 1918, Lapland was to become a Grand Principality and part of the inheritance of the proposed king of Finland. Lapland Province was separated from Oulu Province in 1938.

During the Interim Peace and beginning of the Continuation War the government of Finland allowed the Nazi German Army to station itself in Lapland as a part of Operation Barbarossa. After Finland made a separate peace with the Soviet Union in 1944, the Soviet Union demanded that Finland expel the German army from its soil. The result was the Lapland War, during which almost the whole civilian population of Lapland was evacuated. The Germans used scorched earth tactics in Lapland before they withdrew to Norway. 40 to 47 per cent of the dwellings in Lapland and of railroads were destroyed, of roadways were mined, destroyed or were unusable, and 675 bridges and of telephone lines were also destroyed. Ninety per cent of Rovaniemi, the capital of Lapland, was burned to the ground, with only a few pre-war buildings surviving the destruction.

After the Second World War, Petsamo municipality and part of Salla municipality were ceded to the Soviet Union. The decades following the war were a period of rebuilding, industrialisation and fast economic growth. Large hydroelectric plants and mines were established and cities, roads and bridges were rebuilt after the destruction of the war. In the late 20th century the economy of Lapland started to decline, mines and factories became unprofitable and the population started to decline rapidly across most of the region.

The provinces of Finland were abolished on 1 January 2010, but Lapland was reorganised as one of the new regions that replaced them.

== Municipalities ==

The region of Lapland consists of 21 municipalities, four of which have city status (marked in bold).
=== Sub-regions ===

Kemi-Tornio sub-region
* Kemi 
* Keminmaa 
* Simo 
* Tervola 
* Tornio
Rovaniemi sub-region
* Rovaniemi
* Ranua 
Torne Valley sub-region
* Pello 
* Ylitornio 

Eastern Lapland sub-region
* Kemijärvi 
* Pelkosenniemi
* Posio 
* Salla 
* Savukoski 
Northern Lapland sub-region
* Inari 
* Sodankylä
* Utsjoki 
Fell Lapland sub-region
* Enontekiö
* Kittilä 
* Kolari 
* Muonio 

=== List of municipalities ===
==Economy==


===Tourism===

==Population==

Lapland is the home of about 3.4% of Finland&#x27;s total population and is by far the least densely populated area in the country. The biggest towns in Lapland are Rovaniemi (the regional capital), Tornio, and Kemi. In 2011, Lapland had a population of 183,320 of whom 177,950 spoke Finnish, 1,526 spoke Sami, 387 spoke Swedish and 3,467 spoke some other languages as their mother tongue. Of the Sami languages, Northern Sami, Inari Sami and Skolt Sami are spoken in the region. Pelkosenniemi is the smallest municipality in mainland Finland in terms of population, while Savukoski is sparsely populated in terms of population density.

Lapland&#x27;s population has been in decline since 1990.

===Regional council===
The 21 municipalities of Lapland are organised into a single region, where they cooperate in the Lapland regional council, &quot;Lapin liitto&quot; or &quot;Lapplands förbund&quot;.

===Politics===
Lapland has seven seats in the 200-seat parliament of Finland. In the 2019 Finnish parliamentary election, three seats went to Centre Party, and the Finns Party, the Left Alliance, the Social Democratic Party and the National Coalition Party got one seat each.

The votes were distributed as follows:
*Centre Party 29.20%
*Finns Party 17.19%
*Left Alliance 14.16%
*Social Democratic Party 13.51%
*National Coalition Party 11.26%
*Green League 9.72%
*Movement Now 1.99%
*Christian Democrats 1.08%
*Seven Star Movement 0.67%
*Blue Reform 0.48%
*Swedish People&#x27;s Party 0.11%
*Other parties 0.63%

===Sámi homeland===

The northernmost municipalities of Lapland where the Sámi people are the most numerous form the Sámi homeland. Sámi organisation exists in parallel with the provincial one.

==Transport==
===Roads===
Three European roads pass through Lapland: E8, E63 and E75, the latter of which runs almost 600 kilometres from the southernmost municipality of Simo to the northernmost municipality of Utsjoki.

===Airports===
Kemi-Tornio, Rovaniemi, Kittilä, Ivalo and Enontekiö airports are located in Lapland. The flight time from Helsinki is about 1,5 hours.

===Railways===
In the western part, the Laurila–Kelloselkä railway runs from Tornio to Kolari, and the eastern line runs from Keminmaa via Rovaniemi and Kemijärvi to the eastern border of the country at Salla&#x27;s Kelloselkä.

==See also==
*Finnish Lakeland
*Lääni
*Laponia (historical province of Finland)
*Lappmarken
*National parks in Lapland
*Sea Lapland
*Southern Lapland

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Lapland Regional Council – Official site
*House of Lapland
*Lapland Club
*Kemi-Tornio University of Applied Sciences – video portal – Videos about Lapland experiences and lifestyle.
*Levi, Lapland – Official site of Levi, Finland.
*Where is Lapland?
*Midnight Sun Film Festival</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5700" start="0" end="7" title="Lapland (Finland)" label="Lapland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193512" start="40" end="57" title="Regions of Finland" label="region of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5704" start="166" end="184" title="North Ostrobothnia" label="North Ostrobothnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122574" start="219" end="234" title="Gulf of Bothnia" label="Gulf of Bothnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103686" start="236" end="253" title="Norrbotten County" label="Norrbotten County"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="257" end="263" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q50632" start="265" end="280" title="Finnmark" label="Finnmark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q50631" start="285" end="297" title="Troms" label="Troms County"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="301" end="307" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759" start="313" end="328" title="Murmansk Oblast" label="Murmansk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914" start="337" end="356" title="Republic of Karelia" label="Republic of Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="360" end="366" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36449705" start="411" end="415" title="mire" label="mire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421955" start="445" end="449" title="fell" label="fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="469" end="482" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q774621" start="531" end="543" title="midnight sun" label="midnight sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q190991" start="548" end="559" title="polar night" label="polar night"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="692" end="696" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="702" end="708" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="752" end="761" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="798" end="812" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q103717" start="1164" end="1173" title="Rovaniemi" label="Rovaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323139" start="1222" end="1239" title="Rovaniemi Airport" label="Rovaniemi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q755702" start="1382" end="1387" title="Inari, Finland" label="Inari"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="1553" end="1564" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580236" start="1566" end="1582" title="Father Christmas" label="Father Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="1586" end="1600" title="Saint Nicholas" label="Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294426" start="1638" end="1651" title="Markus Rautio" label="Markus Rautio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784850" start="1683" end="1695" title="Korvatunturi" label="Korvatunturi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421955" start="1699" end="1703" title="fell" label="fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q135379" start="1815" end="1834" title="Santa Claus Village" label="Santa Claus Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q24899931" start="1894" end="1905" title="overtourism" label="overtourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5704" start="2109" end="2130" title="Northern Ostrobothnia" label="Northern Ostrobothnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q829866" start="2252" end="2256" title="Tana (Norway)" label="Tana"/>
<link wikidata="Q837208" start="2258" end="2264" title="Muonio (river)" label="Muonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q121538" start="2269" end="2274" title="Torne (Finnish and Swedish river)" label="Torne"/>
<link wikidata="Q203137" start="2296" end="2306" title="Lake Inari" label="Lake Inari"/>
<link wikidata="Q216035" start="2357" end="2362" title="Halti" label="Halti"/>
<link wikidata="Q984861" start="2482" end="2491" title="Enontekiö" label="Enontekiö"/>
<link wikidata="Q581920" start="2496" end="2503" title="Utsjoki" label="Utsjoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q203137" start="2610" end="2620" title="Lake Inari" label="Lake Inari"/>
<link wikidata="Q514050" start="2631" end="2634" title="fen" label="fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q936067" start="2658" end="2663" title="Salla" label="Salla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815690" start="2664" end="2674" title="Saariselkä" label="Saariselkä"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421955" start="2742" end="2746" title="fell" label="fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q186547" start="2755" end="2777" title="Scandinavian Mountains" label="Scandinavian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709247" start="2819" end="2829" title="blockfield" label="blockfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="2865" end="2870" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="2871" end="2877" title="boreal forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="2880" end="2886" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="2899" end="2904" title="heath" label="heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="2946" end="2950" title="till" label="till"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="2955" end="2959" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q422666" start="3115" end="3125" title="understory" label="understory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413585" start="3148" end="3159" title="Vaccinium myrtillus" label="blueberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="3161" end="3167" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q202305" start="3170" end="3181" title="Empetrum nigrum" label="crowberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983007" start="3186" end="3191" title="calluna" label="lings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3240" end="3255" title="Inselberg#Geology" label="inselberg plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="3319" end="3334" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="3338" end="3347" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975853" start="3358" end="3371" title="pediplain" label="pediplanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231735" start="3375" end="3388" title="etchplain" label="etchplanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="3452" end="3456" title="till" label="till"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="3534" end="3541" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="3543" end="3549" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="3551" end="3560" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q335239" start="3565" end="3576" title="amphibolite" label="amphibolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12599" start="3582" end="3591" title="ice sheet" label="ice sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="3639" end="3649" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q186547" start="3668" end="3690" title="Scandinavian Mountains" label="Scandinavian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3745" end="3766" title="Glacier#Classification by thermal state" label="cold-based conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q15835270" start="3949" end="3963" title="relict (geology)" label="well preserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q192701" start="4051" end="4058" title="drumlin" label="drumlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039348" start="4080" end="4094" title="Ribbed moraine" label="Ribbed moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707848" start="4200" end="4212" title="deglaciation" label="deglaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q121538" start="4310" end="4316" title="Torne (Finnish and Swedish river)" label="Tornio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14079966" start="4394" end="4405" title="periglaciation" label="periglacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q203450" start="4471" end="4476" title="palsa" label="palsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="4479" end="4489" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="4513" end="4517" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="4524" end="4531" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743162" start="4612" end="4623" title="Kola Province" label="Kola Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q203137" start="4648" end="4658" title="Lake Inari" label="Lake Inari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961790" start="4667" end="4691" title="Scandinavian Caledonides" label="Scandinavian Caledonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="4772" end="4779" title="Archean" label="Archean"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="4784" end="4795" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="4801" end="4808" title="Granite" label="Granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="4811" end="4817" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="4819" end="4832" title="metamorphic rock" label="metasediments"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="4837" end="4850" title="metamorphic rock" label="metavolcanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q595991" start="4874" end="4889" title="greenstone belt" label="greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="4951" end="4956" title="mafic" label="mafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143398" start="4961" end="4971" title="ultramafic" label="ultramafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292632" start="4972" end="4989" title="layered intrusion" label="layered intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q605396" start="5026" end="5035" title="ophiolite" label="ophiolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="5082" end="5090" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="5101" end="5110" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="6211" end="6224" title="Swedish Realm" label="Swedish Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q104877" start="6288" end="6307" title="Västerbotten County" label="Västerbotten County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354072" start="6345" end="6356" title="Peräpohjola" label="Peräpohjola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277199" start="6371" end="6390" title="Ostrobothnia County" label="Ostrobothnia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q202112" start="6403" end="6414" title="Oulu County" label="Oulu County"/>
<link wikidata="Q202112" start="6502" end="6515" title="Oulu Province" label="Oulu Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="6615" end="6633" title="Grand Principality" label="Grand Principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q615902" start="6678" end="6693" title="Kingdom of Finland (1918)" label="king of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q200258" start="6695" end="6711" title="Lapland Province" label="Lapland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098938" start="6766" end="6779" title="Interim Peace" label="Interim Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="6801" end="6817" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q313442" start="6844" end="6851" title="Operation Silver Fox" label="allowed"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="6861" end="6872" title="Wehrmacht" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="6915" end="6935" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6982" end="6994" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q154940" start="7099" end="7110" title="Lapland War" label="Lapland War"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="7205" end="7219" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q103717" start="7481" end="7490" title="Rovaniemi" label="Rovaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269671" start="7516" end="7540" title="Battle of Rovaniemi" label="was burned to the ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7614" end="7630" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367345" start="7632" end="7639" title="Pechengsky District" label="Petsamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q936067" start="7665" end="7670" title="Salla" label="Salla"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="7775" end="7792" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217691" start="8157" end="8171" title="Provinces of Finland" label="were abolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q856076" start="8325" end="8339" title="municipalities of Finland" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q839591" start="8411" end="8433" title="Kemi-Tornio sub-region" label="Kemi-Tornio sub-region"/>
<link wikidata="Q203619" start="8436" end="8440" title="Kemi" label="Kemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q859608" start="8444" end="8452" title="Keminmaa" label="Keminmaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q985400" start="8456" end="8460" title="Simo, Finland" label="Simo"/>
<link wikidata="Q990585" start="8464" end="8471" title="Tervola" label="Tervola"/>
<link wikidata="Q214021" start="8475" end="8481" title="Tornio" label="Tornio"/>
<link wikidata="Q839601" start="8482" end="8502" title="Rovaniemi sub-region" label="Rovaniemi sub-region"/>
<link wikidata="Q103717" start="8505" end="8514" title="Rovaniemi" label="Rovaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q485776" start="8517" end="8522" title="Ranua" label="Ranua"/>
<link wikidata="Q839576" start="8524" end="8547" title="Torne Valley sub-region" label="Torne Valley sub-region"/>
<link wikidata="Q31331" start="8550" end="8555" title="Pello" label="Pello"/>
<link wikidata="Q984930" start="8559" end="8568" title="Ylitornio" label="Ylitornio"/>
<link wikidata="Q839523" start="8571" end="8597" title="Eastern Lapland" label="Eastern Lapland sub-region"/>
<link wikidata="Q744704" start="8600" end="8609" title="Kemijärvi" label="Kemijärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q935869" start="8613" end="8626" title="Pelkosenniemi" label="Pelkosenniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q530517" start="8629" end="8634" title="Posio" label="Posio"/>
<link wikidata="Q936067" start="8638" end="8643" title="Salla" label="Salla"/>
<link wikidata="Q984938" start="8647" end="8656" title="Savukoski" label="Savukoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q839597" start="8658" end="8685" title="Northern Lapland" label="Northern Lapland sub-region"/>
<link wikidata="Q755702" start="8688" end="8693" title="Inari, Finland" label="Inari"/>
<link wikidata="Q502175" start="8697" end="8706" title="Sodankylä" label="Sodankylä"/>
<link wikidata="Q581920" start="8709" end="8716" title="Utsjoki" label="Utsjoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q839610" start="8718" end="8741" title="Fell Lapland" label="Fell Lapland sub-region"/>
<link wikidata="Q984861" start="8744" end="8753" title="Enontekiö" label="Enontekiö"/>
<link wikidata="Q593942" start="8756" end="8763" title="Kittilä" label="Kittilä"/>
<link wikidata="Q543882" start="8767" end="8773" title="Kolari" label="Kolari"/>
<link wikidata="Q302717" start="8777" end="8783" title="Muonio" label="Muonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q103717" start="9027" end="9036" title="Rovaniemi" label="Rovaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q214021" start="9061" end="9067" title="Tornio" label="Tornio"/>
<link wikidata="Q203619" start="9073" end="9077" title="Kemi" label="Kemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="9146" end="9153" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q56463" start="9167" end="9171" title="Sami languages" label="Sami"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="9183" end="9190" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33947" start="9275" end="9288" title="Northern Sami language" label="Northern Sami"/>
<link wikidata="Q33462" start="9290" end="9300" title="Inari Sámi language" label="Inari Sami"/>
<link wikidata="Q13271" start="9305" end="9315" title="Skolt Sami language" label="Skolt Sami"/>
<link wikidata="Q935869" start="9342" end="9355" title="Pelkosenniemi" label="Pelkosenniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q984938" start="9435" end="9444" title="Savukoski" label="Savukoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="9479" end="9497" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327895" start="9589" end="9614" title="municipalities of Lapland" label="municipalities of Lapland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193512" start="9643" end="9649" title="Regions of Finland" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q20036875" start="9850" end="9885" title="2019 Finnish parliamentary election" label="2019 Finnish parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q506591" start="9907" end="9919" title="Centre Party (Finland)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q634277" start="9929" end="9940" title="Finns Party" label="Finns Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q385927" start="9946" end="9959" title="Left Alliance (Finland)" label="Left Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q499029" start="9965" end="9988" title="Social Democratic Party of Finland" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q304191" start="9997" end="10021" title="National Coalition Party" label="National Coalition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q506591" start="10082" end="10094" title="Centre Party (Finland)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q634277" start="10103" end="10114" title="Finns Party" label="Finns Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q385927" start="10123" end="10136" title="Left Alliance (Finland)" label="Left Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q499029" start="10145" end="10168" title="Social Democratic Party of Finland" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q304191" start="10177" end="10201" title="National Coalition Party" label="National Coalition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q196695" start="10210" end="10222" title="Green League" label="Green League"/>
<link wikidata="Q52157683" start="10230" end="10242" title="Movement Now" label="Movement Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138982" start="10250" end="10269" title="Christian Democrats (Finland)" label="Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q58868602" start="10277" end="10296" title="Seven Star Movement" label="Seven Star Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30337076" start="10304" end="10315" title="Blue Reform" label="Blue Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q845537" start="10323" end="10350" title="Swedish People&amp;#x27;s Party of Finland" label="Swedish People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="10453" end="10464" title="Sámi people" label="Sámi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982393" start="10496" end="10509" title="Sámi homeland (Finland)" label="Sámi homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q106123" start="10606" end="10620" title="International E-road network" label="European roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129207" start="10643" end="10645" title="European route E8" label="E8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375933" start="10647" end="10650" title="European route E63" label="E63"/>
<link wikidata="Q638912" start="10655" end="10658" title="European route E75" label="E75"/>
<link wikidata="Q985400" start="10745" end="10749" title="Simo, Finland" label="Simo"/>
<link wikidata="Q581920" start="10786" end="10793" title="Utsjoki" label="Utsjoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413172" start="10811" end="10822" title="Kemi-Tornio Airport" label="Kemi-Tornio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323139" start="10824" end="10833" title="Rovaniemi Airport" label="Rovaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347310" start="10835" end="10842" title="Kittilä Airport" label="Kittilä"/>
<link wikidata="Q850269" start="10844" end="10849" title="Ivalo Airport" label="Ivalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q662933" start="10854" end="10863" title="Enontekiö Airport" label="Enontekiö"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="10918" end="10926" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q214021" start="11025" end="11031" title="Tornio" label="Tornio"/>
<link wikidata="Q543882" start="11035" end="11041" title="Kolari" label="Kolari"/>
<link wikidata="Q859608" start="11074" end="11082" title="Keminmaa" label="Keminmaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q744704" start="11101" end="11110" title="Kemijärvi" label="Kemijärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q936067" start="11151" end="11156" title="Salla" label="Salla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370633" start="11191" end="11207" title="Finnish Lakeland" label="Finnish Lakeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q629870" start="11209" end="11214" title="Lääni" label="Lääni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142955" start="11216" end="11256" title="Laponia (historical province of Finland)" label="Laponia (historical province of Finland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q914194" start="11258" end="11268" title="Lappmarken" label="Lappmarken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535177" start="11270" end="11295" title="National parks in Lapland" label="National parks in Lapland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18660802" start="11297" end="11308" title="Sea Lapland" label="Sea Lapland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354072" start="11310" end="11326" title="Southern Lapland" label="Southern Lapland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266100" wikidata="Q1227454" url="?curid=266100" title="Direct Client-to-Client">
<text>Direct Client-to-Client (DCC) (originally Direct Client Connection) is an IRC-related sub-protocol enabling peers to interconnect using an IRC server for handshaking in order to exchange files or perform non-relayed chats. Once established, a typical DCC session runs independently from the IRC server. Originally designed to be used with ircII it is now supported by many IRC clients. Some peer-to-peer clients on napster-protocol servers also have DCC send/get capability, including TekNap, SunshineUN and Lopster. A variation of the DCC protocol called SDCC (Secure Direct Client-to-Client), also known as DCC SCHAT supports encrypted connections. An RFC specification on the use of DCC does not exist.

DCC connections can be initiated in two different ways:
* The most common way is to use CTCP to initiate a DCC session. The CTCP is sent from one user, over the IRC network, to another user.
* Another way to initiate a DCC session is for the client to connect directly to the DCC server. Using this method, no traffic will go across the IRC network (the parties involved do not need to be connected to an IRC network in order to initiate the DCC connection).

==History==
ircII was the first IRC client to implement the CTCP and DCC protocols. The CTCP protocol was implemented by Michael Sandrof in 1990 for ircII version 2.1. The DCC protocol was implemented by Troy Rollo in 1991 for version 2.1.2, but was never intended to be portable to other IRC clients.

==Common DCC applications==

===DCC CHAT===
The CHAT service enables users to chat with each other over a DCC connection. The traffic will go directly between the users, and not over the IRC network. When compared to sending messages normally, this reduces IRC network load, allows sending of larger amounts of text at once, due to the lack of flood control, and makes the communication more secure by not exposing the message to the IRC servers (however, the message is still in plaintext).

DCC CHAT is normally initiated using a CTCP handshake. The user wishing to establish the connection sends the following CTCP to the target, codice_1, where and are the IP address and port number of the sender, and are expressed as integers. is for standard DCC CHAT. The receiving party can then connect to the given port and IP address.

Once a connection is established, the protocol used for DCC CHAT is very simple: users exchange CRLF-terminated messages. Messages that begin with an ASCII 001 (control-A, represented below by ) and the word , and are terminated by another ASCII , are interpreted as emotes: codice_2.

====DCC Whiteboard====
This is an extension to DCC CHAT, allowing simple drawing commands to be sent as well as lines of text. DCC Whiteboard is initiated with a handshake similar to DCC CHAT, with the protocol replaced by :
codice_3.

Once the connection is established, the two clients exchange CRLF-terminated messages. Messages that begin (and optionally end) with ASCII are interpreted as special commands; the command represents an emote, while others cause lines to be drawn on the user&#x27;s whiteboard surface, or allow the two clients to negotiate a set of features.

===DCC SEND ===
The SEND service allows users to send files to one another. The original specification for the handshake did not allow the receiver to know the total file size nor to resume a transfer. This has made clients introduce their own extensions to the handshake, many of which have become widely supported.

The original handshake consisted of the sender sending the following CTCP to the receiver: codice_4.

As with DCC CHAT, and are the IP address and port where the sending machine will be listening for an incoming connection. Some clients enclose filenames with spaces in double quotes. It is common practice to add the file size as a last argument: codice_5.

At this point, the original specification had the receiver either connect to the given address and port and wait for data, or ignore the request, but for clients supporting the DCC RESUME extension, a third alternative is to ask the sender to skip part of the file by sending the CTCP reply: codice_6.

If the sending client supports DCC RESUME, it will reply with, codice_7, and the receiver can connect to the given address and port and listen for data to append to an already existing file.

Data is sent to the client in blocks, each of which the client must acknowledge by sending the total number of bytes received in the form of a 32-bit network byte order integer. This slows down connections and is redundant because of TCP. The send-ahead extension relieves this problem somewhat by not waiting for the acknowledgements, but since the receiver still has to send them for every block it receives, in case the sender expects them, it is not solved completely.

Another extension, TDCC, or turbo DCC, removes the acknowledgements, but requires a slightly modified handshake and is not widely supported. Older versions of TDCC replaced the word SEND in the handshake with TSEND; later versions use the word SEND but append a after the handshake, making this version of TSEND compatible with other clients (as long as they can parse the modified handshake).

====DCC SEND exploit====
The &quot;DCC send exploit&quot; can refer to two bugs: a variant buffer overflow error in mIRC triggered by filenames longer than 14 characters, and an input validation error in some routers manufactured by Netgear, D-Link and Linksys, triggered by the use of port . The router exploit, in particular, may be triggered when the phrase &quot; followed by at least 6 characters without spaces or newlines appears anywhere in a TCP stream on port 6667, not just when an actual DCC SEND request has been made. In the 2000s it was possible to combine multiple exploits into a single string, , which if posted in a public channel could cause multiple users to disconnect (either by crashing IRC clients, crashing routers, or triggering overly strict default settings in antivirus software).

===DCC XMIT===
The XMIT service is a modified version of DCC SEND that allows for resuming files and cuts down on wasteful traffic from the ACK longs. XMIT is not widely supported.

The XMIT handshake differs somewhat from the SEND handshake. The sender sends a CTCP offering a file to the receiver: codice_8

Square brackets here enclose optional parts. is the protocol to use for the transfer; only is defined presently. Unlike standard DCC SEND, can be in the additional forms of standard dotted notation for IPv4, or either hexadecimal or mixed notation for IPv6. To leave an early parameter empty, but still supply a later one, the earlier one can be specified as . If the receiver does not implement the protocol used, it will send back a CTCP reply of the format: codice_9.

CHAT is used here to maintain compatibility with the error messages sent by the extended DCC CHAT. If the receiver declines the transfer, it sends the following CTCP reply: codice_10.

Other errors are reported in the same fashion. If the receiver is willing and capable of receiving the file, it will connect to the given address and port. What happens then depends on the protocol used.

In the case of the protocol, the XMIT server will, upon receiving a connection, send a 32-bit codice_11 in network byte order, representing the file&#x27;s modification time. Presumably based on the modification time of the local file, the client will then send another network byte order codice_12, an offset which the server should seek to when sending the file. This should be set to zero if the whole file is wanted, or the size of the local file if the client wishes to resume a previous download.

While faster than SEND, XMIT carries one of the same limitations in that it is impossible to tell how big the file is, unless its size is specified in the CTCP negotiation or known beforehand. Furthermore, it is not possible to resume a file past the two gigabyte mark due to the 32-bit offset.

===Passive DCC===
In a normal DCC connection the initiator acts as the server, and the target is the client. Because of widespread firewalling and reduction of end-to-end transparency because of NAT, the initiator might not be able to act as a server. Various ways of asking the target to act as the server have been devised:

====DCC Server====
This extension to normal DCC SEND and CHAT was introduced by the IRC client mIRC. DCC Server has moderate support, but is not standard on all clients (see Comparison of Internet Relay Chat clients).

It allows the initiation of a DCC connection by IP address, without the need of an IRC server. This is accomplished by the receiving client acting as a server (hence the name) listening (usually on port 59) for a handshake from the sender.

For a CHAT, the initiator sends codice_13. The target then replies with, codice_13, and the rest proceeds according to standard DCC CHAT protocol.

For a SEND, the initiator sends codice_15. The target replies with, codice_16, where is the offset in the file from which to start. From here the transfer proceeds as a normal DCC SEND.

DCC Server also supports mIRC-style file servers and DCC GET.

====RDCC====
DCC Server provides no way specifying the port to use, so this has to be negotiated manually, which is not always possible, as one of the sides may not be a human. RDCC is a handshake mechanism for DCC Server, which in addition to the port also provides the IP address of the server, which the client might not be able to find otherwise because of host masking. It is not widely supported.

The initiator requests the port the target is listening on by sending the CTCP query, codice_17, where is for chat, for send, or for file server.

The target may then CTCP reply with, codice_18, where and have the same meanings as for normal DCC SEND and CHAT. After this the initiator connects to the and , and a DCC Server handshake follows.

====DCC REVERSE====
Unlike DCC Server, where the handshake is handled over a direct IP connection, DCC REVERSE has a normal CTCP handshake, similar to the one used by DCC SEND. This is not widely implemented. The sender offers a file to the receiver by sending the CTCP message: codice_19. is a 1–50 characters-long string of ASCII characters in the range 33–126, and acts as an identifier for the transfer.

If the receiver accepts, it sends the CTCP reply, codice_20

Here, is the position in the file from which to start sending, is the IP address of the receiver in standard dotted notation for IPv4, or hexadecimal notation for IPv6. The sender then connects to the ip address and port indicated by the receiver, and a normal DCC SEND follows. Both the sender and receiver can cancel the handshake by sending the CTCP reply, codice_21.

====DCC RSEND====
This is the KVIrc client&#x27;s alternative to DCC REVERSE. The sender offers a file by sending the CTCP: codice_22. The receiver can then accept by CTCP replying with, codice_23, and the sender connects to the receiver and sends as during a normal DCC SEND.

====Reverse / Firewall DCC====
This passive DCC mechanism is supported by at least mIRC, Visual IRC, HexChat, KVIrc, DMDirc, Klient, Konversation, and PhibianIRC. The sender offers a file by sending the CTCP message, codice_24. is the IP address of the sender in network byte order, expressed as a single integer (as in standard DCC). The number 0 is sent instead of a valid port, signaling that this is a Reverse DCC request. is a unique integer; if TSEND is being used (by a client that supports it), the letter is appended to the token, letting the receiver know it doesn&#x27;t need to send acknowledgements.

The receiver can accept the file by opening a listening socket and responding with the CTCP message, codice_25. This is identical to the original Reverse DCC message, except the and identify the socket where the receiver is listening. is the same as in the original request, letting the sender know which request is being accepted. (Because this message follows the same format as a regular DCC send request, some servers which filter DCC requests may require the sender to add the receiver to their &quot;DCC allow&quot; list.)

The sender then connects to the receiver&#x27;s socket, sends the content of the file, and waits for the receiver to close the socket when the file is finished.

When the RESUME extension to the SEND protocol is used, the sequence of commands becomes (with indicating an outgoing message on the initiating side, and response by its peer):

codice_26

After which the protocol proceeds as normal (i.e. the sender connects to the receiver&#x27;s socket).

===File servers (FSERVs)===
A DCC &quot;fserve&quot;, or file server, lets a user browse, read and download files located on a DCC server.

Typically, this is implemented with a DCC CHAT session (which presents the user with a command prompt) or special CTCP commands to request a file. The files are sent over DCC SEND or DCC XMIT. There are many implementations of DCC file servers, among them is the FSERV command in the popular mIRC client.

==See also==
* CTCP (Client-to-client protocol)
* XDCC (eXtended DCC)

==References==
==External links==
* A description of the DCC protocol &quot;(note: Most IRC-clients and networks have implemented extensions to the DCC protocol. The DCC commonly used today has evolved quite a bit from what this document describes.)&quot;
* DCC negotiation and connection 
* A description of the Turbo DCC protocol
* A description of the DCC Whiteboard protocol</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1227454" start="0" end="23" title="Direct Client-to-Client" label="Direct Client-to-Client"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227454" start="25" end="28" title="Direct Client-to-Client" label="DCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227454" start="42" end="66" title="Direct Client-to-Client" label="Direct Client Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="74" end="77" title="Internet Relay Chat" label="IRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="108" end="113" title="Peer-to-peer" label="peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q548838" start="154" end="165" title="Handshake (computing)" label="handshaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q291940" start="339" end="344" title="ircII" label="ircII"/>
<link wikidata="Q528166" start="373" end="384" title="client (computing)" label="IRC clients"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="628" end="637" title="encrypted" label="encrypted"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="654" end="671" title="Request for Comments" label="RFC specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q742790" start="795" end="799" title="Client-To-Client Protocol" label="CTCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q291940" start="1179" end="1184" title="ircII" label="ircII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162538" start="1950" end="1959" title="plaintext" label="plaintext"/>
<link wikidata="Q742790" start="2002" end="2006" title="Client-To-Client Protocol" label="CTCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q184914" start="2398" end="2402" title="CRLF" label="CRLF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="2452" end="2457" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q184914" start="2885" end="2889" title="CRLF" label="CRLF"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="4482" end="4488" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q339338" start="4489" end="4507" title="network byte order" label="network byte order"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="4573" end="4576" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="TCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q19423" start="5299" end="5314" title="buffer overflow" label="buffer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q211680" start="5324" end="5328" title="mIRC" label="mIRC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5386" end="5408" title="input validation error" label="input validation error"/>
<link wikidata="Q979690" start="5441" end="5448" title="Netgear" label="Netgear"/>
<link wikidata="Q303580" start="5450" end="5456" title="D-Link" label="D-Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241626" start="5461" end="5468" title="Linksys" label="Linksys"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="5659" end="5662" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="TCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q742790" start="6282" end="6286" title="Client-to-client protocol" label="CTCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="6382" end="6390" title="protocol (computing)" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q339338" start="7299" end="7317" title="network byte order" label="network byte order"/>
<link wikidata="Q742790" start="7851" end="7855" title="Client-to-client protocol" label="CTCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="8063" end="8069" title="Server (computing)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q528166" start="8093" end="8099" title="client (computing)" label="client"/>
<link wikidata="Q80998" start="8123" end="8134" title="Firewall (networking)" label="firewalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="8187" end="8190" title="Network Address Translation" label="NAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q211680" start="8414" end="8418" title="mIRC" label="mIRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378978" start="8493" end="8534" title="Comparison of Internet Relay Chat clients" label="Comparison of Internet Relay Chat clients"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="10252" end="10257" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251237" start="10505" end="10520" title="Dot-decimal notation" label="dotted notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="10525" end="10529" title="IPv4" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="10534" end="10545" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="10559" end="10563" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q211680" start="11129" end="11133" title="mIRC" label="mIRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936556" start="11135" end="11145" title="Visual IRC" label="Visual IRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17117379" start="11147" end="11154" title="HexChat" label="HexChat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378978" start="11163" end="11169" title="DMDirc" label="DMDirc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11171" end="11177" title="Klient" label="Klient"/>
<link wikidata="Q379066" start="11179" end="11191" title="Konversation" label="Konversation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11197" end="11207" title="PhibianIRC" label="PhibianIRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="11281" end="11291" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q742790" start="12898" end="12902" title="Client-to-client protocol" label="CTCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q211680" start="13076" end="13080" title="mIRC" label="mIRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q742790" start="13105" end="13109" title="Client-to-client protocol" label="CTCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565674" start="13140" end="13144" title="XDCC" label="XDCC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266103" wikidata="Q337483" url="?curid=266103" title="Philip Snowden, 1st Viscount Snowden">
<text>Philip Snowden, 1st Viscount Snowden, PC (; 18 July 1864 – 15 May 1937) was a British politician. A strong speaker, he became popular in trade union circles for his denunciation of capitalism as unethical and his promise of a socialist utopia. He was the first Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer, a position he held in 1924 and again between 1929 and 1931. He broke with Labour policy in 1931, and was expelled from the party and excoriated as a turncoat, as the party was overwhelmingly crushed that year by the National Government coalition that Snowden supported. He was succeeded as Chancellor by Neville Chamberlain.

==Early life: 1864–1906==
Snowden was born on 18 July 1864 in Cowling in the West Riding of Yorkshire. His father John Snowden had been a weaver and a supporter of Chartism, and later a Gladstonian liberal. Snowden later wrote in his autobiography: &quot;I was brought up in this Radical atmosphere, and it was then that I imbibed the political and social principles which I have held fundamentally ever since&quot;. Although his parents and sisters were involved in weaving at the Ickornshaw Mill, he did not join them; after attending a local board school (where he received additional lessons in French and Latin from the schoolmaster) he stayed on as a pupil-teacher. When he was 15 he became an insurance office clerk in Burnley. During his seven years as a clerk, he studied and then passed the civil service entry examination; in 1886, he was appointed to a junior position at the Excise Office in Liverpool. Snowden moved on to other posts around Scotland and then to Devon.

In August 1891, when he was aged 27, Snowden severely injured his back in a cycling accident in Devon and was paralyzed from the waist down. He learned to walk again with the aid of sticks within two years. His Inland Revenue job was kept open for him for two years following the accident; however, owing to his condition, he decided to resign from the civil service. While he was convalescing at his mother&#x27;s house at Cowling he began to study socialist theory and history.

Snowden joined the Liberal Party, and followed his parents in becoming a teetotaller. In 1893, in the aftermath of the formation of the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in neighbouring Bradford, he was asked to give a speech for the Cowling Liberal Club on the dangers of socialism. Whilst researching the subject, Snowden instead became convinced by the ideology. He eventually joined the executive committee of the Keighley ILP in 1899, and went on to chair the ILP from 1903 to 1906. He became a prominent speaker for the party, and wrote a popular Christian socialist pamphlet with Keir Hardie in 1903, entitled &quot;The Christ that is to Be&quot;. His strident rhetoric, well-laced with statistics and evangelical themes, contrasted the evil conditions under capitalism with the moral and economic utopia of future socialism. He condemned as &quot;bloodsuckers and parasites&quot; local textile company executives. In 1898, he launched the &quot;Keighley Labour Journal&quot;, using it to denounce waste, pettiness, and corruption. However, he ignored the concerns of the trade unions, which he judged to be conservative and fixated on wages. By 1902, he had moved his base to Leeds and toured Britain as a lecturer on politics and corruption, with his own syndicated column and short essays in numerous working class outlets. By the time he was elected Labour MP for Blackburn in 1906, he had become a well-known socialist figure, standing at the national level alongside both Keir Hardie, Professor Arnold Lupton and Ramsay MacDonald.

Snowden married Ethel Annakin, a campaigner for women&#x27;s suffrage, in 1905. He supported his wife&#x27;s ideals, and he became a noted speaker at suffragist meetings and other public meetings.

==Member of Parliament: 1906–1924==

Snowden unsuccessfully contested the Wakefield constituency in West Yorkshire in a by-election in March 1902, where he received 40 percent of the votes.
In 1906, he became the Labour MP for Blackburn. He continued his writing and lectures, and now was advocating more radical measures than the ruling Liberal government was implementing. He even devised his own &quot;Socialist budget&quot; to rival David Lloyd George&#x27;s 1909 &quot;People&#x27;s Budget&quot;.

Snowden was in Australia on a worldwide lecture tour when the Britain entered World War I in August 1914; he did not return to Britain until February 1915. He was not a pacifist; however, he did not support recruiting for the armed forces, and he campaigned against conscription. His stance was unpopular with the public and he lost his seat in the 1918 general election. In 1922, he was elected to represent Colne Valley.

==Chancellor of the Exchequer: 1924==
Upon Ramsay MacDonald&#x27;s appointment as Prime Minister in January 1924, Snowden was appointed as the Labour Party&#x27;s first ever Chancellor of the Exchequer and sworn of the Privy Council. Despite his socialist rhetoric, Snowden believed that in order to transition towards a socialist society the capitalist British economy had to recover from World War I and the Depression of 1920–1921. He therefore cut taxes and tariffs in order balance the national budget, and continued to commit the government to reentering the gold standard by 1925.

In his budget, Snowden lowered the duties on tea, coffee, cocoa, chicory and sugar; reduced spending on armaments; and provided money for council housing. However, he did not implement the capital levy. Snowden claimed that because of the lowering of duties on foodstuffs consumed by the working class, the budget went &quot;far to realize the cherished radical idea of a free breakfast table&quot;. He profoundly believed in the morality of the balanced budget, with rigorous economy and not a penny wasted. He grasped how serious unemployment was becoming, but differed with the rising belief in deficit spending as a way to combat it. A. J. P. Taylor said his budget &quot;would have delighted the heart of Gladstone&quot;.

In his first budget, Snowden earmarked £38 million for the reduction of food taxes, the introduction of pensions for widows, and a reduction in the pensionable age to 65. However, only the first of these measures was realized during the first Labour Government&#x27;s time in office.

==Opposition: 1924–1929==
Although he had chaired the ILP for a second time, from 1917 to 1920, Snowden resigned from the party in 1927 because he believed it was &quot;drifting more and more away from... evolutionary socialism into revolutionary socialism&quot;. He was also opposed to the new Keynesian economic ideas which provided a rationale for deficit spending, and criticized their expression in the Liberals&#x27; manifesto for the 1929 election, titled &quot;We can Conquer Unemployment&quot;.

==Chancellor of the Exchequer: 1929–1931==
Snowden was again appointed Chancellor after Labour formed a government in 1929, after emerging as the largest party in the general election. His economic philosophy was one of strict Gladstonian Liberalism rather than socialism. His official biographer wrote, &quot;He was raised in an atmosphere which regarded borrowing as an evil and free trade as an essential ingredient of prosperity&quot;.

He was the principal opponent to any radical economic policy to tackle the Great Depression, and blocked proposals to introduce protectionist tariffs. In 1930 he rejected the Mosley Manifesto issued by junior Labour ministers led by Oswald Mosley proposing a programme of high spending on public works and autarkic Imperial Preference to combat unemployment. The government eventually collapsed over arguments about a budget deficit when Snowden accepted the Committee on National Expenditure&#x27;s recommendations for budget cuts while a significant minority of ministers led by Arthur Henderson, the National Executive Committee, and the General Council of the Trades Union Congress refused to enact cuts in unemployment benefits.

Snowden retained the position of Chancellor during the National Government of 1931. As a consequence he was expelled from the party, along with MacDonald and Jimmy Thomas. In a BBC Radio broadcast on 16 October 1931, he called Labour&#x27;s policies &quot;Bolshevism run mad&quot; and contrasted them unfavourably with his own &quot;sane and evolutionary Socialism&quot;. Snowden decided not to stand for parliament in the election of October 1931. At that election, Labour&#x27;s number of seats declined catastrophically from 288 to 52. It was during that year he had prostate gland surgery, following which his health and mobility declined.

Robert Skidelsky is representative of the Keynesians who have charged that Snowden and MacDonald were blinded by their economic philosophy that required balanced budgets, sound money, the gold standard and free trade, regardless of the damage that Keynesians thought it would do to the economy and the people. However, with the decline of Keynesianism as a model after 1968, historians have re-evaluated Snowden in a more favourable light. Ross McKibbin argues that the Labour government had very limited room to manoeuvre in 1929–31, and it did as well as could be expected; and that it handled the British economy better than most foreign governments handled theirs, and the Great Depression was less severe in Britain than elsewhere. Future Prime Minister Harold Wilson would also be inspired by Snowden&#x27;s policies to resist a devaluation of the pound sterling in 1967. 

==Later life: 1931–1937==
In the 1931 Dissolution Honours he was raised to the peerage as Viscount Snowden of Ickornshaw, in the West Riding of the County of York, and served as Lord Privy Seal in the National government from 1931 to 1932, when he resigned in protest at the enactment of a full scheme of Imperial Preference and protectionist tariffs. That year, Snowden said there was never a greater mistake than to say that Cobdenism was dead: &quot;Cobdenism was never more alive throughout the world than it was to-day ... To-day the ideas of Cobden were in revolt against selfish nationalism. The need for the breaking down of trade restrictions, which took various forms, was universally recognized even by those who were unable to throw off those shackles&quot;.

He subsequently wrote his &quot;Autobiography&quot; in which he strongly attacked MacDonald. In the 1935 general election, Snowden supported the Keynesian economic programme proposed by Lloyd George (&quot;Lloyd George&#x27;s New Deal&quot;). Snowden claimed that he was returning to long-held economic views, but that these had been &quot;temporarily inadvisable&quot; during the crisis of 1931, when &quot;national necessity&quot; demanded cutting public expenditure.

Lord Snowden died of a heart attack at his home, Eden Lodge, Tilford, Surrey, on 15 May 1937, aged 72. After cremation at Woking Crematorium his ashes were scattered on Cowling Moor near Ickornshaw. His library of books and pamphlets was presented to Keighley Public Library by his widow, and a cairn was erected to his memory on Ickornshaw Moor in 1938.

His viscountcy died with him. Lady Snowden died in February 1951, aged 69.

His autobiography was republished in 2024 under the title &quot;Britain&#x27;s Iron Chancellor&quot; to mark the centenary of the first Labour government. A new introduction to the book by historian Alexander Clifford defended Snowden on several counts, comparing favourably his handling of the market panic of 1931 to similar events under Liz Truss in 2022 and pointing out that Snowden&#x27;s core belief - &quot;that a prosperous capitalist economy would generate the tax revenue necessary to tackle social inequality&quot; - has remained a keystone of Labour thinking ever since.

Snowden was one of the protagonists of Bill Broady&#x27;s 2024 historical novel &quot;The Night-Soil Men&quot;.

==Notes==
== Bibliography ==

* Jenkins, Roy. &quot;The Chancellors: A History of the Leaders of the British Exchequer, 1886-1947&quot; (1999) pp. 251-300. online
*
* McKibbin, Ross. &quot;The Economic Policy of the Second Labour Government 1929-1931&quot; &quot;Past &amp; Present&quot;, No. 68 (Aug. 1975), pp. 95-123 online
*
*


==External links==
* 
* Philip Snowden - Blackburn Labour Party
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q337483" start="0" end="36" title="Philip Snowden, 1st Viscount Snowden" label="Philip Snowden, 1st Viscount Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="38" end="40" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="181" end="191" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="261" end="267" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="268" end="295" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415358" start="446" end="454" title="turncoat" label="turncoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453430" start="513" end="532" title="National Government (1931)" label="National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="601" end="620" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254466" start="685" end="692" title="Cowling, Craven" label="Cowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="700" end="724" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193974" start="787" end="795" title="Chartism" label="Chartism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566365" start="809" end="828" title="Gladstonian liberal" label="Gladstonian liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687668" start="903" end="910" title="Radicals (UK)" label="Radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q127393838" start="1105" end="1120" title="Ickornshaw Mill" label="Ickornshaw Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432327" start="1168" end="1180" title="Board School" label="board school"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647863" start="1511" end="1524" title="HM Excise" label="Excise Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1578" end="1586" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="1599" end="1604" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034804" start="1818" end="1832" title="Inland Revenue" label="Inland Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="2107" end="2120" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="2224" end="2248" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="2271" end="2279" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q990168" start="2503" end="2511" title="Keighley" label="Keighley"/>
<link wikidata="Q739609" start="2638" end="2657" title="Christian socialism" label="Christian socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q332460" start="2672" end="2683" title="Keir Hardie" label="Keir Hardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="2794" end="2805" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11872677" start="3112" end="3122" title="Corruption in the United Kingdom" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="3269" end="3274" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="3446" end="3452" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="3453" end="3455" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077481" start="3460" end="3469" title="Blackburn (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795155" start="3583" end="3606" title="Arnold Lupton" label="Professor Arnold Lupton"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="3611" end="3627" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q547550" start="3646" end="3659" title="Ethel Snowden" label="Ethel Annakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="3678" end="3699" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q874488" start="3902" end="3911" title="Wakefield (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q23083" start="3928" end="3942" title="West Yorkshire" label="West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076606" start="4021" end="4025" title="1906 United Kingdom general election" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077481" start="4055" end="4064" title="Blackburn (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507478" start="4166" end="4184" title="Liberal government, 1905–1915" label="Liberal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="4265" end="4283" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374979" start="4302" end="4322" title="People&amp;#x27;s Budget" label="People&amp;#x27;s Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q60794097" start="4393" end="4420" title="British entry into World War I" label="Britain entered World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098639" start="4500" end="4508" title="Opposition to World War I" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303122" start="4538" end="4569" title="Recruitment to the British Army during World War I" label="recruiting for the armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042701" start="4680" end="4701" title="1918 United Kingdom general election" label="1918 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080320" start="4740" end="4752" title="Colne Valley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Colne Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="4929" end="4956" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="4974" end="4987" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q323138" start="5109" end="5124" title="Economy of the United Kingdom" label="British economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5145" end="5156" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260911" start="5165" end="5188" title="Depression of 1920–1921" label="Depression of 1920–1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566674" start="5234" end="5261" title="Balanced budget" label="balance the national budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="5320" end="5333" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="5482" end="5497" title="Public housing in the United Kingdom" label="council housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q820602" start="5533" end="5545" title="capital levy" label="capital levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499755" start="5716" end="5736" title="free breakfast table" label="free breakfast table"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057447" start="5876" end="5888" title="Interwar unemployment and poverty in the United Kingdom" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="5942" end="5958" title="deficit spending" label="deficit spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q706931" start="5982" end="5997" title="A. J. P. Taylor" label="A. J. P. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453246" start="6309" end="6332" title="First MacDonald ministry" label="first Labour Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q75786" start="6562" end="6584" title="Evolutionary Socialism" label="evolutionary socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120936" start="6590" end="6613" title="revolutionary socialism" label="revolutionary socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="6652" end="6676" title="Keynesian economics" label="Keynesian economic ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q517639" start="6798" end="6811" title="1929 United Kingdom general election" label="1929 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566365" start="7089" end="7111" title="Gladstonian liberalism" label="Gladstonian Liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599058" start="7378" end="7394" title="Great Depression in the United Kingdom" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="7431" end="7444" title="Protectionism" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q332400" start="7536" end="7549" title="Oswald Mosley" label="Oswald Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="7592" end="7604" title="public works" label="public works"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="7609" end="7617" title="Autarky" label="autarkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11976992" start="7618" end="7637" title="Imperial Preference" label="Imperial Preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="7721" end="7735" title="Deficit spending" label="budget deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796580" start="7762" end="7795" title="Committee on National Expenditure" label="Committee on National Expenditure"/>
<link wikidata="Q208665" start="7884" end="7900" title="Arthur Henderson" label="Arthur Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="7906" end="7934" title="National Executive Committee of the Labour Party" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q24298876" start="7944" end="7988" title="General Council of the Trades Union Congress" label="General Council of the Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q311255" start="8014" end="8035" title="unemployment benefits" label="unemployment benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453430" start="8093" end="8120" title="National Government (1931)" label="National Government of 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q338294" start="8196" end="8208" title="J. H. Thomas" label="Jimmy Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="8215" end="8224" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q472940" start="8294" end="8304" title="Bolshevism" label="Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q918375" start="8461" end="8485" title="1931 United Kingdom general election" label="election of October 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="8608" end="8622" title="prostate gland" label="prostate gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q335331" start="8683" end="8699" title="Robert Skidelsky" label="Robert Skidelsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421756" start="8854" end="8865" title="sound money" label="sound money"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="8889" end="8899" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12504948" start="9011" end="9045" title="Post-war displacement of Keynesianism" label="decline of Keynesianism as a model"/>
<link wikidata="Q28325090" start="9123" end="9136" title="Ross McKibbin" label="Ross McKibbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="9360" end="9376" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="9442" end="9455" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000958" start="9596" end="9620" title="1931 Dissolution Honours" label="1931 Dissolution Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="9741" end="9756" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11976992" start="9868" end="9887" title="Imperial Preference" label="Imperial Preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="9892" end="9905" title="Protectionism" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138853" start="9990" end="9999" title="Cobdenism" label="Cobdenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q918378" start="10435" end="10456" title="1935 United Kingdom general election" label="1935 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="10480" end="10489" title="Keynesian" label="Keynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971901" start="10867" end="10874" title="Tilford" label="Tilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029331" start="10928" end="10946" title="Woking Crematorium" label="Woking Crematorium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10975" end="10987" title="Cowling Moor" label="Cowling Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453246" start="11368" end="11391" title="First MacDonald Ministry" label="first Labour government"/>
<link wikidata="Q272201" start="11578" end="11587" title="Liz Truss" label="Liz Truss"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266108" wikidata="Q217096" url="?curid=266108" title="Naruhito">
<text>Naruhito (born 23 February 1960) is Emperor of Japan. He acceded to the Chrysanthemum Throne following his father&#x27;s abdication on 1 May 2019, beginning the era. He is the 126th monarch according to Japan&#x27;s traditional order of succession.

Naruhito is the elder son of Emperor Emeritus Akihito and Empress Emerita Michiko. He was born during the reign of his paternal grandfather, Emperor Shōwa, and became heir apparent following his father&#x27;s accession in 1989. He was formally invested as Crown Prince of Japan in 1991. He attended Gakushūin schools in Tokyo and later studied history at Gakushuin University and English at Merton College, Oxford. In June 1993, he married diplomat Owada Masako. They have one daughter: Aiko.

Continuing his grandfather&#x27;s and father&#x27;s boycott over the enshrinement of convicted war criminals, Naruhito has never visited Yasukuni Shrine. He is interested in water policy and water conservation. He was an honorary president of the 2020 Summer Olympics and Paralympics and is a supporter of the World Organization of the Scout Movement.

== Name ==
Before becoming emperor, he was generally referred in the Japanese press by his princely title &quot;Kōtaishi&quot; (Crown Prince, 皇太子; ). Upon succeeding to the throne he is referred to as , which may be shortened to . In writing, the emperor is also referred to formally as . The era of his reign bears the name , and according to custom he will be referred to as by order of the Cabinet after his death.

The name of the next era under his successor will be established after his death or before his abdication.

== Early life ==
Naruhito was born on 23 February 1960 at 4:15 p.m. in the Imperial Household Agency Hospital in Tokyo Imperial Palace. As a prince, he later quipped, &quot;I was born in a barn inside the moat&quot;. His parents, Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko, were then crown prince and crown princess of Japan, while his paternal grandfather, Emperor Shōwa, reigned as emperor. Reuters news agency reported that Naruhito&#x27;s paternal grandmother, Empress Kōjun, had driven her daughter-in-law and grandchildren to depression in the 1960s by persistently accusing Michiko of not being suitable for her son.

His childhood was reported to be happy, and he enjoyed activities such as mountain climbing, riding, and learning the violin. He played with the children of the royal chamberlain, and he was a fan of the Yomiuri Giants in the Central League, his favorite player being No. 3, later team manager, Shigeo Nagashima. One day, Naruhito found the remains of an ancient roadway on the palace grounds, sparking a lifelong fascination with the history of transportation, which would provide the subject of his bachelor&#x27;s and master&#x27;s degrees in history. He later said, &quot;I have had a keen interest in roads since childhood. On roads, you can go to the unknown world. Since I have been leading a life where I have few chances to go out freely, roads are a precious bridge to the unknown world, so to speak.&quot;

In August 1974, when the prince was 14, he was sent to Melbourne, Australia, for a homestay. His father, then the crown prince Akihito, had a positive experience there on a trip the year before and encouraged his son to go as well. He stayed with the family of businessman Colin Harper. He got along with his host brothers, riding around Point Lonsdale, playing the violin and tennis, and climbing Uluru together. Once he even played the violin for dignitaries at a state dinner at Government House hosted by Governor-General John Kerr.

== Education ==

When the prince was four years old he was enrolled in the prestigious Gakushūin school system, where many of Japan&#x27;s elite families and &quot;narikin&quot; (nouveaux riches) send their children. In senior high, Naruhito joined the geography club.

He graduated from Gakushuin University in March 1982 with a Bachelor of Letters degree in history. In July 1983, he undertook a three-month intensive English course before entering Merton College of the University of Oxford in the United Kingdom, where he studied until 1986. He did not, however, submit his thesis &quot;A Study of Navigation and Traffic on the Upper Thames in the 18th Century&quot; until 1989. He later revisited these years in his book, &quot;The Thames and I – a Memoir of Two Years at Oxford.&quot; He visited some 21 historic pubs, including the Trout Inn. He joined the Japan Society and the drama society, and became the honorary president of the karate and judo clubs. He played inter-college tennis, seeded number three out of six on the Merton team, and took golf lessons from a pro. In his three years at Merton he also climbed the highest peaks in three of the constituent countries of the United Kingdom: Scotland&#x27;s Ben Nevis, Wales&#x27;s Snowdon and Scafell Pike in England.

While at Oxford, he also was able to go sightseeing across Europe and meet much of its royalty, including the British royal family. The relatively relaxed manners of the United Kingdom&#x27;s royals amazed him: &quot;Queen Elizabeth II, he noted with surprise, poured her own tea and served the sandwiches.&quot; He also went skiing with Liechtenstein&#x27;s Prince Hans-Adam II, holidayed in Mallorca in the Mediterranean with Spain&#x27;s King Juan Carlos I, and sailed with Norway&#x27;s Crown Prince Harald and Crown Princess Sonja and Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands.

Upon his return to Japan, he enrolled once more in Gakushūin University to earn a Master of Humanities degree in history, successfully earning his degree in 1988.

== Personal life ==
=== Marriage and family ===

Naruhito first met Owada Masako, a staff member working at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, at a tea gathering for Infanta Elena of Spain in November 1986, during her studies at the University of Tokyo. The prince was immediately captivated by her, and arranged for them to meet several times over the next few weeks. Because of this, they were pursued relentlessly by the press throughout 1987.

Despite the Imperial Household Agency&#x27;s disapproval of her, and her attending Balliol College, Oxford, for the next two years, he remained interested in her. He proposed to her three times before the Imperial Palace announced their engagement on 19 January 1993. The wedding took place on 9 June the same year at the Imperial Shinto Hall in Tokyo before 800 invited guests, including many of Europe&#x27;s heads of state and royalty.

By the time of their marriage, his father had ascended the throne, so the prince had been invested as the crown prince with the title on 23 February 1991.

Her first pregnancy was announced in December 1999, but she miscarried. They finally had one daughter, , born 1 December 2001 at the Imperial Household Agency Hospital at Tokyo Imperial Palace. 

The Japanese imperial succession debate started around the time when it became increasingly clear over the following years that Princess Aiko would be their only child. The emperor made unprecedented remarks on the issue on June 19, 2024 at a news conference in the imperial palace.

=== Hobbies and interests ===
He is interested in water policy and water conservation. In March 2003, in his capacity as honorary president of the Third World Water Forum, he delivered a speech at the forum&#x27;s opening ceremony titled &quot;Waterways Connecting Kyoto and Local Regions&quot;. Visiting Mexico in March 2006, he gave the keynote address at the opening ceremony for the Fourth World Water Forum, &quot;Edo and Water Transport&quot;. And in December 2007, he gave a commemorative talk at the opening ceremony for the First Asia-Pacific Water Summit, &quot;Humans and Water: From Japan to the Asia-Pacific Region&quot;.

He plays the viola, having switched from the violin because he thought the latter &quot;too much of a leader, too prominent&quot; to suit his musical and personal tastes. He enjoys jogging, hiking, and mountaineering in his spare time.

According to Prime Minister Fumio Kishida, the emperor and King Charles III&#x27;s families share an &quot;intimate relationship&quot;.

== Crown Prince ==
As the crown prince he was a patron of the 1998 Winter Olympics and 1998 Winter Paralympics. He is also a supporter of the World Organization of the Scout Movement and in 2006 attended the 14th Nippon Jamboree, the Japanese national jamboree organized by the Scout Association of Japan. The crown prince had also been an honorary vice-president of the Japanese Red Cross Society since 1994. In 2001, the crown prince visited the United Kingdom; he met Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh at Windsor Castle.

For two weeks in 2012, the crown prince temporarily took charge of his father&#x27;s duties while Emperor Akihito underwent and recovered from heart bypass surgery. Naruhito&#x27;s birthday was named &quot;Mount Fuji Day&quot; by Shizuoka and Yamanashi Prefectures because of his reported love of the mountain.

== Reign ==
On 1 December 2017, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe announced that Naruhito&#x27;s father, Emperor Akihito, would abdicate on 30 April 2019, and that Naruhito would become the 126th emperor of Japan as of 1 May 2019. Following an abdication ceremony on the afternoon of 30 April, Akihito&#x27;s reign and the Heisei era continued until the end of the day. Naruhito then succeeded him as emperor at the beginning of the day on 1 May, ushering in the Reiwa era. The transition took place at midnight, and Naruhito formally began his reign in a ceremony later that morning. In his first statement as emperor, he pledged to reflect deeply on the course followed by his father, and fulfill his constitutional responsibility &quot;as the symbol of the state and of the unity of the people of Japan&quot;.

Under Article 4 of the Japanese constitution, the emperor&#x27;s role is defined as entirely ceremonial and representative. Unlike most other constitutional monarchs, the emperor lacks even nominal powers related to government; he is barred from making political statements. His role is limited to performing ceremonial duties as delineated by the constitution, and even then he is constrained by the requirements of the constitution and the binding advice of the cabinet. For instance, while he formally appoints the Prime Minister, he is required to appoint the person designated by the National Diet.

The enthronement ceremony took place on 22 October 2019, where he was duly enthroned in an ancient-style proclamation ceremony. On 23 July 2021, the new emperor opened the 2020 Summer Olympics (originally scheduled to be played in 2020, postponed by the COVID-19 pandemic) hosted in Tokyo, just as his grandfather, Emperor Shōwa, had done in 1964.
The imperial couple&#x27;s first trip abroad as emperor and empress took place in September 2022, to the United Kingdom to attend the state funeral of Queen Elizabeth II. They visited Indonesia in June 2023, their first state visit.

In February 2024, the emperor marked his 64th birthday with a message mourning the victims of the Noto earthquake, and expressed desire to visit the affected areas. He had previously received condolences for the victims from King Charles III of the United Kingdom in early January. The emperor and empress visited Wajima and Suzu, two earthquake-stricken cities in the Noto Peninsula, on 22 March. The couple later visited an evacuation center in Anamizu on 12 April.

In April 2024, the Imperial Household Agency launched an Instagram account for the imperial family, which received 300,000 followers by the end of its debut on the platform. The account was reportedly launched to &quot;reach out&quot; to Japan&#x27;s younger generations.

The Emperor and Empress embarked on a three-day state visit to the United Kingdom in late June 2024, at the invitation of King Charles III. The imperial couple had originally planned to visit in 2020 as guests of Queen Elizabeth II, but the state visit was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The rescheduled visit went ahead despite concerns of postponement due to the British general election campaign that began in late May. It was the first state visit in modern times to take place during an active election campaign.

== Selected works ==

* 1993 – 
* 2006 – &quot;The Thames and I: A Memoir of Two Years at Oxford&quot; with Hugh Cortazzi. Folkestone, Kent: Global Oriental. ; 

== Titles, styles and honours ==

===Titles and styles===
*23 February 1960 – 7 January 1989: &quot;His Imperial Highness&quot; The Prince Hiro (浩宮徳仁親王殿下 &quot;Hiro-no-miya Naruhito shinnō denka&quot;)
*7 January 1989 – 30 April 2019: &quot;His Imperial Highness&quot; The Crown Prince (皇太子殿下 &quot;Kōtaishi denka&quot;)
*1 May 2019 – present: &quot;His Majesty&quot; The Emperor (天皇陛下 &quot;Ten&#x27;nō heika)&quot;

===Honours===

====National====
* Collar of the Supreme Order of the Chrysanthemum (1 May 2019)
* Grand Cordon of the Supreme Order of the Chrysanthemum (23 February 1980)
* Grand Cordon of the Order of the Paulownia Flowers (1 May 2019)
* Grand Cordon of the Order of the Sacred Treasure (1 May 2019) 
* The Order of Culture (1 May 2019)
* The Golden Pheasant Award of the Scout Association of Japan (1989)
* The Golden Medal of Merit of the Japanese Red Cross (1 May 2019)
* The Golden Medal of Honorary Member of the Japanese Red Cross (1 May 2019)

====Foreign====
* : Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold with Sash for Services to the Republic of Austria (1999) 
* : Knight of the Order of the Elephant (2004)
* : Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary (2000) 
* : Honorary Grand Commander of the Order of the Defender of the Realm (2012)
* : Grand Collar of the Order of Sikatuna, Rank of Raja (3 December 2002)
* : Grand Cross of the Military Order of Christ (2 December 1993)
* : Knight Grand Cross of the Royal and Distinguished Spanish Order of Charles III (8 November 2008)
** Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Order of the Crown of Tonga (1 August 2008)
** Coronation Medal of H.M. King George Tupou V (1 August 2008)
* : Member First Class of the Order of Zayed (23 January 1995)
* : Stranger Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter (25 June 2024)

====Honorary degrees====
* 1991: University of Oxford, Doctor of Law

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==

== External links ==
* Their Majesties the Emperor and Empress at the Imperial Household Agency website











 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217096" start="0" end="8" title="Naruhito" label="Naruhito"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="36" end="52" title="Emperor of Japan" label="Emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981690" start="72" end="92" title="Chrysanthemum Throne" label="Chrysanthemum Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q44023338" start="103" end="131" title="2019 Japanese imperial transition" label="his father&amp;#x27;s abdication"/>
<link wikidata="Q188210" start="216" end="247" title="List of emperors of Japan" label="traditional order of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q37979" start="279" end="303" title="Emperor Emeritus Akihito" label="Emperor Emeritus Akihito"/>
<link wikidata="Q87610" start="308" end="331" title="Empress Emerita Michiko" label="Empress Emerita Michiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q34479" start="391" end="404" title="Hirohito" label="Emperor Shōwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="417" end="430" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061900" start="549" end="558" title="Gakushūin" label="Gakushūin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372362" start="605" end="625" title="Gakushuin University" label="Gakushuin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q82513" start="641" end="663" title="Merton College, Oxford" label="Merton College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q230433" start="699" end="711" title="Empress Masako" label="Owada Masako"/>
<link wikidata="Q743509" start="737" end="741" title="Aiko, Princess Toshi" label="Aiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q112663" start="813" end="852" title="Controversies surrounding Yasukuni Shrine" label="enshrinement of convicted war criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q242803" start="881" end="896" title="Yasukuni Shrine" label="Yasukuni Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973577" start="918" end="930" title="Water politics" label="water policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462136" start="935" end="953" title="water conservation" label="water conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="991" end="1011" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14856650" start="1016" end="1027" title="2020 Summer Paralympics" label="Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210347" start="1054" end="1094" title="World Organization of the Scout Movement" label="World Organization of the Scout Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q24706" start="1390" end="1393" title="Japanese era name" label="era"/>
<link wikidata="Q529012" start="1490" end="1497" title="Cabinet of Japan" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="1611" end="1621" title="abdication" label="abdication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143602" start="1699" end="1724" title="Imperial Household Agency" label="Imperial Household Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q500681" start="1737" end="1758" title="Tokyo Imperial Palace" label="Tokyo Imperial Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q37979" start="1862" end="1869" title="Akihito" label="Akihito"/>
<link wikidata="Q87610" start="1874" end="1889" title="Empress Michiko" label="Empress Michiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q34479" start="1975" end="1988" title="Hirohito" label="Emperor Shōwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="2010" end="2017" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q230697" start="2082" end="2095" title="Empress Kōjun" label="Empress Kōjun"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="2316" end="2333" title="Mountaineering" label="mountain climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="2335" end="2341" title="Horseback riding" label="riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q264323" start="2409" end="2420" title="Chamberlain (office)" label="chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197407" start="2446" end="2460" title="Yomiuri Giants" label="Yomiuri Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053900" start="2468" end="2482" title="Central League" label="Central League"/>
<link wikidata="Q910160" start="2537" end="2553" title="Shigeo Nagashima" label="Shigeo Nagashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645474" start="2605" end="2612" title="roadway" label="roadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="2688" end="2702" title="transportation" label="transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="3115" end="3124" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485919" start="3398" end="3412" title="Point Lonsdale" label="Point Lonsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q33910" start="3458" end="3463" title="Uluru" label="Uluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q16887133" start="3509" end="3520" title="dignitaries" label="dignitaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464941" start="3542" end="3558" title="Government House, Canberra" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354851" start="3586" end="3595" title="John Kerr (governor-general)" label="John Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898394" start="3777" end="3792" title="nouveau riche" label="nouveaux riches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372362" start="3886" end="3906" title="Gakushuin University" label="Gakushuin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901047" start="3928" end="3947" title="Bachelor of Letters" label="Bachelor of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q82513" start="4049" end="4063" title="Merton College" label="Merton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="4071" end="4091" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11319373" start="4331" end="4381" title="The Thames and I – a Memoir of Two Years at Oxford" label="The Thames and I – a Memoir of Two Years at Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770502" start="4433" end="4446" title="the Trout Inn" label="the Trout Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="4540" end="4546" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="4551" end="4555" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="4820" end="4829" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217142" start="4844" end="4851" title="Snowdon" label="Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146222" start="4856" end="4868" title="Scafell Pike" label="Scafell Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="4992" end="5012" title="British royal family" label="British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="5099" end="5117" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="5220" end="5233" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q57454" start="5241" end="5260" title="Hans-Adam II, Prince of Liechtenstein" label="Prince Hans-Adam II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8828" start="5275" end="5283" title="Mallorca" label="Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="5291" end="5304" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="5323" end="5341" title="Juan Carlos I of Spain" label="King Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="5373" end="5392" title="Harald V of Norway" label="Crown Prince Harald"/>
<link wikidata="Q131045" start="5397" end="5417" title="Queen Sonja of Norway" label="Crown Princess Sonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q29574" start="5428" end="5454" title="Beatrix of the Netherlands" label="Beatrix of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785195" start="5539" end="5559" title="Master of Humanities" label="Master of Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q222241" start="5733" end="5760" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q54386" start="5785" end="5807" title="Infanta Elena, Duchess of Lugo" label="Infanta Elena of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842" start="5852" end="5871" title="University of Tokyo" label="University of Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="6150" end="6173" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693" start="6723" end="6733" title="Miscarriage" label="miscarried"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996090" start="6863" end="6898" title="Japanese imperial succession debate" label="Japanese imperial succession debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10912181" start="7296" end="7313" title="World Water Forum" label="World Water Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="7408" end="7413" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q215646" start="7562" end="7565" title="Edo" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q359480" start="8044" end="8057" title="Fumio Kishida" label="Fumio Kishida"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="8075" end="8091" title="King Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q9664" start="8215" end="8235" title="1998 Winter Olympics" label="1998 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053466" start="8240" end="8263" title="1998 Winter Paralympics" label="1998 Winter Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210347" start="8295" end="8335" title="World Organization of the Scout Movement" label="World Organization of the Scout Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039630" start="8366" end="8381" title="Nippon Jamboree" label="Nippon Jamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118784" start="8431" end="8457" title="Scout Association of Japan" label="Scout Association of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538440" start="8524" end="8550" title="Japanese Red Cross" label="Japanese Red Cross Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="8647" end="8679" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="8683" end="8697" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8767" end="8791" title="Emperor of Japan#Role" label="his father&amp;#x27;s duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q39231" start="8906" end="8916" title="Mount Fuji" label="Mount Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q131320" start="8930" end="8938" title="Shizuoka Prefecture" label="Shizuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q132720" start="8943" end="8963" title="Yamanashi Prefecture" label="Yamanashi Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q132345" start="9059" end="9069" title="Shinzo Abe" label="Shinzo Abe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44023338" start="9132" end="9157" title="2019 Japanese imperial transition" label="abdicate on 30 April 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q234510" start="9327" end="9337" title="Heisei era" label="Heisei era"/>
<link wikidata="Q62609017" start="9467" end="9476" title="Reiwa era" label="Reiwa era"/>
<link wikidata="Q237082" start="9841" end="9862" title="Constitution of Japan" label="Japanese constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q202384" start="10407" end="10420" title="National Diet" label="National Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202178" start="10427" end="10448" title="Enthronement of the Japanese emperor" label="enthronement ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q83872291" start="10677" end="10694" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Japan" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="10765" end="10769" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846055" start="10905" end="10940" title="Death and state funeral of Elizabeth II" label="state funeral of Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q124060919" start="11103" end="11118" title="2024 Noto earthquake" label="Noto earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q823896" start="11319" end="11325" title="Wajima, Ishikawa" label="Wajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q846345" start="11330" end="11334" title="Suzu, Ishikawa" label="Suzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q691151" start="11374" end="11388" title="Noto Peninsula" label="Noto Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349353" start="11452" end="11459" title="Anamizu, Ishikawa" label="Anamizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="11531" end="11540" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="12025" end="12042" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="12121" end="12145" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="British general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246898" start="12383" end="12396" title="Hugh Cortazzi" label="Hugh Cortazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570534" start="12416" end="12431" title="Global Oriental" label="Global Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q696246" start="12903" end="12937" title="Order of the Chrysanthemum" label="Supreme Order of the Chrysanthemum"/>
<link wikidata="Q696246" start="12973" end="13007" title="Order of the Chrysanthemum" label="Supreme Order of the Chrysanthemum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156958" start="13049" end="13079" title="Order of the Paulownia Flowers" label="Order of the Paulownia Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066052" start="13115" end="13143" title="Order of the Sacred Treasure" label="Order of the Sacred Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q530124" start="13164" end="13180" title="Order of Culture" label="Order of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154448" start="13200" end="13221" title="Golden Pheasant Award" label="Golden Pheasant Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118784" start="13229" end="13255" title="Scout Association of Japan" label="Scout Association of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538440" start="13298" end="13316" title="Japanese Red Cross" label="Japanese Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538440" start="13375" end="13393" title="Japanese Red Cross" label="Japanese Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q94044" start="13428" end="13512" title="Decoration of Honour for Services to the Republic of Austria" label="Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold with Sash for Services to the Republic of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q976544" start="13539" end="13560" title="Order of the Elephant" label="Order of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q113068" start="13591" end="13632" title="Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary" label="Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074734" start="13677" end="13711" title="Order of the Defender of the Realm" label="Order of the Defender of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q980578" start="13743" end="13760" title="Order of Sikatuna" label="Order of Sikatuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q840941" start="13816" end="13840" title="Order of Christ (Portugal)" label="Military Order of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q751275" start="13889" end="13941" title="Order of Charles III" label="Royal and Distinguished Spanish Order of Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885300" start="13989" end="14022" title="Order of the Crown of Tonga" label="Royal Order of the Crown of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329411" start="14133" end="14147" title="Order of Zayed" label="Order of Zayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="14203" end="14233" title="Order of the Garter" label="Most Noble Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="14283" end="14303" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266112" wikidata="Q3258959" url="?curid=266112" title="The London Free Press">
<text>The London Free Press is a daily newspaper based in London, Ontario, Canada. It has the largest circulation of any newspaper in Southwestern Ontario.

== History ==
&quot;The London Free Press&quot; began as the &quot;Canadian Free Press&quot;, founded by William Sutherland. It first began printing as a weekly newspaper on January 2, 1849. In 1852, it was purchased for $500 by Josiah Blackburn (and Stephen Blackburn), who renamed it &quot;The London Free Press and Daily Western Advertiser&quot;. In 1855 Blackburn turned the weekly newspaper into a daily.

From 1863 to 1936 &quot;The London Free Press&quot; competed for readership with the &quot;London Advertiser&quot;, which was a daily evening newspaper. The &quot;Free Press&quot; has usually been a morning paper, but for many years, it also published an evening paper. Both morning and evening editions were published from the 1950s through to 1981, when the evening edition was permanently retired.

The Blackburn family was also involved in other forms of media in London. They established CFPL in 1933, CFPL-FM in 1948 and CFPL-TV in 1953. The radio stations are now owned by Corus Entertainment, and the television station is owned by Bell Media as a CTV 2 station.

The sudden death of publisher Martha Blackburn in the summer of 1992, due to a heart attack after water skiing on Lake Huron, set the stage for the eventual sale of the family owned newspaper. In 1997 the Blackburn family sold the newspaper to Sun Media Corporation, with new, London-born publisher John Paton introducing a Sunday edition. Later the same year, Sun Media was acquired by Quebecor Inc.

In late August 2005, Quebecor announced that, starting in 2007, &quot;The London Free Press&quot; would no longer be printed locally at its press at 369 York Street; instead it would be printed at a new press facility to be built north of Toronto, resulting in a loss of 180 local jobs. However, in September 2007, the move was suspended to allow the &quot;Free Press&quot; to present a business case for the printing department and staff&#x27;s retention. The &quot;Free Press&quot; has one of the few printing presses in southern Ontario and it prints several papers for Sun Media newspapers in the area, including the &quot;Chatham Daily News&quot;, the &quot;Sarnia Observer&quot;, the &quot;Simcoe Reformer&quot;, the &quot;St. Thomas Times-Journal&quot;, the &quot;Stratford Beacon Herald&quot;, the &quot;Woodstock Sentinel-Review&quot; and the Londoner, along with the &quot;Free Press&quot;. In 2015, Sun Media was acquired by Postmedia. On May 31, 2016 Sun Media announced that they will outsource the printing of the &quot;Free Press&quot; to Metroland Media Group&#x27;s printing facility in Hamilton.

== Circulation ==
&quot;The London Free Press&quot; has seen like most Canadian daily newspapers a decline in circulation. Its total circulation dropped by percent to 60,426 copies daily from 2009 to 2015.

:::::::::Daily average
==Notable former staff==

* Victoria Grace Blackburn (1865–1928)
* Bob Ferguson (1931–2014), sports journalist and writer
* Morley Safer (1931–2016)
* Merle Tingley (1921–2017), the newspaper&#x27;s main editorial cartoonist from 1948 to 1986

==See also==
*List of newspapers in Canada

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;The London Free Press&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="33" end="42" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="52" end="58" title="London, Ontario" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="60" end="67" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502890" start="128" end="148" title="Southwestern Ontario" label="Southwestern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290424" start="380" end="396" title="Josiah Blackburn" label="Josiah Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805723" start="653" end="670" title="London Advertiser" label="London Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010761" start="1055" end="1059" title="CFPL (AM)" label="CFPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010760" start="1069" end="1076" title="CFPL-FM" label="CFPL-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010759" start="1089" end="1096" title="CFPL-DT" label="CFPL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135686" start="1142" end="1161" title="Corus Entertainment" label="Corus Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q815713" start="1202" end="1212" title="Bell Media" label="Bell Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932063" start="1218" end="1223" title="CTV 2" label="CTV 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383" start="1348" end="1358" title="Lake Huron" label="Lake Huron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503752" start="1478" end="1499" title="Sun Media Corporation" label="Sun Media Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q912476" start="1621" end="1634" title="Quebecor Inc." label="Quebecor Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="1875" end="1882" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2263" end="2281" title="Chatham Daily News" label="Chatham Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424348" start="2299" end="2314" title="Sarnia Observer" label="Sarnia Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764327" start="2332" end="2347" title="Simcoe Reformer" label="Simcoe Reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591996" start="2365" end="2389" title="St. Thomas Times-Journal" label="St. Thomas Times-Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715988" start="2407" end="2430" title="The Beacon Herald" label="Stratford Beacon Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033460" start="2448" end="2473" title="Woodstock Sentinel-Review" label="Woodstock Sentinel-Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352022" start="2572" end="2581" title="Postmedia" label="Postmedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824837" start="2690" end="2705" title="Metroland Media" label="Metroland Media"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2822" end="2847" title="List of newspapers in Canada#Daily newspapers" label="Canadian daily newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q759811" start="2861" end="2872" title="Newspaper circulation" label="circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030292" start="3009" end="3033" title="Victoria Grace Blackburn" label="Victoria Grace Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q109928185" start="3048" end="3060" title="Bob Ferguson (journalist)" label="Bob Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q920637" start="3105" end="3117" title="Morley Safer" label="Morley Safer"/>
<link wikidata="Q52368342" start="3132" end="3145" title="Merle Tingley" label="Merle Tingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916094" start="3185" end="3205" title="Political cartoon" label="editorial cartoonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250620" start="3239" end="3267" title="List of newspapers in Canada" label="List of newspapers in Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266119" wikidata="Q202158" url="?curid=266119" title="Hämeenlinna">
<text>Hämeenlinna (; ; ; or &quot;Croneburgum&quot;) is a city in Finland and the regional capital of Kanta-Häme. It is located in the southern interior of the country and on the shores of Lake Vanajavesi. The population of Hämeenlinna is approximately , while the sub-region has a population of approximately . It is the most populous municipality in Finland, and the 14th most populous urban area in the country.

Hämeenlinna is the oldest inland city in Finland and was one of the most important Finnish cities until the 19th century. Hämeenlinna was located in the heart of the historic province of Tavastia. Since then, Hämeenlinna has remained an important regional centre. The medieval Häme Castle (also known as &quot;Tavastia Castle&quot;) is located in the town.

Hämeenlinna is known as the birthplace of the Finnish national composer Jean Sibelius. It is now part of the Kanta-Häme region and was the residence of the Governor of the province of Southern Finland until 2010. Nearby cities include the capital Helsinki (), Tampere () and Lahti (), the regional centre of Päijänne Tavastia (Päijät-Häme).

The neighbouring municipalities of Hämeenlinna are Akaa, Asikkala, Hattula, Hausjärvi, Hollola, Janakkala, Loppi, Padasjoki, Pälkäne, Tammela, Urjala and Valkeakoski. The former municipalities of Hauho, Kalvola, Lammi, Renko and Tuulos were merged with Hämeenlinna on 1 January 2009; with these mergers, the municipality of Hattula is almost completely surrounded by Hämeenlinna.

The coat of arms of Hämeenlinna is based on the 17th-century town seal, which in turn refers to the Häme Castle built by the Lake Vanajavesi in the Middle Ages, near which the city was founded. The current coat of arms was designed by Gustaf von Numers on the basis of the old coat of arms, and was confirmed on September 21, 1956.

==History==
Vanaja is the name of a settlement next to Vanajavesi that had been in existence since the Viking Age. The castle was built in the late 13th century to secure Swedish power in central Finland. A village was established near Häme Castle to provide services and goods to its inhabitants.

The village was granted city rights on January 19, 1639, but Hämeenlinna, which still after that looked more like a rural village, developed very slowly, which was a typical problem for inland cities in Finland compared to the most prosperous coastal cities. In 1777, King Gustav III of Sweden moved it one kilometre () south to the hill on which it still stands.

Hämeenlinna has hosted numerous royal and imperial visits, including the visits of the Kings of Sweden Gustavus Adolphus, Adolf Frederick, Gustav III, and Gustav IV Adolf. The city was also visited by Russian Emperors Alexander I and Alexander II, Grand Dukes of Finland.

In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Hämeenlinna and its region became known for its grand summer residences, such as Karlberg Manor (Aulanko) and Vanajanlinna Manor.

The city is known for its schools and academies where many famous Finns have studied. Schools, government and the military have characterised the life of Hämeenlinna throughout history. 

Finland&#x27;s first railway line, the Finnish Main Railway (, ), opened between Hämeenlinna and Helsinki on March 17, 1862. The current Hämeenlinna railway station (&quot;&quot; in Finnish) was built in 1921.

During the Finnish Civil War in 1918, Hämeenlinna was initially in the area controlled by the Reds, but the Whites captured the city with the help of the Germans in the Battle of Hämeenlinna. After the war, the Hämeenlinna prison camp established for red prisoners operated in the Poltinaho barracks area, and it was known as one of the most notorious high-discipline camps in the history of the Civil War, where female prisoners were also kept. By mid-September, over 2,000 Red prisoners died in the prison camp, mainly for communicable diseases such as smallpox, scarlet fever, typhus and Spanish flu.

After World War II, Hämeenlinna underwent significant transformation as Finland shifted from a wartime economy to peacetime recovery. The city experienced substantial reconstruction efforts, which included the renovation of damaged infrastructure and the development of new housing to accommodate returning soldiers and their families. 

Häme County received 73,812 war refugees from Karelia. Of all the war refugees, 90 percent were Finns. Hämeenlinna specifically welcomed these refugees, and the Ojoinen Borough was constructed to accommodate them.

Post-war period saw an increase in population as people moved to Hämeenlinna for job opportunities in various sectors. Hämeenlinna also embraced industrialisation during this era, with manufacturing becoming a cornerstone of its economy. The city’s strategic location facilitated trade and transport, further promoting economic development.

The establishment of educational institutions, such as the Häme University of Applied Sciences, contributed to the city&#x27;s growth and modernisation. Additionally, cultural initiatives flourished, with museums and theaters enhancing the local cultural landscape. The Artillery Museum of Finland, which opened in 1997, became a key attraction, showcasing the military history and heritage of the region. 

The Prime Ministers and ministers of Finland and Sweden gathered for a historic and joint meeting in Hämeenlinna in 2009.

==Geography==

There are a total of 339 lakes in whole or in part in the area of the city of Hämeenlinna. The largest of them are Lake Vanajavesi, Lake Kukkia and Lake Kuohijärvi. The main features of the Hämeenlinna landscape are the Häme Lake Plateau, the Vanajavesi Valley and the Kanta-Häme Grove Center. In many places, the landscapes are marked by the prosperous Tavastian agricultural culture.

The city has several nature reserves, the largest of which are located in the popular recreation areas of Aulanko and Ahvenisto on the outskirts of the city. In total, there are 31 Natura 2000 areas in the city of Hämeenlinna. In addition, Hämeenlinna has Finland&#x27;s first national urban park, established in 2001.

===Climate===

===Cityscape===
The center of Hämeenlinna is located on the Saarinen Hill on the shores of Lake Vanajavesi, and is bordered on the west by Highway 3 (E12), while Highway 10 bypasses the city to the south and east. The street network in the center is based on a grid pattern drawn up by Carl Ludvid Engel in 1832 with the Market Square as its center. On the edge of the market square are the town hall, Hämeenlinna Church and the Häme County Government House. The city center is divided into four districts, which are Linnanniemi, Koilliskulma, Hämeensaari and Saaristenmäki. Raatihuoneenkatu, which has been partially transformed into a pedestrian street, is the most significant shopping street in the city center; for example, at the western end of the street, the Goodman Shopping Center was completed in October 2014.

There are plenty of buildings of different styles in the city center, and in proportion to the city&#x27;s population, it is quite large and densely built. The most significant expansion direction in the city center in the 2010s has been the Keinusaari district on the other side of Lake Vanajavesi, where, for example, the city&#x27;s railway station is located. Supplementary construction has also been carried out in the city center on an ongoing basis. The center of Hämeenlinna has been ridiculed as the &quot;Finland&#x27;s largest lit cemetery&quot;.

==Demographics==

===Population===

The city of Hämeenlinna has inhabitants, making it the most populous municipality in Finland. The Hämeenlinna region has a population of . In Hämeenlinna, 6.0% of the population has a foreign background, which is below the national average.

=== Languages ===
Hämeenlinna is a monolingual Finnish-speaking municipality. The majority of the population – people or – speak Finnish as their first language. There are Swedish speakers in Hämeenlinna, or of the population. of the population of Hämeenlinna have a mother tongue other than Finnish or Swedish. As English and Swedish are compulsory school subjects, functional bilingualism or trilingualism acquired through language studies is not uncommon.

At least 40 different languages are spoken in Hämeenlinna. The most common foreign languages are Estonian (0.7%), Russian (0.7%), Arabic (0.7%) and Farsi (0.5%).

=== Immigration ===
, there were 4,677 persons with a migrant background living in Hämeenlinna, or 6.8% of the population. The number of residents who were born abroad was 4,536, or 6.6% of the population. The number of persons with foreign citizenship living in Hämeenlinna was 3,293. Most foreign-born citizens came from the Estonia, former Soviet Union, Iraq and Poland. 

The relative share of immigrants in Hämeenlinna&#x27;s population is below to the national average. However, the city&#x27;s new residents are increasingly of foreign origin. This will increase the proportion of foreign residents in the coming years.

=== Religion ===

In 2023, the Evangelical Lutheran Church was the largest religious group with 67.8% of the population of Hämeenlinna. Other religious groups accounted for 2.5% of the population. 29.7% of the population had no religious affiliation.

==Economy==

The economic structure of Hämeenlinna is close to the national average. In 2015, there were 28,270 jobs in the city. Of these, 75% were in the service sector, 3% in primary production (agriculture, forestry and fisheries) and 21% in processing. The share of the unemployed was 13,6%.

===Largest employers ===

Source:

By number of employees:

*City of Hämeenlinna: 2,490
*State of Finland: 2,480
*Kanta-Häme Hospital District: 1,460
*Ruukki (Rautaruukki Oyj): 1,030
*Huhtamäki Oyj: 700
*HAMK University of Applied Sciences (an institution offering tertiary degree education): 510
*Kansanterveystyön ky: 490
*Patria Vehicles Oy: 430
*Konecranes Standard Lifting Oy: 330
*Koulutuskeskus Tavastia: 270
*Aina Group Oyj: 250
*Lindström Oy: 175

==Education==

Hämeenlinna is home to HAMK Häme University of Applied Sciences&#x27; headquarters. Founded in 1873, Hämeenlinna Lyceum has many cultural influencers. The school is one of the most famous educational institutions in Finland, as many well-known Finns have graduated from the institution; examples include master composer Jean Sibelius and president Juho Kusti Paasikivi. Hämeenlinna Lyceum has a middle school (grades 7–9) and a high school. Another of the high schools in Hämeenlinna&#x27;s inner city is Kauriala High School. Hämeenlinna&#x27;s Lyceum and Kauriala High School were to be combined in the fall of 2018 to form a large high school with more than a thousand students on the Hattelmala campus of the Tavastia Education Consortium. However, the city council decided to cancel the high school project in the spring of 2018, and the high schools will continue to be separate.

==Culture==
=== Museums ===
Hämeenlinna is home to a diverse range of museums, including Häme Castle, Hämeenlinna Art Museum, Iittala Glass Museum, Prison Museum, Skogster Museum (Hämeenlinna City Museum), Birthplace of Jean Sibelius, and Artillery, Engineer and Signals Museum of Finland (Militaria Museum).

=== Verkatehdas - Cultural and Conference Center ===
Verkatehdas is a well-known cultural and conference center situated in Hämeenlinna, Finland. Originally a textile factory, it has been repurposed into a versatile venue that hosts a wide range of events and activities.

BioRex Verkatehdas: This modern cinema, located within the complex, features five screening rooms equipped with advanced technology, including 4K laser projectors and Xpandin 3D capabilities. 

Hämeenlinna Art Museum: Situated in the Verkatehdas area, this museum showcases Finnish and international visual art. It boasts an extensive collection of over 8,000 works and frequently hosts temporary exhibitions.

===Gastronomy===
Hämeenlinna is emerging as a notable gastronomy destination in Finland, characterized by its diverse culinary offerings and a growing number of high-quality restaurants.

In the 1980s, the following dishes were named Hämeenlinna&#x27;s traditional cuisine: as a daily meal, smoked ham and sourdough bread; as a festive meal, the herring wrapped in rye dough or &quot;kalaleipä&quot;, i.e. &quot;fish bread&quot;, buttermilk and beer, and the &quot;riistansylttääjän lintupaisti&quot;, which is pheasant stuffed with almonds, potato and apple slices.
=== Festivals ===

* Wanaja Festival is annual music festival held in Linnanpuisto, this event has grown in popularity, showcasing both local and international artists. It attracts large crowds each summer, emphasizing Hämeenlinna&#x27;s vibrant music scene.
* Häme Medieval Festival celebrates medieval culture with activities, performances, and markets. It has become a staple event in August, drawing visitors interested in history and reenactments.

===Sport===
*Elite level ice hockey teams HPK of the SM-liiga and HPK Kiekkonaiset of the Naisten Liiga
*Football team Hämeenlinnan Jalkapalloseura plaus in the third-tier Kakkonen, and the women&#x27;s representative team of Hämeenlinnan Jalkapalloseura plays in the Naisten Kakkonen.
*The city hosted the modern pentathlon competition for the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki.
*Hämeenlinna hosted the first round of the Underwater Rugby Euroleague in October 2012 and again in 2015.
*The Ahvenisto Race Circuit, opened in 1967, hosts many motorsport happenings. The following racing legends have competed on the circuit: Jim Clark, Graham Hill, Jack Brabham, and Niki Lauda. Track has an FIA Grade 4 license.
*Steelers Sailbandy (Floorball) Club which play in the F-liiga.

==Notable natives or residents==

* Jouko Ahola (strongman/actor)
* Antony Hämäläinen (vocalist) 
* Eino Leino (poet) 
* Marko Mäkilaakso (music video and film director)
* Antti Miettinen (NHL player); won a bronze medal with Finland in the 2010 Vancouver Olympics
* Victorine Nordenswan (painter)
* J. K. Paasikivi (7th President of Finland) 
* Kimi Räikkönen (Formula One driver) and Jenni Dahlman (married at Vanajanlinna Manor in 2004)
* Juuse Saros (NHL goaltender)
* Jean Sibelius (composer)
* Turisas (metal band)

==International relations==

===Twin towns – Sister cities===
Hämeenlinna is twinned with:
==See also==
* Aulanko
* Finnish national road 3
* &quot;Hämeen Sanomat&quot;
* Parola (Hattula)
* Häme Castle
* Lake Vanajavesi
* Vanajanlinna Manor

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
*City of Hämeenlinna – Official Site (in English)
*1952 Summer Olympics official report (pp. 60–62)
*Häme Castle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202158" start="0" end="11" title="Hämeenlinna" label="Hämeenlinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="52" end="56" title="city" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="60" end="67" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695" start="96" end="106" title="Kanta-Häme" label="Kanta-Häme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298076" start="183" end="198" title="Vanajavesi" label="Lake Vanajavesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q296398" start="259" end="269" title="Hämeenlinna sub-region" label="sub-region"/>
<link wikidata="Q856076" start="330" end="342" title="Municipalities of Finland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084920" start="382" end="392" title="List of urban areas in Finland by population" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q475244" start="597" end="605" title="Tavastia (historical province)" label="Tavastia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012561" start="687" end="698" title="Häme Castle" label="Häme Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="840" end="853" title="Jean Sibelius" label="Jean Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252642" start="924" end="932" title="Provincial Governors of Finland" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188752" start="952" end="968" title="Southern Finland" label="Southern Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="1015" end="1023" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="1028" end="1035" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q28911" start="1043" end="1048" title="Lahti" label="Lahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708" start="1076" end="1107" title="Päijänne Tavastia" label="Päijänne Tavastia (Päijät-Häme)"/>
<link wikidata="Q413747" start="1161" end="1165" title="Akaa" label="Akaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q730285" start="1167" end="1175" title="Asikkala" label="Asikkala"/>
<link wikidata="Q965172" start="1177" end="1184" title="Hattula" label="Hattula"/>
<link wikidata="Q369720" start="1186" end="1195" title="Hausjärvi" label="Hausjärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q990578" start="1197" end="1204" title="Hollola" label="Hollola"/>
<link wikidata="Q374324" start="1206" end="1215" title="Janakkala" label="Janakkala"/>
<link wikidata="Q636607" start="1217" end="1222" title="Loppi" label="Loppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025720" start="1224" end="1233" title="Padasjoki" label="Padasjoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q374619" start="1235" end="1242" title="Pälkäne" label="Pälkäne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005049" start="1244" end="1251" title="Tammela, Finland" label="Tammela"/>
<link wikidata="Q636459" start="1253" end="1259" title="Urjala" label="Urjala"/>
<link wikidata="Q322126" start="1264" end="1275" title="Valkeakoski" label="Valkeakoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013639" start="1306" end="1311" title="Hauho" label="Hauho"/>
<link wikidata="Q930181" start="1313" end="1320" title="Kalvola" label="Kalvola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025715" start="1322" end="1327" title="Lammi" label="Lammi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791957" start="1329" end="1334" title="Renko, Finland" label="Renko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013612" start="1339" end="1345" title="Tuulos" label="Tuulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1495" end="1507" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="1552" end="1561" title="Seal (emblem)" label="town seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q245981" start="1726" end="1743" title="Gustaf von Numers" label="Gustaf von Numers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366125" start="1836" end="1842" title="Vanaja (Finland)" label="Vanaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="1927" end="1937" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012561" start="2060" end="2071" title="Häme Castle" label="Häme Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="2391" end="2416" title="Gustav III" label="King Gustav III of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="2591" end="2608" title="Gustavus Adolphus" label="Gustavus Adolphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q52931" start="2610" end="2625" title="Adolf Frederick of Sweden" label="Adolf Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="2627" end="2637" title="Gustav III" label="Gustav III"/>
<link wikidata="Q52929" start="2643" end="2658" title="Gustav IV Adolf" label="Gustav IV Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="2706" end="2717" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="2722" end="2734" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072419" start="2885" end="2899" title="Aulanko" label="Karlberg Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11900335" start="2914" end="2932" title="Vanajanlinna Manor" label="Vanajanlinna Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="3001" end="3006" title="Finns" label="Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357601" start="3162" end="3182" title="Finnish Main Line" label="Finnish Main Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268786" start="3260" end="3287" title="Hämeenlinna railway station" label="Hämeenlinna railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="3305" end="3312" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="3345" end="3362" title="Finnish Civil War" label="Finnish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006649" start="3428" end="3432" title="Red Guards (Finland)" label="Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014199" start="3442" end="3448" title="White Guard (Finland)" label="Whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721319" start="3503" end="3524" title="Battle of Hämeenlinna" label="Battle of Hämeenlinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070290" start="3557" end="3568" title="Prisoner-of-war camp" label="prison camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="3889" end="3897" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q180266" start="3899" end="3912" title="scarlet fever" label="scarlet fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="3914" end="3920" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="3925" end="3936" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q192273" start="4323" end="4330" title="Karelia" label="Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628931" start="4889" end="4928" title="HAMK Häme University of Applied Sciences" label="the Häme University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q549096" start="5100" end="5131" title="The Artillery Museum of Finland" label="The Artillery Museum of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298076" start="5495" end="5510" title="Lake Vanajavesi" label="Lake Vanajavesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400187" start="5512" end="5523" title="Lake Kukkia" label="Lake Kukkia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445237" start="5528" end="5543" title="Lake Kuohijärvi" label="Lake Kuohijärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864082" start="5734" end="5743" title="Tavastians" label="Tavastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="5744" end="5756" title="agricultural" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="5788" end="5802" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q338112" start="5853" end="5868" title="recreation area" label="recreation area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072419" start="5873" end="5880" title="Aulanko" label="Aulanko"/>
<link wikidata="Q503021" start="5948" end="5959" title="Natura 2000" label="Natura 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="6044" end="6063" title="Urban park" label="national urban park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298076" start="6193" end="6208" title="Lake Vanajavesi" label="Lake Vanajavesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040469" start="6241" end="6250" title="Finnish national road 3" label="Highway 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346648" start="6252" end="6255" title="European route E12" label="E12"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6264" end="6274" title="Finnish national road 10" label="Highway 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="6363" end="6375" title="Grid plan" label="grid pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q77103" start="6388" end="6405" title="C. L. Engel" label="Carl Ludvid Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41776738" start="6423" end="6436" title="Hämeenlinna Market Square" label="Market Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q149621" start="6598" end="6606" title="district" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6619" end="6630" title="Linnanniemi" label="Linnanniemi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6632" end="6644" title="Koilliskulma" label="Koilliskulma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6646" end="6657" title="Hämeensaari" label="Hämeensaari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6662" end="6675" title="Saaristenmäki" label="Saaristenmäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q17381559" start="6869" end="6892" title="Goodman (shopping centre)" label="Goodman Shopping Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268786" start="7249" end="7276" title="Hämeenlinna railway station" label="city&amp;#x27;s railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q296398" start="7618" end="7636" title="Hämeenlinna sub-region" label="Hämeenlinna region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="7809" end="7825" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q726673" start="7934" end="7950" title="Swedish-speaking population of Finland" label="Swedish speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="8029" end="8042" title="first language" label="mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="8077" end="8084" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="8319" end="8327" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="8336" end="8343" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="8352" end="8358" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="8370" end="8375" title="Persian language" label="Farsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="8712" end="8719" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8728" end="8740" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="8742" end="8746" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="8751" end="8757" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379849" start="9044" end="9071" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="9463" end="9474" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="9476" end="9484" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="9489" end="9498" title="Fishery" label="fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095671" start="9714" end="9720" title="Rautaruukki" label="Ruukki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433279" start="9747" end="9756" title="Huhtamäki" label="Huhtamäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628931" start="9767" end="9854" title="HAMK University of Applied Sciences" label="HAMK University of Applied Sciences (an institution offering tertiary degree education)"/>
<link wikidata="Q613116" start="9888" end="9903" title="Patria (company)" label="Patria Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781308" start="9913" end="9940" title="Konecranes" label="Konecranes Standard Lifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628931" start="10058" end="10098" title="HAMK Häme University of Applied Sciences" label="HAMK Häme University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="10355" end="10368" title="Jean Sibelius" label="Jean Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q202171" start="10383" end="10403" title="Juho Kusti Paasikivi" label="Juho Kusti Paasikivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012561" start="11011" end="11022" title="Häme Castle" label="Häme Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="11142" end="11155" title="Jean Sibelius" label="Jean Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q170486" start="12214" end="12217" title="ham" label="ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360560" start="12222" end="12231" title="sourdough" label="sourdough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="12262" end="12269" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="12281" end="12284" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q106612" start="12346" end="12356" title="buttermilk" label="buttermilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="12361" end="12365" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25432" start="12427" end="12435" title="Common pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="12449" end="12455" title="almond" label="almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474502" start="12979" end="12982" title="HPK" label="HPK"/>
<link wikidata="Q456107" start="12990" end="12998" title="SM-liiga" label="SM-liiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q87465424" start="13003" end="13019" title="HPK Kiekkonaiset" label="HPK Kiekkonaiset"/>
<link wikidata="Q793769" start="13027" end="13040" title="Naisten Liiga (ice hockey)" label="Naisten Liiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698369" start="13109" end="13117" title="Kakkonen" label="Kakkonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q683022" start="13244" end="13261" title="Modern pentathlon at the 1952 Summer Olympics" label="modern pentathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="13282" end="13302" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="13306" end="13314" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696439" start="13427" end="13449" title="Ahvenisto Race Circuit" label="Ahvenisto Race Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137" start="13560" end="13569" title="Jim Clark" label="Jim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128" start="13571" end="13582" title="Graham Hill" label="Graham Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125" start="13584" end="13596" title="Jack Brabham" label="Jack Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="13602" end="13612" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579603" start="13703" end="13710" title="F-liiga" label="F-liiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373261" start="13749" end="13760" title="Jouko Ahola" label="Jouko Ahola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354554" start="13781" end="13798" title="Antony Hämäläinen" label="Antony Hämäläinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q360079" start="13813" end="13823" title="Eino Leino" label="Eino Leino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881140" start="13834" end="13850" title="Marko Mäkilaakso" label="Marko Mäkilaakso"/>
<link wikidata="Q609738" start="13885" end="13900" title="Antti Miettinen" label="Antti Miettinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="13954" end="13977" title="2010 Vancouver Olympics" label="2010 Vancouver Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17382785" start="13980" end="14000" title="Victorine Nordenswan" label="Victorine Nordenswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q202171" start="14013" end="14028" title="J. K. Paasikivi" label="J. K. Paasikivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29558" start="14034" end="14054" title="President of Finland" label="President of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11192" start="14059" end="14073" title="Kimi Räikkönen" label="Kimi Räikkönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="14075" end="14086" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q124888" start="14099" end="14112" title="Jenni Dahlman" label="Jenni Dahlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11900335" start="14125" end="14143" title="Vanajanlinna Manor" label="Vanajanlinna Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072852" start="14155" end="14166" title="Juuse Saros" label="Juuse Saros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="14168" end="14171" title="NHL" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="14186" end="14199" title="Jean Sibelius" label="Jean Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q656739" start="14213" end="14220" title="Turisas" label="Turisas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="14312" end="14319" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072419" start="14341" end="14348" title="Aulanko" label="Aulanko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040469" start="14351" end="14374" title="Finnish national road 3" label="Finnish national road 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144488" start="14383" end="14397" title="Hämeen Sanomat" label="Hämeen Sanomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673718" start="14406" end="14412" title="Parola (Hattula)" label="Parola"/>
<link wikidata="Q965172" start="14414" end="14421" title="Hattula" label="Hattula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012561" start="14425" end="14436" title="Tavastia Castle" label="Häme Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298076" start="14439" end="14454" title="Lake Vanajavesi" label="Lake Vanajavesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11900335" start="14457" end="14475" title="Vanajanlinna Manor" label="Vanajanlinna Manor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266121" wikidata="Q3253435" url="?curid=266121" title="List of railway stations">
<text>The following is a list of [[railway station]]s (also known as railroad stations in the United States), which is indexed by country.

==Africa==
* Railway stations in Angola
* Railway stations in Benin
* Railway stations in Botswana
* Railway stations in Burkina Faso
* Railway stations in Cameroon

* Railway stations in Chad
* Railway stations in Republic of the Congo
* List of railway stations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
* Railway stations in Côte d&#x27;Ivoire
* Railway stations in Djibouti
* Railway stations in Egypt
* Railway stations in Eritrea
* Railway stations in Ethiopia
* Railway stations in Ghana
* Railway stations in Guinea
* Railway stations in Kenya
* Railway stations in Lesotho
* Railway stations in Liberia
* Railway stations in Libya
* Railway stations in Madagascar
* Railway stations in Malawi
* Railway stations in Mali
* Railway stations in Mauritania
* Railway stations in Mauritius
* Railway stations in Morocco
* Railway stations in Mozambique
* Railway stations in Namibia
* Railway stations in Nigeria
* Railway stations in Réunion
* Railway stations in Rwanda
* Railway stations in Senegal
* Railway stations in Sierra Leone
* South Africa: Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa
* Railway stations in Sudan
* Railway stations in Swaziland
* Railway stations in Tanzania
* Railway stations in Togo
* Railway stations in Tunisia
* Railway stations in Uganda
* Railway stations in Zambia
* Railway stations in Zimbabwe

== Asia ==
* Railway stations in Armenia
* List of railway stations in Bangladesh
*List of railway stations in Cambodia
* :Category:Railway stations in China
* List of railway stations in Pakistan
* Railway stations of Hong Kong
* List of railway stations in India
*List of railway stations in Indonesia
* List of railway stations in Iran
* List of railway stations in Japan
* List of railway stations in North Korea
* :Category:Railway stations in South Korea
* :Category:Railway stations in Malaysia
* List of railway stations in Pakistan
* List of railway stations in the Philippines

=== Singapore ===

* Woodlands train checkpoint

=== Sri Lanka ===
===Taiwan===
=== Thailand ===
:Category: Railway stations in Thailand
*List of Southern Line (Thailand) stations

=== Turkmenistan ===
*Ashgabat railway station
*Turkmenbashi railway station

==Europe==
===Austria===
*:Category:Railway stations in Austria

===Azerbaijan===
*:Category:Railway stations in Azerbaijan

===Belgium===
*:Category:Railway stations in Belgium

===Czech Republic===
*:Category:Railway stations in the Czech Republic

===Denmark===
===Estonia===
===Finland===
===France===
* :Category:Railway stations in France

===Germany===

See German railway station categories for more information.

===Greece===
===Hungary===
*Budapest
**Eastern Railway Station (Keleti pályaudvar)
**Western Railway Station (Nyugati pályaudvar)
**Southern Railway Station (Déli pályaudvar)
*Miskolc
**Tiszai Station (Tiszai pályaudvar)
**Gömöri Station (Gömöri pályaudvar)

===Ireland===
===Italy===
===Luxembourg===
===Monaco===
===Netherlands===
===Norway===
===Poland===
*List of busiest railway stations in Poland
*:Category:Railway stations in Poland

===Portugal===
===Romania===
* Brașov
** Brașov railway station
* Bucharest
** Gara de Nord
** Basarab railway station
* Cluj-Napoca
** Cluj-Napoca railway station
* Constanța
** Constanţa railway station
* Craiova
** Craiova railway station
* Iaşi
** Iaşi railway station
* Satu Mare
** Satu Mare railway station
* Sibiu
** Sibiu railway station
* Sinaia
** Sinaia railway station
* Timișoara
** Timișoara Nord railway station

===Russia===

*Moscow
** (1851)
** (1862, rebuilt 1904)
** (1864, rebuilt 1913–40)
** (1870, rebuilt 1909)
** (1896, rebuilt 1972)
** (1899)
** (1900)
** (1903)
** (1912–18)
*Saint Petersburg
** (1851)
** (1837, rebuilt 1904)
** (1857)
** (1860)
**Finland Station (1870, rebuilt 1960)
** (2003)
*Krasnodar
**Krasnodar-1 railway station (1889)
*Samara
**Samara railway station (1876, rebuilt 1996–2001)

===Spain===
*Barcelona - List of railway stations in Barcelona
*Madrid - Atocha Railway Station
*Madrid - Chamartín Railway Station
*Sevilla - Santa Justa Railway Station
*Toledo - Toledo Railway Station
*Valencia - Norte Railway Station

===Sweden===
*Stockholm - Stockholm Central Station

===Switzerland===

*Basel
**Basel SBB
**Basel Badischer Bahnhof
*Bern - Bern railway station
*Geneva - Genève-Cornavin railway station
*Lausanne - Lausanne railway station
*Zürich - Zürich Hauptbahnhof

===Turkey===
===Ukraine===

*Darnytsia Railway Station
*Kharkiv Railway Station
*Kyiv Passenger Railway Station
*Lviv Rail Terminal
*Odessa Railway Station
*Uzhhorod Central Rail Terminal

===United Kingdom===
*UK railway stations A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
*List of London railway stations
*List of busiest railway stations in Great Britain
*List of closed railway stations in Britain
*List of Parkway railway stations in Britain
*:Category:Lists of railway stations in Great Britain

===Vatican City===
*Railway Station in the Vatican City

==North America==
*:Category:Railway stations in Canada
*:Category:Railway stations in the United States
*:Category:Railway stations in Mexico

==Oceania==

===Australia===
*Adelaide - List of Adelaide railway stations
**Adelaide station
*Brisbane - List of Brisbane railway stations
**Central station
**Roma Street station
*Melbourne - List of Melbourne railway stations
**Flinders Street station
**Southern Cross station (formerly Spencer Street)
*Perth - List of Perth railway stations
**Perth station
*New South Wales
**List of Sydney Trains railway stations
**List of NSW TrainLink railway stations
**List of closed Sydney railway stations
*Victoria
**List of closed regional railway stations in Victoria

===New Zealand===
* Auckland - List of Auckland railway stations
** Britomart Transport Centre
* Dunedin station
* Wellington - List of Wellington railway stations


== See also ==

*List of highest railway stations in the world
*List of railway stations named after people
*:Category:Lists of railway stations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3253435" start="19" end="47" title="List of railway stations" label="list of [[railway station]]s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253435" start="63" end="80" title="List of railway stations" label="railroad stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284261" start="147" end="173" title="Railway stations in Angola" label="Railway stations in Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284262" start="176" end="201" title="Railway stations in Benin" label="Railway stations in Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284267" start="204" end="232" title="Railway stations in Botswana" label="Railway stations in Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q291317" start="235" end="267" title="Railway stations in Burkina Faso" label="Railway stations in Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284268" start="270" end="298" title="Railway stations in Cameroon" label="Railway stations in Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234702" start="302" end="326" title="Railway stations in Chad" label="Railway stations in Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284314" start="329" end="370" title="Railway stations in Republic of the Congo" label="Railway stations in Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636087" start="373" end="437" title="List of railway stations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="List of railway stations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284284" start="440" end="478" title="Railway stations in Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="Railway stations in Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284272" start="481" end="509" title="Railway stations in Djibouti" label="Railway stations in Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284273" start="512" end="537" title="Railway stations in Egypt" label="Railway stations in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284274" start="540" end="567" title="Railway stations in Eritrea" label="Railway stations in Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284275" start="570" end="598" title="Railway stations in Ethiopia" label="Railway stations in Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284277" start="601" end="626" title="Railway stations in Ghana" label="Railway stations in Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284278" start="629" end="655" title="Railway stations in Guinea" label="Railway stations in Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284285" start="658" end="683" title="Railway stations in Kenya" label="Railway stations in Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847982" start="686" end="713" title="Railway stations in Lesotho" label="Railway stations in Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572640" start="716" end="743" title="Railway stations in Liberia" label="Railway stations in Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209808" start="746" end="771" title="Railway stations in Libya" label="Railway stations in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100099" start="774" end="804" title="Railway stations in Madagascar" label="Railway stations in Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137037" start="807" end="833" title="Railway stations in Malawi" label="Railway stations in Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284288" start="836" end="860" title="Railway stations in Mali" label="Railway stations in Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268632" start="863" end="893" title="Railway stations in Mauritania" label="Railway stations in Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283976" start="896" end="925" title="Railway stations in Mauritius" label="Railway stations in Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972172" start="928" end="955" title="Railway stations in Morocco" label="Railway stations in Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284291" start="958" end="988" title="Railway stations in Mozambique" label="Railway stations in Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q834006" start="991" end="1018" title="Railway stations in Namibia" label="Railway stations in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284295" start="1021" end="1048" title="Railway stations in Nigeria" label="Railway stations in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536984" start="1051" end="1078" title="Railway stations in Réunion" label="Railway stations in Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283984" start="1081" end="1107" title="Railway stations in Rwanda" label="Railway stations in Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284298" start="1110" end="1137" title="Railway stations in Senegal" label="Railway stations in Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284299" start="1140" end="1172" title="Railway stations in Sierra Leone" label="Railway stations in Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434734" start="1189" end="1226" title="Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa" label="Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972181" start="1229" end="1254" title="Railway stations in Sudan" label="Railway stations in Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748978" start="1257" end="1286" title="Railway stations in Swaziland" label="Railway stations in Swaziland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284303" start="1289" end="1317" title="Railway stations in Tanzania" label="Railway stations in Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284304" start="1320" end="1344" title="Railway stations in Togo" label="Railway stations in Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284305" start="1347" end="1374" title="Railway stations in Tunisia" label="Railway stations in Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284308" start="1377" end="1403" title="Railway stations in Uganda" label="Railway stations in Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284312" start="1406" end="1432" title="Railway stations in Zambia" label="Railway stations in Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284311" start="1435" end="1463" title="Railway stations in Zimbabwe" label="Railway stations in Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284263" start="1478" end="1505" title="Railway stations in Armenia" label="Railway stations in Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21013804" start="1508" end="1546" title="List of railway stations in Bangladesh" label="List of railway stations in Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636018" start="1548" end="1584" title="List of railway stations in Cambodia" label="List of railway stations in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1587" end="1622" title=":Category:Railway stations in China" label=":Category:Railway stations in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636071" start="1625" end="1661" title="List of railway stations in Pakistan" label="List of railway stations in Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11667666" start="1664" end="1693" title="Railway stations of Hong Kong" label="Railway stations of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636036" start="1696" end="1729" title="List of railway stations in India" label="List of railway stations in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089006" start="1731" end="1768" title="List of railway stations in Indonesia" label="List of railway stations in Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284279" start="1771" end="1803" title="List of railway stations in Iran" label="List of railway stations in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q988176" start="1806" end="1839" title="List of railway stations in Japan" label="List of railway stations in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636069" start="1842" end="1881" title="List of railway stations in North Korea" label="List of railway stations in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1884" end="1925" title=":Category:Railway stations in South Korea" label=":Category:Railway stations in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1928" end="1966" title=":Category:Railway stations in Malaysia" label=":Category:Railway stations in Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636071" start="1969" end="2005" title="List of railway stations in Pakistan" label="List of railway stations in Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594025" start="2008" end="2051" title="List of railway stations in the Philippines" label="List of railway stations in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132101" start="2074" end="2100" title="Woodlands train Checkpoint" label="Woodlands train checkpoint"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2150" end="2189" title=":Category: Railway stations in Thailand" label=":Category: Railway stations in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633277" start="2191" end="2232" title="List of Southern Line (Thailand) stations" label="List of Southern Line (Thailand) stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4073594" start="2256" end="2280" title="Ashgabat railway station" label="Ashgabat railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4466113" start="2282" end="2310" title="Turkmenbashi railway station" label="Turkmenbashi railway station"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2338" end="2375" title=":Category:Railway stations in Austria" label=":Category:Railway stations in Austria"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2395" end="2435" title=":Category:Railway stations in Azerbaijan" label=":Category:Railway stations in Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2452" end="2489" title=":Category:Railway stations in Belgium" label=":Category:Railway stations in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2513" end="2561" title=":Category:Railway stations in the Czech Republic" label=":Category:Railway stations in the Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2620" end="2656" title=":Category:Railway stations in France" label=":Category:Railway stations in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q550637" start="2677" end="2710" title="German railway station categories" label="German railway station categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="2762" end="2770" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q841167" start="2773" end="2796" title="Eastern Railway Station (Budapest)" label="Eastern Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q522868" start="2819" end="2842" title="Western Railway Station (Budapest)" label="Western Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q764685" start="2866" end="2890" title="Southern Railway Station (Budapest)" label="Southern Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q102397" start="2910" end="2917" title="Miskolc" label="Miskolc"/>
<link wikidata="Q854118" start="2920" end="2934" title="Tiszai Station" label="Tiszai Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q830801" start="2957" end="2971" title="Gömöri Station" label="Gömöri Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695356" start="3094" end="3136" title="List of busiest railway stations in Poland" label="List of busiest railway stations in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3138" end="3174" title=":Category:Railway stations in Poland" label=":Category:Railway stations in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q82174" start="3207" end="3213" title="Brașov" label="Brașov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685438" start="3217" end="3239" title="Brașov railway station" label="Brașov railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="3242" end="3251" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q683346" start="3255" end="3267" title="Gara de Nord" label="Gara de Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q59606097" start="3271" end="3294" title="Basarab railway station" label="Basarab railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="3297" end="3308" title="Cluj-Napoca" label="Cluj-Napoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q59615300" start="3312" end="3339" title="Cluj-Napoca railway station" label="Cluj-Napoca railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="3342" end="3351" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q59615461" start="3355" end="3380" title="Constanţa railway station" label="Constanţa railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q168057" start="3383" end="3390" title="Craiova" label="Craiova"/>
<link wikidata="Q59615775" start="3394" end="3417" title="Craiova railway station" label="Craiova railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="3420" end="3424" title="Iaşi" label="Iaşi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983536" start="3428" end="3448" title="Iaşi railway station" label="Iaşi railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q185332" start="3451" end="3460" title="Satu Mare" label="Satu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426557" start="3464" end="3489" title="Satu Mare railway station" label="Satu Mare railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q83324" start="3492" end="3497" title="Sibiu" label="Sibiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507116" start="3501" end="3522" title="Sibiu railway station" label="Sibiu railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q213296" start="3525" end="3531" title="Sinaia" label="Sinaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45752403" start="3535" end="3557" title="Sinaia railway station" label="Sinaia railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="3560" end="3569" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q978167" start="3573" end="3603" title="Timișoara Nord railway station" label="Timișoara Nord railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="3780" end="3796" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q548259" start="3853" end="3868" title="Finland Station" label="Finland Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646" start="3901" end="3910" title="Krasnodar" label="Krasnodar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4238511" start="3913" end="3940" title="Krasnodar-1 railway station" label="Krasnodar-1 railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q894" start="3949" end="3955" title="Samara" label="Samara"/>
<link wikidata="Q20821474" start="3958" end="3980" title="Samara railway station" label="Samara railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="4021" end="4030" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745034" start="4033" end="4070" title="List of railway stations in Barcelona" label="List of railway stations in Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="4072" end="4078" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23093" start="4081" end="4103" title="Atocha Railway Station" label="Atocha Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="4105" end="4111" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23081" start="4114" end="4139" title="Chamartín Station" label="Chamartín Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="4141" end="4148" title="Sevilla" label="Sevilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4151" end="4178" title="Santa Justa Railway Station" label="Santa Justa Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="4180" end="4186" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q801520" start="4189" end="4211" title="Toledo Railway Station" label="Toledo Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="4213" end="4221" title="Valencia, Spain" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4224" end="4245" title="Norte Railway Station" label="Norte Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="4261" end="4270" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q54315" start="4273" end="4298" title="Stockholm Central Station" label="Stockholm Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="4320" end="4325" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q667201" start="4328" end="4337" title="Basel SBB railway station" label="Basel SBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q666725" start="4340" end="4363" title="Basel Badischer Bahnhof" label="Basel Badischer Bahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="4365" end="4369" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q28870" start="4372" end="4392" title="Bern railway station" label="Bern railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="4394" end="4400" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q800819" start="4403" end="4434" title="Genève-Cornavin railway station" label="Genève-Cornavin railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="4436" end="4444" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q669678" start="4447" end="4471" title="Lausanne railway station" label="Lausanne railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="4473" end="4479" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q224494" start="4482" end="4501" title="Zürich Hauptbahnhof" label="Zürich Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093770" start="4532" end="4557" title="Darnytsia Railway Station" label="Darnytsia Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023815" start="4559" end="4582" title="Kharkiv Railway Station" label="Kharkiv Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105249" start="4584" end="4614" title="Kyiv Passenger Railway Station" label="Kyiv Passenger Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801139" start="4616" end="4634" title="Lviv Rail Terminal" label="Lviv Rail Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072398" start="4636" end="4658" title="Odessa Railway Station" label="Odessa Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16720732" start="4660" end="4690" title="Uzhhorod Central Rail Terminal" label="Uzhhorod Central Rail Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319758" start="4714" end="4735" title="UK railway stations - A" label="UK railway stations A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258756" start="4736" end="4737" title="UK railway stations - B" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976969" start="4738" end="4739" title="UK railway stations - C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997637" start="4740" end="4741" title="UK railway stations - D" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531904" start="4742" end="4743" title="UK railway stations - E" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785510" start="4744" end="4745" title="UK railway stations - F" label="F"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527761" start="4746" end="4747" title="UK railway stations - G" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738972" start="4748" end="4749" title="UK railway stations - H" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460054" start="4750" end="4751" title="UK railway stations - I" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359354" start="4752" end="4753" title="UK railway stations - J" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q13756708" start="4754" end="4755" title="UK railway stations - K" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563646" start="4756" end="4757" title="UK railway stations - L" label="L"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456321" start="4758" end="4759" title="UK railway stations - M" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610309" start="4760" end="4761" title="UK railway stations - N" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598132" start="4762" end="4763" title="UK railway stations - O" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677300" start="4764" end="4765" title="UK railway stations - P" label="P"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117303" start="4766" end="4767" title="UK railway stations - Q" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915118" start="4768" end="4769" title="UK railway stations - R" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q515675" start="4770" end="4771" title="UK railway stations - S" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934871" start="4772" end="4773" title="UK railway stations - T" label="T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917019" start="4774" end="4775" title="UK railway stations - U" label="U"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865011" start="4776" end="4777" title="UK railway stations - V" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547154" start="4778" end="4779" title="UK railway stations - W" label="W"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263919" start="4782" end="4783" title="UK railway stations - Y" label="Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q253837" start="4787" end="4818" title="List of London railway stations" label="List of London railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394543" start="4820" end="4869" title="List of busiest railway stations in Great Britain" label="List of busiest railway stations in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610197" start="4871" end="4913" title="List of closed railway stations in Britain" label="List of closed railway stations in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593542" start="4915" end="4958" title="List of Parkway railway stations in Britain" label="List of Parkway railway stations in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4960" end="5012" title=":Category:Lists of railway stations in Great Britain" label=":Category:Lists of railway stations in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q856747" start="5034" end="5069" title="Rail transport in Vatican City" label="Railway Station in the Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5090" end="5126" title=":Category:Railway stations in Canada" label=":Category:Railway stations in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5128" end="5175" title=":Category:Railway stations in the United States" label=":Category:Railway stations in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5177" end="5213" title=":Category:Railway stations in Mexico" label=":Category:Railway stations in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="5245" end="5253" title="Adelaide, Australia" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560593" start="5256" end="5289" title="List of Adelaide railway stations" label="List of Adelaide railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681770" start="5292" end="5308" title="Adelaide railway station" label="Adelaide station"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="5310" end="5318" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283988" start="5321" end="5354" title="List of Brisbane railway stations" label="List of Brisbane railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062143" start="5357" end="5372" title="Central railway station, Brisbane" label="Central station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361491" start="5375" end="5394" title="Roma Street railway station" label="Roma Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="5396" end="5405" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858860" start="5408" end="5442" title="List of Melbourne railway stations" label="List of Melbourne railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q260986" start="5445" end="5468" title="Flinders Street railway station" label="Flinders Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801455" start="5471" end="5493" title="Southern Cross railway station" label="Southern Cross station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="5521" end="5526" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593910" start="5529" end="5559" title="List of Perth railway stations" label="List of Perth railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170917" start="5562" end="5575" title="Perth railway station" label="Perth station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="5577" end="5592" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567328" start="5595" end="5633" title="List of Sydney Trains railway stations" label="List of Sydney Trains railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927289" start="5636" end="5674" title="List of NSW TrainLink railway stations" label="List of NSW TrainLink railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610183" start="5677" end="5715" title="List of closed Sydney railway stations" label="List of closed Sydney railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="5717" end="5725" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610274" start="5728" end="5780" title="List of closed regional railway stations in Victoria" label="List of closed regional railway stations in Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="5802" end="5810" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839225" start="5813" end="5846" title="List of Auckland railway stations" label="List of Auckland railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q920488" start="5850" end="5876" title="Britomart Transport Centre" label="Britomart Transport Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q800694" start="5879" end="5894" title="Dunedin railway station" label="Dunedin station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="5897" end="5907" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839231" start="5910" end="5945" title="List of Wellington railway stations" label="List of Wellington railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622445" start="5965" end="6010" title="List of highest railway stations in the world" label="List of highest railway stations in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636092" start="6012" end="6055" title="List of railway stations named after people" label="List of railway stations named after people"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6057" end="6092" title=":Category:Lists of railway stations" label=":Category:Lists of railway stations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266122" wikidata="Q331657" url="?curid=266122" title="Daniel Chatto">
<text>Daniel St George Chatto (born Daniel Chatto St George Sproule; 22 April 1957) is a British artist and former actor. He is the husband of Lady Sarah Chatto, the daughter of Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon, niece of Queen Elizabeth II and cousin of King Charles III.

==Biography==
Daniel was born on 22 April 1957 in London as Daniel Chatto St George Sproule. He is the son of Tom Chatto and Rosalind Joan Chatto. He is the uncle of Mae Martin.

==Marriage==
On 14 July 1994, Chatto married Lady Sarah Armstrong-Jones. The couple have two sons.

== Honours ==
== Filmography ==
*&quot;The Marquise&quot; (1980, TV film) as Miguel
*&quot;Quartet&quot; (1981, directed by James Ivory) as Guy
*&quot;Priest of Love&quot; (1981) as Aquitania Officer
*&quot;To the Manor Born&quot; (series finale, 1981) as Heatherington-Poole
*&quot;Nancy Astor&quot; (1982; based on the life of Nancy Astor) as Billy Grenfell
*&quot;Charles &amp; Diana: A Royal Love Story&quot; (1982, TV film) as Prince Andrew
*&quot;A Shocking Accident&quot; (1982, Short) as Paul
*&quot;Juliet Bravo&quot; (1983, TV series) as Billy Braithwaite
*&quot;Heat and Dust&quot; (1983, by James Ivory, based on a novel by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala) as Party Guest
*&quot;The Razor&#x27;s Edge&quot; (1984; based on a novel by Somerset Maugham) as Wounded French Soldier #1
*&quot;A Christmas Carol&quot; (1984, TV movie, based on a novel by Charles Dickens) as William
*&quot;The Shooting Party&quot; (1985) as John
*&quot;Dutch Girls&quot; (1985, TV movie) as Fforde
*&quot;The Death of the Heart&quot; (1985, TV film, based on a novel by Elizabeth Bowen) as Eddie
*&quot;Little Dorrit&quot; (1987; based on a novel by Charles Dickens) as Tip Dorrit (final film role)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q331657" start="0" end="23" title="Daniel Chatto" label="Daniel St George Chatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q331657" start="30" end="61" title="Daniel Chatto" label="Daniel Chatto St George Sproule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040807" start="137" end="154" title="Lady Sarah Chatto" label="Lady Sarah Chatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q153815" start="172" end="210" title="Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon" label="Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="221" end="239" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="254" end="270" title="King Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815263" start="383" end="393" title="Tom Chatto" label="Tom Chatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q27673046" start="439" end="449" title="Mae Martin" label="Mae Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040807" start="497" end="523" title="Lady Sarah Chatto" label="Lady Sarah Armstrong-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="591" end="603" title="The Marquise#Revivals and adaptations" label="The Marquise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300191" start="643" end="650" title="Quartet (1981 film)" label="Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q51577" start="676" end="687" title="James Ivory" label="James Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242893" start="703" end="717" title="Priest of Love" label="Priest of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756461" start="759" end="776" title="To the Manor Born" label="To the Manor Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q106091317" start="835" end="846" title="Nancy Astor (TV series)" label="Nancy Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q195013" start="881" end="892" title="Nancy Witcher Astor" label="Nancy Astor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="919" end="958" title="Charles &amp;amp; Diana: A Royal Love Story" label="Charles &amp;amp; Diana: A Royal Love Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q153330" start="984" end="997" title="Prince Andrew" label="Prince Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659451" start="1005" end="1024" title="A Shocking Accident" label="A Shocking Accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374435" start="1060" end="1072" title="Juliet Bravo" label="Juliet Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549369" start="1125" end="1138" title="Heat and Dust (film)" label="Heat and Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q51577" start="1155" end="1166" title="James Ivory" label="James Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q235759" start="1188" end="1208" title="Ruth Prawer Jhabvala" label="Ruth Prawer Jhabvala"/>
<link wikidata="Q504101" start="1232" end="1253" title="The Razor&amp;#x27;s Edge (1984 film)" label="The Razor&amp;#x27;s Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q134942" start="1287" end="1303" title="William Somerset Maugham" label="Somerset Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064123" start="1341" end="1358" title="A Christmas Carol (1984 film)" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="1402" end="1417" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211385" start="1437" end="1455" title="The Shooting Party" label="The Shooting Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317298" start="1484" end="1495" title="Dutch Girls" label="Dutch Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823252" start="1536" end="1558" title="The Death of the Heart" label="The Death of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q235308" start="1601" end="1616" title="Elizabeth Bowen" label="Elizabeth Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211521" start="1634" end="1647" title="Little Dorrit (1987 film)" label="Little Dorrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="1681" end="1696" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266127" wikidata="Q3178744" url="?curid=266127" title="Jim Breen">
<text>James William Breen (born 1947) is a Research Fellow at Monash University in Australia, where he was a professor in the area of IT and telecommunications before his retirement in 2003. He holds a BSc in mathematics, an MBA and a PhD in computational linguistics, all from the University of Melbourne. He is well known for his involvement in several popular free Japanese-related projects: the EDICT and JMDict Japanese–English dictionaries, the KANJIDIC kanji dictionary, and the WWWJDIC portal which provides an interface to search them.

His EDICT dictionary and WWWJDIC server have been described as &quot;reliable and close to comprehensive&quot;. The 195,000-term lexicon is used by popular apps such as ImiWa (iOS) and AEDict (Android), and has been used to build other Japanese language learning sites such as Rikai and Jisho.org.

He remains a board member of the Japanese Studies Centre at Monash University.

==References==
== External links ==
* Jim Breen&#x27;s home page
* The EDICT home page
* The WWWJDIC online Japanese dictionary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3178744" start="0" end="19" title="Jim Breen" label="James William Breen"/>
<link wikidata="Q598841" start="56" end="73" title="Monash University" label="Monash University"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="77" end="86" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="236" end="261" title="computational linguistics" label="computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q319078" start="276" end="299" title="University of Melbourne" label="University of Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="362" end="370" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045873" start="403" end="409" title="JMDict" label="JMDict"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="445" end="453" title="KANJIDIC" label="KANJIDIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="454" end="459" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498215" start="480" end="487" title="WWWJDIC" label="WWWJDIC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="266137" wikidata="Q273120" url="?curid=266137" title="Protest">
<text>A protest (also called a demonstration, remonstration, or remonstrance) is a public act of objection, disapproval or dissent against political advantage. Protests can be thought of as acts of cooperation in which numerous people cooperate by attending, and share the potential costs and risks of doing so. Protests can take many different forms, from individual statements to mass political demonstrations. Protesters may organize a protest as a way of publicly making their opinions heard in an attempt to influence public opinion or government policy, or they may undertake direct action in an attempt to enact desired changes themselves. When protests are part of a systematic and peaceful nonviolent campaign to achieve a particular objective, and involve the use of pressure as well as persuasion, they go beyond mere protest and may be better described as civil resistance or nonviolent resistance.

Various forms of self-expression and protest are sometimes restricted by governmental policy (such as the requirement of protest permits), economic circumstances, religious orthodoxy, social structures, or media monopoly. One state reaction to protests is the use of riot police. Observers have noted an increased militarization of protest policing in many countries, with police deploying armored vehicles and snipers against protesters. When such restrictions occur, protests may assume the form of open civil disobedience, more subtle forms of resistance against the restrictions, or may spill over into other areas such as culture and emigration.

A protest itself may at times be the subject of a counter-protest. In such cases, counter-protesters demonstrate their support for the person, policy, action, etc. that is the subject of the original protest. Protesters and counter-protesters can sometimes violently clash. One study found that nonviolent activism during the civil rights movement in the United States tended to produce favorable media coverage and changes in public opinion focusing on the issues organizers were raising, but violent protests tended to generate unfavorable media coverage that generated public desire to restore law and order.

==Historical examples==


Unaddressed protests may grow and widen into civil resistance, dissent, activism, riots, insurgency, revolts, and political or social revolution. Some examples of protests include:
* Northern Europe in the early 16th century (Protestant Reformation)
* North America in the 1770s (American Revolution)
* Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783, an anti-government protest by several hundred soldiers of the Continental Army 
* France in 1789 (French Revolution)
* Haiti in 1803 (Haitian Revolution), the first successful black revolution against slavery
* The Haymarket affair in 1886, a violent labor protest led by the Anarchist Movement
* New York shirtwaist strike of 1909
* Mohandas Gandhi&#x27;s 1930 Salt March to protest the colonial salt tax in India
* 1963 Birmingham Children&#x27;s Crusade, part of the civil rights movement.
* 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, a key moment in the Civil rights movement
* Selma to Montgomery marches of 1965, part of the Civil Rights Movement
* Protests against the Vietnam War
* Mexico 68
* The Takeover of Vanha in Helsinki, Finland in 1968
* The Stonewall riots in 1969, protesting the treatment of homosexuals in New York City
* The People Power Revolution in the Philippines
* 1976 Thai military personnel, police and right wing nationalistic milita shooting at peaceful protesters the Thammasat University of Thailand. 
* The Solidarity (Polish trade union) Movement&#x27;s protests against Soviet Communism in Poland from 1980 to 1989.
* June Democratic Struggle, South Korean pro-democracy movement in 1987
* The Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
* The Alexanderplatz demonstrations from November 4–9, 1989, which culminated in the Fall of the Berlin Wall
* The many ACT-UP AIDS protests of the late 1980s and early 1990s
*Japanese Canadians Protest of their Dispossession
* The Seattle WTO Ministerial Conference of 1999 protest activity against the World Trade Organization
* Anti-globalization protests in Prague in 2000
* Anti-globalization protests in Genoa from 18 to 22 July 2001
* 15 February 2003 Iraq War Protest
* Anti-nuclear protests
* 2007 Bersih rally
* 2010 Thai political protests
* 2011 Iranian protests
* Arab Spring protests
* Impact of the Arab Spring
* Occupy Wall Street protests
* Bersih Malaysia protests
* Gezi Park protests in 2013 in Turkey
* June 2013 Egyptian protests
* Euromaidan protests in Ukraine, November 2013–February 2014
* Black Lives Matter-led protests on July 13, 2013
* Sunflower Student Movement
* Add the Words gay and transgender rights protests in Idaho in 2014.
* 2014 Hong Kong Umbrella Movement
* 2016 South Korean protests
* 2017 Jallikattu protests
* 2017–2019 Romanian protests 
* Dakota Access Pipeline protests
* 2018 Tommy Robinson protests 
* 2018 Sadiq Khan protests
* March for Our Lives protests
* 2018 Armenian Velvet Revolution
* 2018–2019 Sudanese protests
* 2018–2020 Serbian protests
* 2019 Venezuelan protests
* 2019 Indonesian protests
* 2019 Bolivian protests
* 2019–20 Hong Kong protests
* Citizenship Amendment Act protests
* 2019–20 Lebanese protests
* 2019–2021 Iraqi protests
* George Floyd protests
* 2020–21 Belarusian protests
* Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
* COVID-19 protests and riots in Serbia
* 2020 Thai protests
* 2020–2021 Indian farmers&#x27; protest
* 2020–2021 United States election protests
* Mahsa Amini protests
* Protests against the Russian invasion of Ukraine
* Peruvian protests (2022–2023)
* 2024 Columbia University pro-Palestinian campus occupation
* July Revolution (Bangladesh)
* 2024–present Serbian anti-corruption protests

==Forms==
A protest can take many forms.
Willingness to participate is influenced by individuals&#x27; ties within social networks. Social connections can affect both the spread of factual information about a protest and social pressures on participants. 
Willing to participate will also vary depending on the type of protest. 
Likelihood that someone will respond to a protest is also affected by group identification, and by the types of tactics involved.

The Dynamics of Collective Action project and the Global Nonviolent Action Database are two of the leading data collection efforts attempting to capture information about protest events. The Dynamics of Collective Action project considers the repertoire of protest tactics (and their definitions) to include:
* Rally or Demonstration: Demonstration, rally, or similar protest, without reference to marching or walking in a picket line or standing in a vigil. Reference to speeches, speakers, singing, or preaching, often verified by the presence of PA sound equipment and sometimes by a platform or stage. Ordinarily will include worship services, speeches, briefings.
* March: Reference to moving from one location to another; to distinguish from rotating or walking in a circle with picket signs (which is a picket).
* Vigil: Most vigils have banners, placards, or leaflets so that people passing by, despite silence from participants, can be informed about the purpose of the vigil.
* Picket: The modal activity is picketing; there may be references to a picket line, informational picketing, or holding signs; &quot;carrying signs and walking around in a circle&quot;. Holding signs, placards, or banners is not the defining criteria; rather, it is holding or carrying those items and walking a circular route, a phrase sometimes surprisingly found in the permit application.
* Civil Disobedience: Explicit protest that involves deliberately breaking laws deemed unjust in order to protest them; crossing barricades, prohibited use of segregated facilities (such as lunch-counters or restrooms), voter registration drives (to earn non-eligible people the right to vote), or tying up phone lines.
* Ceremony: These celebrate or protest status transitions ranging from birth and death dates of individuals, organizations or nations; seasons; re-enlistment or commissioning of military personnel; or to anniversaries of any of the above. These are sometimes referenced by presenting flowers or wreaths commemorating, dedicating, or celebrating status transitions or their anniversary; e.g., an annual merchant marine memorial service, celebrating Hanukkah or Easter, or celebrating the birthday of Martin Luther King Jr.
* Dramaturgical Demonstration
* Motorcade: Vehicular procession (electoral campaigns or other issues)
* Information distribution: Tabling/petition gathering, lobbying, letter-writing campaigns, or teach-ins.
* Symbolic Display: e.g., a menorah or creche scene, graffiti, cross burning, sign, or standing display.
* Attack by collective group (not-one-on-one assault, crime, rape): Motivation for attack is the &quot;other group&#x27;s identity&quot;, as in gay-bashing or lynching. Can also include verbal attacks or threats. (See hate crime)
* Riot, melee, mob violence: Large-scale (50+), use of violence by instigators against persons, property, police, or buildings separately or in combination, lasting several hours.
* Strike, slow down, sick-ins, and employee work protest of any kind: Regular air strike through failure of negotiations or wildcat air strike. (Make note if a wildcat strike.)
* Boycott: Organized refusal to buy or use a product or service. Examples: rent strikes, Montgomery bus boycotts
* Press Conference: Only if specifically named as such in report, and must be the predominant activity form. Could involve disclosure of information to &quot;educate the public&quot; or influence various decision-makers.
* Organization formation announcement or meeting announcement: Meeting or press conference to announce the formation of a new organization.
* Conflict, attack or clash (no instigator): This includes any boundary conflict in which no instigator can be identified, i.e. Black/white conflicts, abortion/anti-abortion conflicts.
*Prayer Walk: A prayer walk is an activity that consists of walking and praying at the same time. 
* Lawsuit: Legal maneuver by social movement organization or group.
*Peopleless Protest: Simultaneous online and offline protests involving physical representations of protesters in public spaces that are subsequently assembled online. Developed in Europe during the COVID-19 pandemic. Holographic projections of protesters were used in Spain to highlight the use of anti-protest laws in 2015.
The Global Nonviolent Action Database uses Gene Sharp&#x27;s classification of 198 methods of nonviolent action. There is considerable overlap with the Dynamics of Collective Action repertoire, although the GNA repertoire includes more specific tactics. Together, the two projects help define tactics available to protesters and document instances of their use.

==Typology==
Thomas Ratliff and Lori Hall have devised a typology of six broad activity categories of the protest activities described in the Dynamics of Collective Action project.
* Literal, symbolic, aesthetic and sensory - Artistic, dramaturgical, and symbolic displays (street theater, dancing, etc.) including use of images, objects, graphic art, musical performances, or vocal/auditory exhibitions (speech-making, chanting, etc.). May also include tactile exchanges of information (petitions, leaflets, etc.) and the destruction of objects of symbolic or political value. Highly visible and most diverse category of activity; impacts on society (police response, media focus, impact on potential allies, etc.) often are underestimated.
* Solemnity and the sacred – Vigils, prayer, or rallies, in the form of religious service, candlelight vigils, cross or coffin bearing etc. All directly related to the Durkheimian &quot;sacred&quot;, or some form of religious or spiritual practice, belief, or ideology. Events where sacred activity is the primary focus are rarely responded to by police with force or presence. Solemnity usually provides a distinct quietness or stillness, changing the energy, description, and interpretation of such events.
* Institutional and conventional – Institutionalized activity or activity highly dependent on formal political processes and social institutions (press conferences, lawsuits, lobbying, etc.). Often conflated with non-confrontational and nonviolent activities in research as the &quot;other&quot; or reference category. More &quot;acceptable&quot; because it operates, to some degree, within the system. Historically contentious issue in regard to the practice of protest due to this integration within the system.
* Movement in space – Marches or parades (processional activities) from one spatio-temporal location to another, with beginning or ending places sometimes chosen for symbolic reasons. Picket lines often used in labor strikes but can be used by non-labor actors but the key differences between picket and processionals are the distance of movement. Events that take the form of a procession are logistically much more difficult to police (even if it is for the safety of protesters). Marches are some of the largest events in this period.
* Civil disobedience – Withholding obligations, sit-ins, blockades, shop-ins, occupations, bannering, &quot;camping&quot;, etc., are all specific activities which constitute the tactical form of civil disobedience. In some way, these activities directly or technically break the law. Usually given most attention by researchers, media, and authorities. Often conflated with violence and threats because of direct action and confrontational nature, but should serve as a distinct category of action (both in the context of tactical and strategic planning and in the control of activity).
* Collective violence and threats – Collective violence such as pushing, shoving, hitting, punching, damaging property, throwing objects, verbal threats, etc., is usually committed by a relative few out of many protesters (even tens of thousands). It is rare in occurrence and rarely condoned by the public or onlookers (particularly the media). Usually met with equivalent or overwhelming force in response by authorities.

Some forms of direct action listed in this article are also public demonstrations or rallies:
* Protest march, a historically and geographically common form of nonviolent action by groups of people.
* Picketing, a form of protest in which people congregate outside a place of work or location where an event is taking place. Often, this is done in an attempt to dissuade others from going in (&quot;crossing the picket line&quot;), but it can also be done to draw public attention to a cause.
* Street protesters demonstrate in areas with high visibility, often employing handmade such as sandwich boards or picket signs in order to maximize exposure and interaction with the public.
* Lockdowns and lock-ons are a way to stop movement of an object like a structure or tree, and to thwart the removal of actual protesters from the location. Users employ various chains, locks and even the sleeping dragon for impairment of those trying to remove them with a matrix of composted materials.
* Die-ins are a form of protest where participants simulate being dead (with varying degrees of realism). In the simplest form of a die-in, protesters simply lie down on the ground and pretend to be dead, sometimes covering themselves with signs or banners. Much of the effectiveness depends on the posture of the protesters, for when not properly executed, the protest might look more like a &quot;sleep-in&quot;. For added realism, simulated wounds are sometimes painted on the bodies, or bandages, usually made to appear bloody, are used.
* Protest song is a song which protests perceived problems in society. Every major movement in Western history has been accompanied by its own collection of protest songs, from slave emancipation to women&#x27;s suffrage, the labor movement, civil rights, the anti-war movement, the feminist movement, the environmental movement. Over time, the songs have come to protest more abstract, moral issues, such as injustice, racial discrimination, the morality of war in general (as opposed to purely protesting individual wars), globalization, inflation, social inequalities, and incarceration.
* Radical cheerleading. The idea is to ironically re-appropriate the aesthetics of cheerleading, for example by changing the chants to promote feminism and left-wing causes. Many radical cheerleaders (some of whom are male, transgender or non-gender identified) are in appearance far from the stereotypical image of a cheerleader.
* Critical Mass bike rides have been perceived as protest activities. A 2006 &quot;New Yorker&quot; article described Critical Mass&#x27; activity in New York City as &quot;monthly political-protest rides&quot;, and characterized Critical Mass as a part of a social movement; the U.K. e-zine Urban75, which advertises as well as publishes photographs of the Critical Mass event in London, describes this as &quot;the monthly protest by cyclists reclaiming the streets of London&quot;. However, Critical Mass participants have insisted that these events should be viewed as &quot;celebrations&quot; and spontaneous gatherings, not as protests or organized demonstrations. This stance allows Critical Mass to argue a legal position that its events can occur without advance notification of local police.
* Toyi-toyi is a Southern African dance originally from Zimbabwe that became famous for its use in political protests in the apartheid-era South Africa. See Protest in South Africa.

===Written demonstration===
Written evidence of political or economic power, or democratic justification may also be a way of protesting.
* Petitions
* Letters (to show political power by the volume of letters): Used by some letter writing campaigns, especially those with a form letter that supporters are given to sign

===Civil disobedience demonstrations===

Any protest could be civil disobedience if a &quot;ruling authority&quot; says so, but the following are &quot;usually&quot; civil disobedience demonstrations:
* Public nudity or topfree (to protest indecency laws or as a publicity stunt for another protest such as a war protest) or animal mistreatment (e.g. PETA&#x27;s campaign against fur). See also Nudity and protest.
* Sit-in
* Photobombing – disrupting an event being broadcast live
* Raasta roko – people blocking auto traffic with their bodies
* Silent protest
* Lebenslaute

===As a residence===
* Peace camp
* Formation of a tent city
* Camp for Climate Action

===Destructive===

* Vandalism – Smashing windows or spraying graffiti is used as a form of riot, and is sometimes employed by black bloc groups.
* Riot – Protests or attempts to end protests sometimes lead to rioting.
* Looting – stealing goods from establishments or businesses (takes place during riots)
* Self-immolation
* Suicide
* Hunger strike
* Bombing

===Non-destructive===
* Silent protest – protests or parades in which participants are nonviolent and usually silent in an attempt to avoid violent confrontation with military or police forces. This tactic was effectively used during the Arab Spring in cities such as Tehran and Cairo.

===Direct action===
* Civil resistance
* Nonviolent resistance
* Occupation
* Public shaming

===Against a government===

* Tax resistance
* Conscientious objector
* Flag desecration

===Against a military shipment===
* Port Militarization Resistance – protests which attempt to prevent military cargo shipments

===Against a planning application or development===
* NIMBY (&quot;not in my backyard&quot;) – protest by residents of an area against a development in the area they see as undesirable

===By government employees===

* Bully pulpit
* Judicial activism
* Filibuster

===Job action===

* Strike action
* Walkout
* Work-to-rule

===In sports===
*U.S. national anthem kneeling protests

===By management===
* Lockout

===By tenants===
* Rent strike

===By consumers===
* Boycott
* Consumer Court

===Information===
* Informative letters, letter writing campaigns, letters to the editor
* Teach-in
* Zine
* Soap-boxing

===Civil disobedience to censorship===
* Samizdat (distributing censored materials)
* Protest graffiti

===By Internet and social networking===

Blogging and social networking have become effective tools to register protest and grievances. Protests can express views or news, and use viral networking to reach out to thousands of people. With protests on the rise from the U.S. election season of 2016 going into 2017, protesters became aware that using their social media during a protest could make them an easier target for government surveillance.

===Literature, art and culture===
* Culture jamming

===Against religious or ideological institutions===
* Recusancy
* Book burning

==Economic effects against companies==

A study of 342 US protests covered by &quot;The New York Times&quot; newspaper from 1962 to 1990 showed that such public activities usually affected the company&#x27;s publicly traded stock price. The most intriguing aspect of the study&#x27;s findings revealed that the amount of media coverage the event received was of the most importance to this study. Stock prices fell an average of one-tenth of a percent for every paragraph printed about the event.

==See also==

* &quot;Activist Wisdom&quot;, a book about protesters in Australia
* Anti-globalization movement
* Fare strike
* First Amendment to the United States Constitution 
* Coup d&#x27;état
* Revolution
* Riot
* People power
* Two Minutes Hate 
* Struggle session
* Emmanuel Goldstein
* Mass mobilization
* Burning of the Papal Bull by Martin Luther, during Protestant reformation and the Counter-Reformation of the Catholic Church in Western and Central Europe, Mainland Europe, Europe 
* 1992 Los Angeles riots
* Gandhigiri
* &quot;I Protest&quot;
* List of uprisings led by women
* Protest art
* Public Library Advocacy
* Right to protest
* Satyagraha
* Social criticism
* Tactical frivolity
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="2" end="9" title="Protest" label="protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="25" end="38" title="Protest" label="demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="40" end="53" title="Protest" label="remonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="58" end="70" title="Protest" label="remonstrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q380962" start="192" end="203" title="cooperation" label="cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="381" end="404" title="political demonstration" label="political demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17946" start="517" end="531" title="public opinion" label="public opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q506259" start="576" end="589" title="direct action" label="direct action"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="693" end="703" title="Nonviolence" label="nonviolent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109572" start="862" end="878" title="civil resistance" label="civil resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="882" end="903" title="nonviolent resistance" label="nonviolent resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251591" start="1027" end="1041" title="protest permit" label="protest permit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825410" start="1173" end="1184" title="riot police" label="riot police"/>
<link wikidata="Q20728055" start="1220" end="1254" title="Militarization of police" label="militarization of protest policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="1296" end="1312" title="Vehicle armour" label="armored vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="1412" end="1430" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176895" start="1608" end="1623" title="counter-protest" label="counter-protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="1884" end="1905" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109572" start="2242" end="2258" title="civil resistance" label="civil resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="2286" end="2296" title="insurgency" label="insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2423" end="2433" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="2434" end="2445" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="2477" end="2496" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164013" start="2500" end="2527" title="Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783" label="Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="2591" end="2607" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="2627" end="2644" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="2663" end="2681" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q214148" start="2744" end="2760" title="Haymarket affair" label="Haymarket affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q265385" start="2805" end="2823" title="Anarchism in the United States" label="Anarchist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014958" start="2826" end="2860" title="New York shirtwaist strike of 1909" label="New York shirtwaist strike of 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="2863" end="2885" title="Mohandas Gandhi" label="Mohandas Gandhi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q239344" start="2891" end="2901" title="Salt March" label="Salt March"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869173" start="2917" end="2943" title="History of the British salt tax in India" label="colonial salt tax in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935359" start="2951" end="2985" title="Birmingham Campaign" label="Birmingham Children&amp;#x27;s Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="2999" end="3020" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128871" start="3029" end="3069" title="March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom" label="March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061891" start="3115" end="3142" title="Selma to Montgomery marches" label="Selma to Montgomery marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251688" start="3188" end="3220" title="List of protests against the Vietnam War" label="Protests against the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="3223" end="3232" title="Mexico 68" label="Mexico 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q11900368" start="3239" end="3256" title="Takeover of Vanha" label="Takeover of Vanha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="3260" end="3268" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="3270" end="3277" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q51402" start="3292" end="3307" title="Stonewall riots" label="Stonewall riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274389" start="3380" end="3403" title="People Power Revolution" label="People Power Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3411" end="3422" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907348" start="3498" end="3529" title="6 October 1976 massacre" label="shooting at peaceful protesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="3575" end="3606" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity (Polish trade union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q497194" start="3688" end="3712" title="June Democratic Struggle" label="June Democratic Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="3764" end="3797" title="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989" label="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q152783" start="3804" end="3818" title="Alexanderplatz" label="Alexanderplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="3883" end="3906" title="Fall of the Berlin Wall" label="Fall of the Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q343047" start="3918" end="3924" title="AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power" label="ACT-UP"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="3925" end="3929" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4010" end="4023" title="Internment of Japanese Canadians#Protest" label="Dispossession"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="4030" end="4037" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428844" start="4038" end="4089" title="WTO Ministerial Conference of 1999 protest activity" label="WTO Ministerial Conference of 1999 protest activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="4102" end="4126" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774367" start="4129" end="4166" title="Anti-globalization Protests in Prague" label="Anti-globalization protests in Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="4208" end="4213" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580246" start="4240" end="4273" title="February 15, 2003 anti-war protest" label="15 February 2003 Iraq War Protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15466187" start="4276" end="4297" title="Anti-nuclear protests" label="Anti-nuclear protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q995898" start="4300" end="4317" title="2007 Bersih rally" label="2007 Bersih rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059090" start="4320" end="4348" title="2010 Thai political protests" label="2010 Thai political protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q947960" start="4351" end="4372" title="2011 Iranian protests" label="2011 Iranian protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="4375" end="4386" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051969" start="4398" end="4423" title="Impact of the Arab Spring" label="Impact of the Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q939103" start="4426" end="4453" title="Occupy protest" label="Occupy Wall Street protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q827252" start="4456" end="4462" title="Bersih" label="Bersih"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410316" start="4483" end="4501" title="Gezi Park protests" label="Gezi Park protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634716" start="4522" end="4549" title="June 2013 Egyptian protests" label="June 2013 Egyptian protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224558" start="4552" end="4562" title="Euromaidan" label="Euromaidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="4575" end="4582" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="4614" end="4632" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15972916" start="4665" end="4691" title="Sunflower Student Movement" label="Sunflower Student Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001755" start="4694" end="4707" title="Add the Words" label="Add the Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q18145420" start="4764" end="4796" title="2014 Hong Kong protests" label="2014 Hong Kong Umbrella Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q27648946" start="4799" end="4825" title="2016 South Korean protests" label="2016 South Korean protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374300" start="4828" end="4852" title="2017 Jallikattu protests" label="2017 Jallikattu protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q28482411" start="4855" end="4882" title="2017–2019 Romanian protests" label="2017–2019 Romanian protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q27643296" start="4886" end="4917" title="Dakota Access Pipeline protests" label="Dakota Access Pipeline protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345201" start="4925" end="4939" title="Tommy Robinson" label="Tommy Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q334155" start="4957" end="4967" title="Sadiq Khan" label="Sadiq Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058648" start="4968" end="4976" title="Protests against Donald Trump" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q50317608" start="4979" end="4998" title="March for Our Lives" label="March for Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q51846024" start="5010" end="5041" title="2018 Armenian Velvet Revolution" label="2018 Armenian Velvet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q60289711" start="5044" end="5071" title="2018–2019 Sudanese protests" label="2018–2019 Sudanese protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q61198364" start="5074" end="5100" title="2018–2020 Serbian protests" label="2018–2020 Serbian protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q60894799" start="5103" end="5127" title="2019 Venezuelan protests" label="2019 Venezuelan protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q68664291" start="5130" end="5154" title="2019 Indonesian protests and riots" label="2019 Indonesian protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q71936844" start="5157" end="5179" title="2019 Bolivian protests" label="2019 Bolivian protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q64509602" start="5182" end="5208" title="2019–20 Hong Kong protests" label="2019–20 Hong Kong protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q78455589" start="5211" end="5245" title="Citizenship Amendment Act protests" label="Citizenship Amendment Act protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q71443275" start="5248" end="5273" title="2019–20 Lebanese protests" label="2019–20 Lebanese protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q72367808" start="5276" end="5300" title="2019–2021 Iraqi protests" label="2019–2021 Iraqi protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="5303" end="5324" title="George Floyd protests" label="George Floyd protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q97384381" start="5327" end="5354" title="2020–21 Belarusian protests" label="2020–21 Belarusian protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q91280428" start="5357" end="5405" title="Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic" label="Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97118887" start="5410" end="5447" title="COVID-19 protests and riots in Serbia" label="COVID-19 protests and riots in Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97667436" start="5450" end="5468" title="2020 Thai protests" label="2020 Thai protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q102439127" start="5471" end="5509" title="2020–2021 Indian farmers&amp;#x27; protest" label="2020–2021 Indian farmers&amp;#x27; protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q101213028" start="5512" end="5553" title="2020–2021 United States election protests" label="2020–2021 United States election protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q114065797" start="5556" end="5576" title="Mahsa Amini protests" label="Mahsa Amini protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q111011730" start="5579" end="5627" title="Protests against the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Protests against the Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q115651756" start="5630" end="5659" title="Peruvian protests (2022–2023)" label="Peruvian protests (2022–2023)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125560811" start="5662" end="5720" title="2024 Columbia University pro-Palestinian campus occupation" label="2024 Columbia University pro-Palestinian campus occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130255015" start="5723" end="5751" title="July Revolution (Bangladesh)" label="July Revolution (Bangladesh)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131554983" start="5754" end="5799" title="2024–present Serbian anti-corruption protests" label="2024–present Serbian anti-corruption protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="5916" end="5930" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q784843" start="6022" end="6037" title="social pressure" label="social pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q27948866" start="6311" end="6344" title="Global Nonviolent Action Database" label="Global Nonviolent Action Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480879" start="6684" end="6695" title="Picketing" label="picket line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238731" start="6713" end="6718" title="vigil" label="vigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="6810" end="6828" title="Public address system" label="PA sound equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604469" start="7831" end="7845" title="Lunch counter protests" label="lunch-counters"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="8363" end="8378" title="merchant marine" label="merchant marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130881" start="8409" end="8417" title="Hanukkah" label="Hanukkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="8460" end="8482" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3271527" start="8485" end="8498" title="Dramaturgical action" label="Dramaturgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518054" start="8680" end="8688" title="teach-in" label="teach-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q750660" start="8719" end="8726" title="Menorah (Hanukkah)" label="menorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q31732" start="8730" end="8742" title="Nativity scene" label="creche scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188444" start="8754" end="8767" title="cross burning" label="cross burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="8841" end="8848" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310282" start="8940" end="8951" title="Gay bashing" label="gay-bashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="8955" end="8963" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="9014" end="9024" title="hate crime" label="hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198713" start="9366" end="9380" title="Wildcat strike action" label="wildcat strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313519" start="9458" end="9469" title="rent strike" label="rent strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q249367" start="9472" end="9494" title="Montgomery bus boycott" label="Montgomery bus boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q128200064" start="10210" end="10228" title="Peopleless protest" label="Peopleless Protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="10408" end="10425" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27948866" start="10539" end="10572" title="Global Nonviolent Action Database" label="Global Nonviolent Action Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q903900" start="11731" end="11748" title="candlelight vigil" label="candlelight vigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="11808" end="11819" title="Durkheimian" label="Durkheimian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="11826" end="11832" title="sacred" label="sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="13249" end="13255" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501086" start="13269" end="13276" title="shop-in" label="shop-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q506259" start="14227" end="14240" title="direct action" label="direct action"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="14273" end="14294" title="Demonstration (people)" label="public demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="14309" end="14322" title="Demonstration (people)" label="Protest march"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="14373" end="14383" title="nonviolent" label="nonviolent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480879" start="14414" end="14423" title="Picketing (protest)" label="Picketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="14708" end="14724" title="Street protester" label="Street protester"/>
<link wikidata="Q690700" start="14802" end="14816" title="sandwich board" label="sandwich board"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665312" start="14899" end="14907" title="Lockdown" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665198" start="14913" end="14920" title="Lock-on (protest tactic)" label="lock-on"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438307" start="15102" end="15117" title="sleeping dragon (manoeuver)" label="sleeping dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210697" start="15204" end="15210" title="Die-in" label="Die-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q829147" start="15746" end="15758" title="Protest song" label="Protest song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="15927" end="15939" title="abolitionism in the United States" label="emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="15956" end="15964" title="suffrage" label="suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="15970" end="15984" title="labor movement" label="labor movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="15986" end="15998" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="16027" end="16035" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q770480" start="16153" end="16162" title="injustice" label="injustice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12332701" start="16164" end="16185" title="racial discrimination" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="16269" end="16282" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431887" start="16295" end="16314" title="social inequalities" label="social inequalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="16320" end="16333" title="incarceration" label="incarceration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776554" start="16337" end="16357" title="Radical cheerleading" label="Radical cheerleading"/>
<link wikidata="Q61391" start="16418" end="16430" title="cheerleading" label="cheerleading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553339" start="16460" end="16465" title="chant" label="chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="16478" end="16486" title="feminism" label="feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="16559" end="16570" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q318702" start="16668" end="16681" title="Critical Mass (cycling)" label="Critical Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="16749" end="16759" title="The New Yorker" label="New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49773" start="16925" end="16940" title="social movement" label="social movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q847906" start="16951" end="16957" title="e-zine" label="e-zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249965" start="16958" end="16965" title="Urban75" label="Urban75"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355464" start="17470" end="17479" title="Toyi-toyi" label="Toyi-toyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251592" start="17625" end="17648" title="Protest in South Africa" label="Protest in South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q697279" start="17791" end="17799" title="Petition" label="Petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q133492" start="17803" end="17810" title="Letter (message)" label="Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469932" start="17926" end="17937" title="form letter" label="form letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="18035" end="18053" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q10791" start="18176" end="18189" title="Public nudity" label="Public nudity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084807" start="18193" end="18200" title="topfree" label="topfree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999003" start="18236" end="18251" title="publicity stunt" label="publicity stunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40053" start="18298" end="18317" title="animal mistreatment" label="animal mistreatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="18324" end="18328" title="PETA" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115422" start="18368" end="18386" title="Nudity and protest" label="Nudity and protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="18390" end="18396" title="Sit-in" label="Sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187719" start="18399" end="18411" title="Photobombing" label="Photobombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249004" start="18457" end="18468" title="Raasta roko" label="Raasta roko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255532" start="18520" end="18534" title="Silent protest" label="Silent protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q17505229" start="18537" end="18548" title="Lebenslaute" label="Lebenslaute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157511" start="18573" end="18583" title="Peace camp" label="Peace camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309248" start="18601" end="18610" title="tent city" label="tent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935206" start="18613" end="18636" title="Camp for Climate Action" label="Camp for Climate Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="18659" end="18668" title="Vandalism" label="Vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="18700" end="18708" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q690153" start="18765" end="18775" title="black bloc" label="black bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="18786" end="18790" title="Riot" label="Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="18859" end="18866" title="Looting" label="Looting"/>
<link wikidata="Q621076" start="18947" end="18962" title="Self-immolation" label="Self-immolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="18965" end="18972" title="Suicide" label="Suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="18975" end="18988" title="Hunger strike" label="Hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="18991" end="18998" title="Bombing" label="Bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255532" start="19024" end="19038" title="Silent protest" label="Silent protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="19238" end="19249" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="19268" end="19274" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="19279" end="19284" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109572" start="19309" end="19325" title="Civil resistance" label="Civil resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="19328" end="19349" title="Nonviolent resistance" label="Nonviolent resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q528892" start="19352" end="19362" title="Occupation (protest)" label="Occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300625" start="19365" end="19379" title="Public shaming" label="Public shaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937612" start="19411" end="19425" title="Tax resistance" label="Tax resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="19428" end="19450" title="Conscientious objector" label="Conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426793" start="19453" end="19469" title="Flag desecration" label="Flag desecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230799" start="19507" end="19537" title="Port Militarization Resistance" label="Port Militarization Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q849024" start="19654" end="19659" title="NIMBY" label="NIMBY"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997097" start="19819" end="19831" title="Bully pulpit" label="Bully pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330176" start="19834" end="19851" title="Judicial activism" label="Judicial activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q624036" start="19854" end="19864" title="Filibuster" label="Filibuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="19886" end="19899" title="Strike action" label="Strike action"/>
<link wikidata="Q685160" start="19902" end="19909" title="Walkout" label="Walkout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078746" start="19912" end="19924" title="Work-to-rule" label="Work-to-rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q26878551" start="19943" end="19981" title="U.S. national anthem kneeling protests" label="U.S. national anthem kneeling protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q159377" start="20005" end="20012" title="Lockout (industry)" label="Lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313519" start="20033" end="20044" title="Rent strike" label="Rent strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q179366" start="20067" end="20074" title="Boycott" label="Boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164649" start="20077" end="20091" title="Consumer Court" label="Consumer Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q133492" start="20125" end="20132" title="Letter (message)" label="letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518054" start="20184" end="20192" title="Teach-in" label="Teach-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q549638" start="20195" end="20199" title="Zine" label="Zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261247" start="20202" end="20210" title="Soapbox" label="Soap-box"/>
<link wikidata="Q152416" start="20256" end="20264" title="Samizdat" label="Samizdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892465" start="20588" end="20616" title="US election 2016" label="U.S. election season of 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="20675" end="20687" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="20742" end="20765" title="government surveillance" label="government surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143564" start="20804" end="20819" title="Culture jamming" label="Culture jamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q286321" start="20875" end="20884" title="Recusancy" label="Recusancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22702" start="20887" end="20899" title="Book burning" label="Book burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="20985" end="21003" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="21109" end="21124" title="publicly traded" label="publicly traded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196314" start="21125" end="21130" title="stock" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677613" start="21421" end="21436" title="Activist Wisdom" label="Activist Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q191442" start="21483" end="21510" title="Anti-globalization movement" label="Anti-globalization movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434914" start="21513" end="21524" title="Fare strike" label="Fare strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="21527" end="21576" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="21580" end="21596" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="21599" end="21609" title="Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="21612" end="21616" title="Riot" label="Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166006" start="21619" end="21631" title="People power" label="People power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284181" start="21634" end="21650" title="Two Minutes Hate" label="Two Minutes Hate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681848" start="21654" end="21670" title="Struggle session" label="Struggle session"/>
<link wikidata="Q645795" start="21673" end="21691" title="Emmanuel Goldstein" label="Emmanuel Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647408" start="21694" end="21711" title="Mass mobilization" label="Mass mobilization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21714" end="21756" title="Papal bull#Burning" label="Burning of the Papal Bull by Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="21765" end="21787" title="Protestant reformation" label="Protestant reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="21796" end="21815" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="21823" end="21838" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="21842" end="21849" title="Western Europe" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="21854" end="21868" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="21870" end="21885" title="Mainland Europe" label="Mainland Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="21887" end="21893" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q696187" start="21897" end="21919" title="1992 Los Angeles riots" label="1992 Los Angeles riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632535" start="21922" end="21932" title="Gandhigiri" label="Gandhigiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936384" start="21941" end="21950" title="I Protest" label="I Protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005524" start="21959" end="21989" title="List of uprisings led by women" label="List of uprisings led by women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251595" start="21992" end="22003" title="Protest art" label="Protest art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390933" start="22006" end="22029" title="Public Library Advocacy" label="Public Library Advocacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333698" start="22032" end="22048" title="Right to protest" label="Right to protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q194279" start="22051" end="22061" title="Satyagraha" label="Satyagraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508663" start="22064" end="22080" title="Social criticism" label="Social criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387015" start="22083" end="22101" title="Tactical frivolity" label="Tactical frivolity"/>
</links>
</doc>
